The Project Gutenberg eBook, Christie, the King's Servant, by Mrs. O. F.
Walton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net








Title: Christie, the King's Servant

Author: Mrs. O. F. Walton

Release Date: January 16, 2004  [eBook #10728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTIE, THE KING'S SERVANT***


E-text prepared by Joel Erickson, Michael Ciesielski, David Garcia, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



CHRISTIE, THE KING'S SERVANT

A Sequel to 'Christie's Old Organ'

By MRS. O.F. WALTON

AUTHOR OF 'CHRISTIE'S OLD ORGAN'
'A PEEP BEHIND THE SCENES'
'THE KING'S CUPBEARER'
'SHADOWS' ETC ETC







[Illustration]




Contents


CHAPTER


     I RUNSWICK BAY
    II LITTLE JOHN
   III STRANGE MUSIC
    IV WHAT ARE YOU?
     V THE RUNSWICK SPORTS
    VI THE TUG OF WAR
   VII OVER THE LINE
  VIII A NIGHT OF STORM
    IX ASK WHAT YE WILL
     X WE KNOW
    XI LITTLE JACK AND BIG JACK
   XII WHERE ARE YOU GOING?






[Illustration]




Chapter I

RUNSWICK BAY


It was the yellow ragwort that did it! I have discovered the clue at
last. All night long I have been dreaming of Runswick Bay. I have been
climbing the rocks, talking to the fishermen, picking my way over the
masses of slippery seaweed, and breathing the fresh briny air. And all
the morning I have been saying to myself, 'What can have made me dream
of Runswick Bay? What can have brought the events of my short stay in
that quaint little place so vividly before me?' Yes, I am convinced of
it; it was that bunch of yellow ragwort on the mantelpiece in my
bedroom. My little Ella gathered it in the lane behind the house
yesterday morning, and brought it in triumphantly, and seized the best
china vase in the drawing-room, and filled it with water at the tap, and
thrust the great yellow bunch into it.

'Oh, Ella,' said Florence, her elder sister, 'what ugly common flowers!
How could you put them in mother's best vase, that Aunt Alice gave her
on her birthday! What a silly child you are!'

'I'm not a silly child,' aid Ella stoutly, 'and mother is sure to like
them; I know she will. _She_ won't call them common flowers. She
loves all yellow flowers. She said so when I brought her the daffodils;
and these are yellower, ever so much yellower.'

Her mother came in at this moment, and, taking our little girl on her
knee, she told her that she was quite right; they were very beautiful in
her eyes, and she would put them at once in her own room, where she
could have them all to herself.

And that is how it came about, that, as I lay in bed, the last thing my
eyes fell upon was Ella's bunch of yellow ragwort; and what could be
more natural than that I should go to sleep and dream of Runswick Bay?

It seems only yesterday that I was there, so clearly can I recall it,
and yet it must be twenty years ago. I think I must write an account of
my visit to Runswick Bay and give it to Ella, as it was her yellow
flowers which took me back to the picturesque little place. If she
cannot understand all I tell her now, she will learn to do so as she
grows older.

I was a young man then, just beginning to make my way as an artist. It
is slow work at first; until you have made a name, every one looks
critically at your work; when once you have been pronounced a rising
artist, every daub from your brush has a good market value. I had had
much uphill work, but I loved my profession for its own sake, and I
worked on patiently, and, at the time my story begins, several of my
pictures had sold for fair prices, and I was not without hope that I
might soon find a place in the Academy.

It was an unusually hot summer, and London was emptying fast. Every one
who could afford it was going either to the moors or to the sea, and I
felt very much inclined to follow their example. My father and mother
had died when I was quite a child, and the maiden aunt who had brought
me up had just passed away, and I had mourned her death very deeply, for
she had been both father and mother to me. I felt that I needed change
of scene, for I had been up for many nights with her during her last
illness, and I had had my rest broken for so long, that I found it very
difficult to sleep, and in many ways I was far from well. My aunt had
left all her little property to me, so that the means to leave London
and to take a suitable holiday were not wanting. The question was, where
should I go? I was anxious to combine, if possible, pleasure and
business--that is to say, I wished to choose some quiet place where I
could get bracing air and thorough change of scene, and where I could
also find studies for my new picture, which was (at least, so I fondly
dreamed) to find a place in the Academy the following spring.

It was whilst I was looking for a suitable spot that Tom Bernard, my
great friend and confidant, found one for me.

'Jack, old fellow,' he said, thrusting a torn newspaper into my hand,
'read that, old man.'

The newspaper was doubled down tightly, and a great red cross of Tom's
making showed me the part he wished me to read.

  RUNSWICK BAY.

  This charming seaside resort is not half so well known
  as it deserves to be. For the lover of the beautiful,
  for the man with an artistic eye, it possesses a charm
  which words would fail to describe. The little bay is a
  favourite resort for artists; they, at least, know how
  to appreciate its beauties. It would be well for any who
  may desire to visit this wonderfully picturesque and
  enchanting spot to secure hotel or lodging-house
  accommodation as early as possible, for the demand for
  rooms is, in August and September, far greater than the
  supply.


'Well, what do you think of it?' said Tom.

'It sounds just the thing,' I said; 'fresh air and plenty to paint.'

'Shall you go?'

'Yes, to-morrow,' I replied; 'the sooner the better.'

My bag was soon packed, my easel and painting materials were collected,
and the very next morning I was on my way into Yorkshire.

It was evening when I reached the end of my long, tiring railway
journey; and when, hot and dusty, I alighted at a village which lay
about two miles from my destination. I saw no sign of beauty as I walked
from the station; the country was slightly undulating in parts, but as a
rule nothing met my gaze but a long flat stretch of field after field,
covered, as the case might be, with grass or corn. Harebells and pink
campion grew on the banks, and the meadows were full of ox-eye daisies;
but I saw nothing besides that was in the least attractive, and
certainly nothing of which I could make a picture.

A family from York had come by the same train, and I had learnt from
their conversation that they had engaged lodgings for a month at
Runswick Bay. The children, two boys of ten and twelve, and a little
fair-haired girl a year or two younger, were full of excitement on their
arrival.

'Father, where is the sea?' they cried. 'Oh, we do want to see the sea!'

'Run on,' said their father, 'and you will soon see it.'

So we ran together, for I felt myself a child again as I watched them,
and if ever I lagged behind, one or other of them would turn round and
cry, 'Come on, come on; we shall soon see it.'

Then, suddenly, we came to the edge of the high cliff, and the sea in
all its beauty and loveliness burst upon us. The small bay was shut in
by rocks on either side, and on the descent of the steep cliff was built
the little fishing village. I think I have never seen a prettier place.

The children were already running down the steep, rocky path--I cannot
call it a road--which led down to the sea, and I followed more slowly
behind them. It was the most curiously built place. The fishermen's
cottages were perched on the rock, wherever a ledge or standing place
could be found. Steep, narrow paths, or small flights of rock-hewn
steps, led from one to another. There was no street in the whole place;
there could be none, for there were hardly two houses which stood on the
same level. To take a walk through this quaint village was to go up and
down stairs the whole time.

At last, after a long, downward scramble, I found myself on the shore,
and then I looked back at the cliff and at the irregular little town. I
did not wonder that artists were to be found there. I had counted four
as I came down the hill, perched on different platforms on the rock, and
all hard at work at their easels.

Yes, it was certainly a picturesque place, and I was glad that I had
come. The colouring was charming: there was red rock in the background,
here and there covered with grass, and ablaze with flowers. Wild roses
and poppies, pink-thrift and white daisies, all contributed to make the
old rock gay. But the yellow ragwort was all over; great patches of it
grew even on the margin of the sand, and its bright flowers gave the
whole place a golden colouring. There seemed to be yellow everywhere,
and the red-tiled cottages, and the fishermen in their blue jerseys, and
the countless flights of steps, all appeared to be framed in the
brightest gilt.

Yes, I felt sure I should find something to paint in Runswick Bay. I was
not disappointed in Tom's choice for me.




[Illustration]




Chapter II

LITTLE JOHN


After admiring the beauties of my new surroundings for some little time,
I felt that I must begin to look for quarters. I was anxious, if
possible, to find a lodging in one of the cottages, and then, after a
good night's rest, I would carefully select a good subject for my
picture. I called at several houses, where I noticed a card in the
window announcing _Apartments to Let_, but I met the same answer
everywhere, 'Full, sir, quite full.' In one place I was offered a bed in
the kitchen, but the whole place smelt so strongly of fried herrings and
of fish oil, that I felt it would be far more pleasant to sleep on the
beach than to attempt to do so in that close and unwholesome atmosphere.

After wandering up and down for some time, I passed a house close to the
village green, and saw the children with whom I had travelled sitting at
tea close to the open window. They, too, were eating herrings, and the
smell made me hungry. I began to feel that it was time I had something
to eat, and I thought my best plan would be to retrace my steps to the
hotel which I had passed on my way, and which stood at the very top of
the high cliff. I turned a little lazy when I thought of the climb, for
I was tired with my journey, and, as I said before, I was not very
strong, and to drag my bag and easel up the rugged ascent would require
a mighty effort at the best of times. I noticed that wooden benches had
been placed here and there on the different platforms of the rock, for
the convenience of the fishermen, and I determined to rest for a quarter
of an hour on one of them before retracing my steps up the steep hill to
the hotel. The fishermen were filling most of the seats, sitting side by
side, row after row of them, talking together, and looking down at the
beach below. As I gazed up at them, they looked to me like so many blue
birds perched on the steep rock.

There was one seat in a quiet corner which I noticed was empty. I went
to it, and laying my knapsack and other belongings beside me, I sat down
to rest.

But I was not long to remain alone. A minute afterwards a young
fisherman, dressed like his mates in blue jersey and oilskin cap,
planted himself on the other end of the seat which I had selected.

'Good-day, sir,' he said. 'What do you think of our bay?'

'It's a pretty place, very pretty,' I said. 'I like it well enough now,
but I daresay I shall like it better still to-morrow.'

'Better still to-morrow,' he repeated; 'well, it _is_ the better
for knowing, in my opinion, sir, and I _ought_ to know, if any one
should, for I've lived my lifetime here.'

I turned to look at him as he spoke, and I felt at once that I had come
across one of Nature's gentlemen. He was a fine specimen of an honest
English fisherman, with dark eyes and hair, and with a sunny smile on
his weather-beaten, sunburnt face. You had only to look at the man to
feel sure that you could trust him, and that, like Nathanael, there was
no guile in him.

'I wonder if you could help me,' I said; 'I want to find a room here if
I can, but every place seems so full.'

'Yes, it is full, sir, in August; that's the main time here. Let me see,
there's Brown's, they're full, and Robinson's, and Wilson's, and
Thomson's, all full up. There's Giles', they have a room, I believe, but
they're not over clean; maybe you're particular, sir.'

'Well,' I said, 'I do like things clean; I don't mind how rough they are
if they're only clean.'

'Ah,' he said, with a twinkle in his eye; 'you wouldn't care for one pan
to do all the work of the house--to boil the dirty clothes, and the
fish, and your bit of pudding for dinner, and not overmuch cleaning of
it in between.'

'No,' I said, laughing; 'I should not like that, certainly.'

'Might give the pudding a flavour of stockings, and a sauce of fish
oil,' he answered. 'Well, you're right, sir; I shouldn't like it myself.
Cleanliness is next to godliness, that's my idea. Well, then, that being
as it is, I wouldn't go to Giles', not if them is your sentiments with
regard to pans, sir.'

'Then I suppose there's nothing for it but to trudge up to the hotel at
the top of the hill,' I said, with something of a groan.

'Well, sir,' he said, hesitating a little; 'me and my missus, we have a
room as we lets sometimes, but it's a poor place, sir, homely like, as
ye may say. Maybe you wouldn't put up with it.'

'Would you let me see it?' I asked.

'With pleasure, sir; it's rough, but it's clean. We could promise you a
clean pan, sir. My missus she's a good one for cleaning; she's not one
of them slatternly, good-for-nothing lasses. There's heaps of them here,
sir, idling away their time. She's a good girl is my Polly. Why, if that
isn't little John a-clambering up the steps to his daddy!'

He jumped up as he said this, and ran quickly down the steep flight of
steps which led down from the height on which the seat was placed, and
soon returned with a little lad about two years old in his arms.

The child was as fair as his father was dark. He was a pretty boy with
light hair and blue eyes, and was tidily dressed in a bright red cap and
clean white-pinafore.

'Tea's ready, daddy,' said the boy; 'come home with little John.'

'Maybe you wouldn't object to a cup o' tea, sir,' said the father,
turning to me; 'it'll hearten you up a bit after your journey, and
there's sure to be herrings. We almost lives on herrings here, sir, and
then, if you're so minded, you can look at the room after. Ye'll excuse
me if I make too bold, sir,' he added, as he gently patted little John's
tiny hand, which rested on his arm.

'I shall be only too glad to come,' I said; 'for I am very hungry, and
if Polly's room is as nice as I think it will be, it will be just the
place for me.'

He walked in front of me, up and down several flights of steps, until,
at some little distance lower down the hill, he stopped before a small
cottage. Sure enough there were herrings, frying and spluttering on the
fire, and there too was Polly herself, arrayed in a clean white apron,
and turning the herrings with a fork. The kitchen was very low, and the
rafters seemed resting on my head as I entered; but the window and door
were both wide open, and the whole place struck me as being wonderfully
sweet and clean. A low wooden settle stood by the fire, one or two plain
deal chairs by the wall, and little John's three-legged stool was placed
close to his father's arm-chair. A small shelf above the fireplace held
the family library. I noticed a Bible, a hymn-book, a _Pilgrim's
Progress_, and several other books, all of which had seen their best
days and were doubtless in constant use. On the walls were prints in
wooden frames and much discoloured by the turf smoke of the fire. Upon a
carved old oak cupboard, which held the clothes of the family, were
arranged various rare shells and stones, curious sea-urchins and other
treasures of the sea, and in the centre, the chief ornament of the house
and the pride of Polly's heart, a ship, carved and rigged by Duncan
himself, and preserved carefully under a glass shade.

Polly gave me a hearty Yorkshire welcome, and we soon gathered about the
small round table. Duncan, with little John on his knee, asked a
blessing, and Polly poured out the tea, and we all did justice to the
meal.

The more I saw of these honest people, the more I liked them and felt
inclined to trust them. When tea was over, Polly took me to see the
guest-chamber in which her husband had offered me a bed. It was a low
room in the roof, containing a plain wooden bedstead, one chair, a small
wash-hand stand, and a square of looking-glass hanging on the wall.
There was no other furniture, and, indeed, there was room for no other,
and the room was unadorned except by three or four funeral cards in
dismal black frames, which were hanging at different heights on the wall
opposite the bed. But the square casement window was thrown wide open,
and the pure sea air filled the little room, and the coarse white
coverings of the bed were spotless, and, indeed, the whole place looked
and felt both fresh and clean.

'You'll pardon me, sir,' said Duncan, 'for asking you to look at such a
poor place.'

'But I like it, Duncan,' I answered, 'and I like you, and I like your
wife, and if you will have me as a lodger, I am willing and glad to
stay.'

The terms were soon agreed upon to the satisfaction of both parties, and
then all things being settled, Polly went to put little John to bed
whilst I went with Duncan to see his boat.

It was an old boat, and it had been his father's before him, and it had
weathered many a storm; but it was the dream of Duncan's life to buy a
new one, and he and Polly had nearly saved up money enough for it.

'That's why me and the missus is glad to get a lodger now and again,' he
said; 'it all goes to the boat, every penny of it. We mean to call her
The Little John. He's going in her the very first voyage she takes; he
is indeed, sir, for he'll be her captain one day, please God, little
John will.'

It was a calm, beautiful evening; the sea was like a sheet of glass.
Hardly a ripple was breaking on the shore. The sun was setting behind
the cliff, and the fishing village would soon be in darkness. The
fishermen were leaving their cottages and were making for the shore.
Already some of the boats were launched, and the men were throwing in
their nets and fishing-tackle, and were pulling out to sea. I enjoyed
watching my new friend making his preparations. His three mates brought
out the nets, and he gave his orders with a tone of command. He was the
owner and the captain of the Mary Ann, and the rest were accustomed to
do his bidding.

When all were on board, Duncan himself jumped in and gave the word to
push from shore. He nodded to me and bid me good-night, and when he was
a little way from shore, I saw him stand up in the boat and wave his
oil-skin cap to some one above me on the cliff.

I looked up, and saw Polly standing on the rock overhanging the shore
with little John in his white nightgown in her arms. He was waving his
red cap to his father, and continued to do so till the boat was out of
sight.




Chapter III

STRANGE MUSIC


I slept well in my strange little bedroom, although I was awakened early
by the sunlight streaming in at the window. I jumped up and looked out.
The sun was rising over the sea, and a flood of golden light was
streaming across it.

I dressed quickly and went out. Very few people were about, for the
fishermen had not yet returned from their night's fishing. The cliff
looked even more beautiful than the night before, for every bit of
colouring stood out clear and distinct in the sunshine. 'I shall get my
best effects in the morning,' I said to myself, 'and I had better choose
my subject at once, so that after breakfast I may be able to begin
without delay.'

How many steps I went up, and how many I went down, before I came to a
decision, it would be impossible to tell; but at last I found a place
which seemed to me to be the very gem of the whole village. An old
disused boat stood in the foreground, and over this a large fishing net,
covered with floats, was spread to dry. Behind rose the rocks, covered
with tufts of grass, patches of gorse, tall yellow mustard plants and
golden ragwort, and at the top of a steep flight of rock-hewn steps
stood a white cottage with red-tiled roof, the little garden in front of
it gay with hollyhocks and dahlias. A group of barefooted children were
standing by the gate feeding some chickens and ducks, a large dog was
lying asleep at the top of the steps, and a black cat was basking in the
morning sunshine on the low garden wall. It was, to my mind, an
extremely pretty scene, and it made me long to be busy with my brush.

I hurried back to my lodging, and found Polly preparing my breakfast,
whilst little John looked on. He was sitting in his nightgown, curled up
in his father's armchair. 'I'm daddy,' he called out to me as I came in.

There was a little round table laid ready for me, and covered with a
spotlessly clean cloth, and on it was a small black teapot, and a white
and gold cup and saucer, upon which I saw the golden announcement, 'A
present from Whitby,' whilst my plate was adorned with a remarkable
picture of Whitby Abbey in a thunderstorm.

There were herrings, of course, and Polly had made some hot cakes, the
like of which are never seen outside Yorkshire. These were ready
buttered, and were lying wrapped in a clean cloth in front of the fire.
Polly made the tea as soon as I entered, and then retired with little
John in her arms into the bedroom, whilst I sat down with a good
appetite to my breakfast.

I had not quite finished my meal when I heard a great shout from the
shore. Women and children, lads and lasses, ran past the open door,
crying, 'The boats! the boats!' Polly came flying into the kitchen,
caught up little John's red cap, thrust it on his head, and ran down the
steps. I left my breakfast unfinished, and followed them.

It was a pretty sight. The fishing-boats were just nearing shore, and
almost every one in the place had turned out to meet them.

Wives, children, and visitors were gathered on the small landing place;
most had dishes or plates in their hands, for the herrings could be
bought straight from the boats. The family from York were there, and
they greeted me as an old friend.

When the little village had been abundantly supplied with fish, the rest
of the herrings were packed up and sent off by train to be sold
elsewhere. It was a pretty animated scene, and I wished I had brought my
sketchbook with me. I thought the arrival of the fishing boats would
make a splendid subject for a picture.

Duncan was too busy even to see me till the fish were all landed,
counted, and disposed of, but he had time for a word with little John,
and as I was finishing my breakfast he came in with the child perched on
his shoulder.

'Good morning, sir,' he said; 'and how do you like our bay this
morning?'

My answer fully satisfied him, and whilst he sat down to his morning
meal I went out to begin my work. It was a lovely day, and I thoroughly
enjoyed the prospect before me. I found a shady place just under the
wall of a house, where my picture would be in sunlight and I and my
easel in shadow. I liked the spot I had chosen even better than I had
done before breakfast, and I was soon hard at work.

I had sketched in my picture, and was beginning to paint, when I became
conscious of the sound of voices just over my head, and I soon became
equally conscious that they were talking about me.

'It's just like it,' said one voice. 'Look--do look. There's Betty
Green's cottage, and Minnie the cat, and the seat, and the old boat.'

[Illustration]

'Let me see, Marjorie,' said another voice; 'is it the old one with
white hair and a long, long beard?'

'No, it's quite a young one; his hair's black, and he hasn't got a beard
at all.'

'Let me look. Yes, I can see him. I like him much better than the old
one; hasn't he got nice red cheeks?'

'Hush! he'll hear,' said the other voice. 'You naughty boy! I believe he
did hear; I saw him laugh.'

I jumped up at this, and looked up, but I could see nothing but a garden
wall and a thick bushy tree, which was growing just inside it.

'Hullo, who's there?' I shouted.

But there was dead silence; and as no one appeared, and nothing more
happened, I sat down and went on with my picture.

Many people passed by as I was painting, and tried to look at what I was
doing. Some glanced out of the corners of their eyes as they walked on;
others paused behind me and silently watched me; a few made remarks to
one another about my picture; one or two offered suggestions, thought I
should have had a better view lower down the hill, or hoped that I would
make the colouring vivid enough. The children with whom I had travelled
seemed to feel a kind of partnership in my picture.

'Let's go and look at _our_ artist,' Bob would say to Harry; 'his
picture is going to be the best of the lot.'

They were so fond of watching me, and so much excited over what I was
doing, that, as time went on, I was often obliged to ask them to move
further away, so eager were they to watch every movement of my brush.

I thoroughly enjoyed my morning's work, and went back very hungry, and
quite ready for the comfortable little dinner which Polly had prepared
for me. In the afternoon the light would be all wrong for my picture;
but I determined to sketch in the foreground, and prepare for my next
morning's work.

I was very busy upon this, when suddenly I became conscious of music, if
music it could be called. It was the most peculiar sound, and at first I
could not find out from whence it came. It was evidently not caused by a
wind instrument; I felt sure it was not a concertina or an accordion.
This sound would go on for a minute or two, and then stop suddenly, only
to begin again more loudly a few seconds later. At times I distinguished
a few bars of a tune, then only disjointed notes followed. Could it be a
child strumming idly on a harmonium? but no, it was not at all like an
instrument of that kind. It was an annoying, worrying sound, and it went
on for so long that I began to be vexed with it, and stamped my foot
impatiently when, after a short interval, I heard it begin again. The
sound seemed to come from behind the wall of the house near which I was
sitting, and it was repeated from time to time during the whole of the
afternoon.

At length, as the afternoon went on, I began to distinguish what tunes
were being attempted. I made out a bar or two of the old French
Republican air, 'The Marseillaise,' and then I was almost startled by
what came next, for it was a tune I had known well since I was a very
little child. It was 'Home, Sweet Home,' and that was my mother's
favourite tune; in fact, I never heard it without thinking of her. Many
and many a time had she sung me to sleep with that tune. I had scarlet
fever when I was five years old, and my mother had nursed me through it,
and when I was weary and fretful she would sing to me--my pretty
fair-haired mother. Even as I sat before my easel I could see her, as
she sat at the foot of my bed, with the sunshine streaming upon her
through the half-darkened window, and making her look, to my boyish
imagination, like a beautiful angel. And I could hear her voice still;
and the sweet tones in which she sang that very song to me, 'Home, sweet
home, there's no place like home.'

I remembered one night especially, in which she knelt by my bed and
prayed that she might meet her boy in the bright city, the sweet home
above the sky which was the best and brightest home of all. I wonder
what she would think of me now, I said to myself, and whether she ever
will see me there. I very much doubt it; it seems to me that I am a long
way off from Home, Sweet Home now.

My mother had died soon after that illness of mine, and I knew that she
had gone to live in that beautiful home of which she had so often spoken
to me. And I had been left behind, and my aunt, who had brought me up,
had cared for none of these things, and I had learnt to look at the
world and at life from her worldly standpoint, and had forgotten to seek
first the Kingdom of God. Oh! if my mother only knew, my pretty,
beautiful mother, I said to myself that day. And then there came the
thought, perhaps she _does_ know, and the thought made me very
uncomfortable. I wished, more than ever, that that cracked old
instrument, whatever it was, would stop.

But, in spite of all my wishes, the strange sound went on, and again and
again I had to listen to 'Home, Sweet Home,' and each time that it came
it set my memory going, and brought back to me the words and the looks
which I thought I had forgotten. And it set something else going
too--the still, small voice within, accusing me of forgetfulness, not so
much of my mother as of my mother's God.

I began to wish most heartily that I had chosen some other spot for my
picture. But it was working out so well that I felt it would be a great
mistake to change, and I hoped that the individual, man, woman, or
child, who had been making that horrible noise might find some other
employment to-morrow, and might leave me in peace.

The next day my wishes were fulfilled, for I was not disturbed, and very
little happened except that my picture made progress. Then came two wet
days, on which I had to paint in my little chamber, and did not get back
to my seat under the wall.

I saw a good deal of Duncan during those wet days. He would come and sit
beside me as I painted, and would tell me stories of storms and
shipwrecks, and of the different times when the lifeboat had been sent
out, and of the many lives she had saved.

'Have ye seen her, sir? You must go and have a look at our boat; she
lies in a house down by the shore, as trim and tight a little boat as
you could wish to see anywhere!'

'I suppose you've been in many a storm yourself,
Duncan,' I said.

'Storms, sir! I've very near lived in them ever since I was born. Many
and many's the time I've never expected to see land again. I didn't care
so much when I was a young chap. You see, my father and mother were
dead, and if I went to the bottom there was nobody, as you might say, to
feel it; but it's different now, sir, you see.'

'Yes,' I said, 'there's Polly and little John.'

'That's just where it is, sir, Polly and little John, bless 'em; and all
the time the wind's raging, and the waves is coming right over the boat,
I'm thinking of my poor lass at home, and how every gust of wind will be
sweeping right over her heart, and how she'll be kneeling by little
John's bed, praying God to bring his daddy safe home again. And I know,
sir, as well as I know anything, that when God Almighty hears and
answers her prayer, and brings me safe to land, Polly and little John
will be standing on yon rocks a-straining their eyes for the first sight
of the boats, and then a-running down almost into the water to welcome
me home again. Yes, it makes a sight o' difference to a married man,
sir; doesn't it, now? It isn't the dying, ye understand, it's the
leaving behind as I think of. I'm not afraid to die,' he added humbly
and reverently, as he took off his oilskin cap. 'I know whom I have
believed.'

'You're a plucky fellow, Duncan,' I said, 'to talk of not being afraid
to die. I've just been at a death-bed, and--'

'And you felt you wouldn't like to be there yourself,' Duncan went on,
as I stopped. 'Well, maybe not, it comes nat'ral to us, sir; we're born
with that feeling, I often think, and we can no more help it than we can
help any other thing we're born with. But what I mean to say is, I'm not
afraid of what comes _after_ death. It may be a dark tunnel, sir,
but there's light at the far end!'





[Illustration]




Chapter IV

WHAT ARE YOU?


On Saturday of that week the sun shone brightly, and I was up betimes,
had an early breakfast, and set to work at my picture as soon as
possible. I had not been painting long before I again heard voices above
me, the same childish voices that I had heard before.

'_You_ give it to him,' said one voice.

'No, Marjorie, I daren't; you take it.'

'You ought not to be afraid, because you're a boy,' said the first
speaker; 'father says boys ought always to be brave.'

'But you're big, Marjorie, and big people ought to be braver than little
people!'

There was a long, whispered conversation after this, and I could not
distinguish the words which were spoken. But presently a small piece of
pink paper was thrown over the wall, and fluttered down upon my palette.
I caught it up quickly, to prevent it from sticking to the paints, and I
saw there was something printed on it. It ran thus:--

  _There will be a short service on the shore on Sunday Morning at
  11 o'clock, when you are earnestly requested to be present_.

  _Subject_: WHAT ARE YOU?


'Thank you,' I said aloud. 'Who sent me this?'

There was no answer at first, then a little voice just above me said,
'Both of us, sir.'

'Come down and talk to me,' I said; 'I can't talk to children whom I
can't see. Come out here and look at my picture.'

They came out presently hand in hand, a little girl of five in a blue
tam-o'-shanter cap, a pale pink frock, and a white pinafore, and a boy
of three, the merriest, most sturdy little fellow I thought I had ever
seen. His face was as round and rosy as an apple, his eyes were dark
blue, and had the happiest and most roguish expression that it would be
possible for eyes to have. When the child laughed (and whenever was he
not laughing?), every part of his face laughed together. His eyes began
it, his lips followed suit, even his nose was pressed into the service.
If a sunbeam could be caught and dressed up like a little boy, I think
it would look something like that child.

'Now,' I said, 'that's right; I like to see children's faces when I talk
to them; tell me your names to begin with.'

'I'm Marjorie, sir,' said the little girl, 'and he's Jack.'

'Jack!' I said; 'that's _my_ name, and a nice name too, isn't it,
little Jack? Come and look at my picture, little Jack, and see if you
think big Jack knows how to paint.'

By degrees they grew more at their ease, and chatted freely with me.
Marjorie told me that her father had sent the paper. Father was going to
preach on Sunday; he preached every Sunday, and numbers of people came,
and Jack was in the choir.

What a dear little chorister, to be sure, a chubby little cherub if ever
there was one!

'Shall you come, big Jack?' he said, patting my hand with his strong,
sturdy little fist.

'I don't know,' I said; 'if it's a fine day, perhaps I shall want to get
on with my picture.'

'On Sunday?' said the child in a shocked voice; 'it's on Sunday father
preaches, and you couldn't paint on Sunday, could you?'

'Well, I'll see,' I said; 'perhaps I'll come and hear you sing, little
Jack.'

'Thank you, big Jack,' he said, with a merry twinkle in his pretty blue
eyes.

'What is this preaching on the shore, Duncan?' I asked.

'Oh, it's our lay preacher,' he said; 'he's a good man, and has done a
sight of good in this place. You see, it's too far for folks here to go
to church, and so he lives amongst us, and has meetings in the hall
yonder in winter, and in summer, why, we have 'em on the shore, and the
visitors comes mostly. There's a few won't come, but we get the best of
them, and we have some fine singing--real nice it is! I'm in the choir
myself, sir,' he said; 'you wouldn't think it, but I am. I've got a good
strong voice, too!'

It must be a choir worth seeing, I thought, if it contained two such
strange contrasts, the big burly fisherman and the tiny child who had
invited me to be present.

I had not quite made up my mind to go. I had not been to a service for
many months, I might almost say years. I had slipped out of it lately,
and I thought I should feel myself a fish out of water. However, when
the next day came, every one seemed to take it as a matter of course
that I should be going. Polly was up early, and had dressed little John
in his best.

'You'll see him at church, sir,' she said, as she laid my breakfast; 'he
always likes to go to church, and he's as good as gold, bless him!'

Duncan was out before I was up, and I had seen him, as I was dressing,
going round to the fishermen sitting as usual on the seats on the cliff,
with a bundle of pink papers in his hand, similar to the one which had
been given me, and distributing them to every group of his mates which
he came across. Yes, I felt that I was expected to go, and it would be
hard work to keep away. But if I had still had any doubt about the
matter, it would have surely disappeared when at half-past ten exactly a
tiny couple came toiling hand in hand up the steps leading to Duncan's
door, and announced to Polly that they had come to call for big Mr. Jack
to go to church.

It was Marjorie and her little brother, and the small Jack put his
little fat hand into that of big Jack, and led him triumphantly away.

It was a pretty sight to see that congregation gathering on the village
green. From the fishermen's cottages there came a stream of people down
to the shore,--mothers with babies in their arms and leading young
children by the hand, groups of boys and girls wearing shoes and
stockings who had been barefooted all the week, many a weather-beaten
sailor, many a sunburnt fisher lad, many elderly people too, old men,
and white-haired women in closely-plaited white caps. There were
visitors, too, coming down from the rocks, and these mostly kept in the
background, and had at first an air of watching the movement rather than
joining in it. My York friends were, however, well to the front, and the
children nodded to me, and smiled at one another as they saw me led like
a lamb to the service by my two small guardians.

It was a lovely day, and the sandy ground was dry, and the congregation
sat on the rough coarse grass or perched on the sand hillocks round. As
for the old boat, it was occupied by the choir, and little Jack, having
seen me safely to the spot, climbed into it and stood proudly in the
stern. He had a hymn-book in his hand, which I knew he could not read,
for he was holding it upside down, but he looked at it as long and as
earnestly as if he could understand every word. Marjorie planted herself
beside me, I suppose to watch me, in case I showed signs of running away
before the service was over.

Then just before eleven, and when quite a large company of people had
gathered on the green, her father arrived. He was a man of about forty,
and his face gave me the impression that he had known trouble, and yet I
fancied as I looked further at him that the trouble, whatever it was,
had ended. He seemed to me like one who has come out of a sharp storm,
and has anchored in a quiet haven. For whilst I noticed in his face the
traces of heavy sorrow, still at the same time he looked happier and
more peaceful than any of those who stood round him; in fact, it was the
most restful face I had ever seen. He was not an educated man, nor was
he what men call a gentleman, and yet there was a refinement about him
which made one feel at once that he was no common man, and had no common
history. His face was so interesting to me, that I am afraid I was
gazing at him instead of finding the hymn he had given out, but I was
recalled to my duty by his little daughter, who seized the hymn-book she
had given me at the beginning of the service, found the page for me, and
pointed with her small finger to the place.

It was a mission hymn, sung to a wild, irregular tune. I daresay I
should have smiled if I had heard it anywhere else, but it was no
laughing matter that morning. As I looked at the brown fishermen who had
taken off their oilskin caps, as I glanced at the earnest face of the
preacher, as I noticed how even children, like little Marjorie beside
me, were singing with all their heart and soul the simple plaintive
words, I felt strangely solemnized.

Then came the prayer, and I felt as he prayed that One whom we could not
see was standing amongst us. It was a very simple prayer, but it was the
outpouring of his heart to God, and many a low Amen broke from the lips
of the fishermen as their hearts went with his.

The sermon followed. Shall I call it a sermon? It was more an appeal
than a sermon, or even an address. There was no attempt at style, there
were no long words or stilted sentences; it was exactly what his prayer
had been, words spoken out of the abundance of his earnest heart. The
prayer had contained the outpouring of his soul to his God in heaven;
the words, to which we listened afterwards contained the outpouring of
his soul to us, his brothers and sisters on earth.

There was a great hush over the congregation whilst he spoke. The
mothers quieted their babes, the children sat with their eyes fixed on
the speaker; even those visitors who had been on the outskirts of the
crowd drew near to listen.

'What are you, dear friends?' he began; 'that is our subject to-day.
What are you? How many different answers I hear you make, as you answer
my question in your hearts!'

'What am I?' you say. 'I am a fisherman, a strong active man, accustomed
to toil and danger.' 'I am a mother, with a large family of little ones,
working hard from morning till night.' 'I am a schoolboy, learning the
lessons which are to fit me to make my way in the world.' 'I am a busy
merchant, toiling hard to make money, and obliged to come to this quiet
place to recruit my wearied energies.' 'I am an artist, with great
ambition of future success.' 'I am an old man, who has weathered many a
storm, but my work is done now; I am too old to fish, too tired to
toil.' 'I am a gentleman of no occupation, idling comfortably through a
busy world.' 'I'--and here he glanced at his own little Jack in the
stern of the old boat--'I am a tiny child, with an unknown life all
before me.'

'Dear friends, such are some of your answers to my question. Can I find,
do you think, one answer, one description, which will suit you
all--fishermen, mothers, boys and girls, artists, merchants, gentlemen,
the old man and the little child? Yes, I can. If I could hand you each a
piece of paper and a pencil this day, there is one description of
yourself which each of you might write, one occupation which would
include you all, the old, the young, the rich and the poor. Each of you,
without exception, might write this--_I am a servant_.

'I, the speaker, am a servant; you who listen, all of you, are
servants.'

'Well, I don't know how he is going to make that out,' I said to myself.
'I thought he was going to say we were all sinners, and _that_, I
suppose, we are, but _servants_! I do not believe I am anybody's
servant.'

'All servants,' he went on, 'but not all in the same service. As God and
the angels look down upon this green to-day they see gathering together
a great company of servants, but they also see that we are not all
servants of the same master. They see what we do not see, a dividing
line between us. On one side of the line God sees, and the angels see,
one company of servants--and in God's book He gives us the name of their
master--_Servants of sin_.

'On the other side of the line, God sees, and the angels see, another
company of servants--_Servants of Christ_.

'Which company do you belong to, dear friend? You fishermen on the bank
there, what are you? Little child, what are you?--a servant of sin, or a
servant of Jesus Christ?

So I tried to turn it off from myself, and to forget the words which had
been spoken. And whenever the question came back to me, the question
which the speaker had repeated so often, 'What are you?' I answered it
by saying to myself, 'I am a poor artist, having a holiday in Runswick
Bay, and I am not going to trouble my head with gloomy thoughts.'

Polly had prepared an excellent dinner in honour of the day, and I did
full justice to it. Then I determined to walk to Staithes, and to spend
the rest of the day in seeing the country. I had always been accustomed,
to paint on Sunday, but only one of the artists seemed to be at work,
and Duncan and Polly had been so much shocked by seeing him, that I did
not venture to do the same. I enjoyed the walk along the cliffs, and
came back in good spirits, having completely shaken off, as I imagined,
the remembrance of the speaker's words.




[Illustration]




Chapter V

THE RUNSWICK SPORTS


'I've got a big favour to ask of you, sir,' said Duncan the next day.
'You'll not think I'm taking a liberty, will you?'

'Certainly not, Duncan,' I said. 'What do you want?'

'Well, it's just here, sir--me and my mates, we get up some sports every
year on the green. We have 'em in August, sir, just when the visitors
are here. They all turn out to see them, and there's lots of them is
very good in subscribing to the prizes. You see, sir, there is a many
young fellows here, young chaps who must have something to keep them out
of mischief; when they're not fishing, they're bound to be after the
beer, if they haven't something to turn their minds and keep them going
a bit. And these sports, why, they like 'em, sir; and a man must keep
sober if he's to win a prize--you understand, sir?'

'Yes, Duncan, I understand,' I said; 'it's first-rate for these young
lads, and for the old lads too, for the matter of that. I suppose you
want a subscription for your prizes?' I added, as I handed him half a
sovereign.

'Thank ye kindly, sir, I won't refuse it, and it's very good of you to
help us so largely; but that isn't what I came to ask of you. I hardly
like to bother you, sir,' he said doubtfully.

'Never mind the bother, Duncan; let's hear what you want.'

'Well, it's just here, sir. Could you, do you think, make for us some
sort of a programme to hang up by the post office there, for visitors to
see? You draw them pictures so quick, sir, and--'

'I see, Duncan; you want the programme to be illustrated. I'm your man;
I'll do it at once.' I was really only too glad to oblige the dear,
honest fellow.

He was wonderfully pleased at my ready consent, and went off at once to
procure a board upon which my programme might be fastened. We soon made
out together a list of attractions, and I had great pleasure in
beautifying and illustrating the catalogue of sports.

I headed it thus:--

  OYEZ, OYEZ!
  RUNSWICK ATHLETIC SPORTS.


Then, from the R of Runswick I hung a long fishing net, covered with
floats, and falling down over a fish basket, and some lobster-pots,
whilst on the ground were lying a number of fish which had been emptied
out of the basket.

Next followed a list of patrons, such as: The Honourable O'Mackerell,
Lord Crabby Lobster, Sir C. Shrimp, etc., etc.

Then came a list of the various sports, each profusely illustrated--The
tug of war, the jockey race, the women's egg and spoon race, the sack
race, the greasy pole, the long jump, etc.; and lastly, an announcement
of a grand concert to be held in the evening, as a conclusion of the
festivities of the day.

Duncan was more than satisfied--he was delighted, and his gratitude knew
no bounds. His excitement, as he carried the board away to hang it in a
conspicuous place, was like the excitement of a child.

The whole village seemed to be stirred as the eventful day drew near.

'Are you going to see the great tug, big Mr. Jack?' my little friend
called to me over the wall as I was painting. As for the York boys,
Harry and Bob, they spent a great part of every day in admiring the
programme, and in bringing other visitors to see and admire the work of
_their_ artist.

How anxiously Duncan watched the sky the day before the sports, and how
triumphantly Polly announced, when I came down to breakfast, 'A fine
day, sir; couldn't be finer, could it now?'

Those village sports were really a pretty sight. I see it all in my
mind's eye now. I often wonder I have not made a picture of it. The high
cliff stretching overhead, and covered with bushes and bracken, amongst
which nestled the red-tiled cottages. Then below the cliff the level
green, covered with strong, hardy fishermen and their sunburnt wives,
and surrounding the green, on the sand-hills, the visitors old and
young, dressed in bright colours and holiday attire. Is it too late to
paint it from memory, I wonder? I see it all still so distinctly.

The sports lasted a long time, and went off well. Polly distinguished
herself by winning the egg and spoon race, much to the joy of little
John, who watched all the proceedings from his father's arms.

Then came the greatest event of all, the tug of war. A long cable was
brought out and stretched across the green, and a pocket-handkerchief
was tied in the centre of it. Two stakes were then driven into the
ground, and between these a line was chalked on the grass. The
handkerchief was then placed exactly over the line. After this all the
fishermen who entered the lists were divided into two parties. Then each
side laid hold of one end of the rope, and at a given signal they began
to pull. It was a trial of strength; whichever side could draw the
handkerchief past the two stakes and over the line, that side would win.

How tremendously those men pulled! What force they put into it! Yet for
a long time the rope did not move a single inch. All the strength of
those powerful fishermen was put out; they were lying on the ground,
that their pull might be all the stronger. Every sinew, every nerve,
every muscle seemed to be on the strain, but so evenly were the two
sides matched, that the rope was motionless, and it seemed impossible to
tell which party would win.

Little John was eagerly watching his father.

'Pull, daddy, pull!' I heard him cry; and I think I was nearly as
pleased as he and Polly were when Duncan and the mates on his side
suddenly made one mighty effort, and the handkerchief was drawn across
the line. There was tremendous cheering after this. Polly clapped her
hands with delight, and little Jack and big Jack nearly shouted
themselves hoarse.

It was an interesting sight, and I had reason to remember it afterwards,
as you will see. The evening concert went off as well as the sports had
done, and Duncan came in at night rather tired, but well satisfied with
the day's proceedings.

I enjoyed all the sights at Runswick Bay, but I think I was particularly
charmed with what happened on the day after the sports. All the village
was early astir, and as I was dressing, it seemed to me that every
fisherman in the place was hurrying down to the beach. It was not long
before I followed them to see what they were doing. I found that they
were about to draw the crab-boats up from the shore, to a place where
they would be safe from the winter storms. It was hard work, but every
one was there to give a hand. A long string of men and lads laid hold of
the strong cable fastened to the boat. Even the wives and elder children
caught hold of it. I myself went to their help, and several of the
visitors followed my example. Then, when we were all in position, there
came a pause, for Duncan, who was directing the proceedings, charged us
not to pull till the signal was given. Then there rose a peculiar cry or
yodel, all the fishermen uttering it together, and as soon as it ceased
we gave our united, mighty pull. Then we paused to take breath, until
once more there came a yodel followed by another pull, and as this was
repeated again and again, it was grand to see the heavy boat making
steady and regular progress. Across the heavy sand she came, up the low
bank, over the rough grass, slowly, steadily, surely, she moved onward,
until at length she was placed in safety, far out of reach of the
highest tide and the strongest sea. Thus, one after another, the boats
were drawn up, and we were fairly tired before our work was done.

I think it must have been that very day, that, as I was sitting
painting, I once more heard the broken notes of the instrument which had
troubled me so much before. It was that tune again, my mother's tune,
and somehow, I do not know how it was, with the sound of my mother's
tune there came back to my mind the remembrance of the Sunday service.
Ah! my mother was on the right side of the line, I said to myself; she
was a servant of Christ. But her son! what is he?

I did not want to follow out this subject, so I jumped up from my
camp-stool, and standing under the wall, I called, 'Little Jack, little
Jack.'

The music stopped at once, and the child came out. Dear, little merry
fellow, how fond I was of him already!

'Yes, Mr. big Jack,' he said, as he ran out of the gate.

'Come and talk to me, old chappie,' I said, 'whilst I paint. Who plays
music in your house?'

'I do,' said little Jack.

'_You_ do, Jack? Why, you are a funny little fellow to play music!
What do you play on, and who taught you?'

'Nobody teached me, Mr. Jack,' he said; 'I teached my own self.'

'Teached your own self? Why, how did you manage that?' I asked.

'I turned him round and round and round, Mr. Jack, and the music came,
and I teached my own self,' he repeated.

'What is it, Jack?' I asked. 'Is it an old musical box?'

'No, it's an organ, a barrow-organ, Mr. Jack.'

'Oh, a barrel-organ you mean, little chappie; why, however in the world
did you get hold of a barrel-organ? Is it a little toy one?'

'No, it's big, ever so big,' he said, stretching out his hands to show
me its size.

'Why, whoever gave you it?' I asked.

'It isn't Jack's own organ,' said the child.

'Whose is it, then?'

'It's father's, father's own organ.'

It seemed to me a most extraordinary thing for the mission preacher of
Runswick Bay to have in his possession, but I did not like to ask any
more questions at that time.

However, in the afternoon my little friend called to me over, the wall,
'Big Mr. Jack, come here.'

'Come where, my little man?'

'Come inside and look at father's organ; I'll play it to you, Mr. Jack.'

'What will father say if I come in?'

'Father's out.'

'What will mother say?'

'Mother's out too.'

I did not much relish the idea of entering a man's house in his absence,
but such plaintive entreaties came from the other side of the wall. Over
and over again he pleaded, 'Do come, Mr. Jack; do come quick, Mr. Jack!'
that at last, to please the child, I left my work for a few minutes and
went up the steps which led to the gate of their garden.

It was only a small place, but very prettily laid out. There was a tiny
lawn, well kept, and covered with short, soft grass, and in the centre
of this a round bed filled with geraniums, calceolarias, and lobelias.
Round the lawn, at the edge of the garden, was a border, in which grew
all manner of gay and sweet-smelling flowers. There were asters and
mignonette, sweet-peas and convolvolus, heliotrope and fuchsias. Then in
front of me was the pretty cottage, with two gables and a red-tiled
roof, the walls of which were covered from top to bottom with creeping
plants. Ivy and jessamine, climbing roses, virginia-creeper, and
canariensis, all helped to make the little place beautiful.

'What a pretty home you have, little Jack!' I said.

He kept tight hold of my hand, lest I should escape from him, and led me
on--into a tiny entrance hall, past one or two doors, down a dark
passage, and into a room at the back.

This room had a small bow-window overlooking the sea, the walls were
covered with bookshelves, a writing-table stood in the window, and in
the corner by the fireplace was the extraordinary object I had been
brought to see--an extremely ancient and antiquated barrel-organ.

What a peculiar thing to come across in a preacher's study! What
possible use could he have for it? It was a most dilapidated old
instrument, almost falling to pieces with old age. The shape was so
old-fashioned that I do not remember ever having seen one like it; the
silk, which had doubtless once been its adornment, was torn into shreds,
and it was impossible to tell what its original colour had been; the
wood was worm-eaten and decayed, and the leg upon which it had rested
could no longer support its weight.

'Let me hear you play it, Jack,' I said.

He sat down with great pride to turn the handle, but I noticed that half
the notes were broken off the barrel, which accounted for only fragments
of each tune being heard, whilst many bars of some were wanting
altogether. However, Jack seemed very proud of his performance, and
insisted on my staying till he had gone through the whole of the four
tunes which the poor old thing was supposed to play. He announced their
names, one by one, as each began.

'This is "My Poor Mary Anne," Mr. Jack, _very_ sad.' Then when that
was finished, 'This is the Old Hundred, _very_ old.'

After this there was a long turning of the handle without any sound
being heard, for the first part of the next tune was gone entirely. 'I
can't say the name of this one, Mr. Jack,' he explained; 'Marjorie calls
its something like "Ma says."'

'Oh! the "Marseillaise,"' I said, laughing; 'all right, little man, I
know that.'

'Then comes father's tune, father _does_ like it so. Listen, "Home,
sweet home, there's no place like home, there's no place like home." Do
_you_ like it, Mr. Jack?'

'Yes, I do like it, Jack,' I said; 'I knew it when I was a little chap
like you.'

As he played, once more it brought before me my mother's voice and my
mother's words. I had not thought of my mother for years so much as I
had done at Runswick Bay. Even the old organ brought her back to me, for
she was always kind to organ-grinders. There was an Italian who used to
come round with a barrel-organ when I was a little boy. I can see him
now. I used to watch for him from my nursery window, and as soon as he
came in sight I flew down to my mother for a penny, and then went into
the garden and stood beside him whilst he played. My mother gave me a
musical-box on my birthday; it was in the shape of a barrel-organ, and
had a strap which I could hang round my neck. I used to take this box
with me, and standing beside the Italian, I imitated his every movement,
holding my little organ just as he held his big one, and playing beside
him as long as he remained. So delightful did this man's occupation seem
to me, that I can remember quite well when my father asked me one day
what I would like to be when I was a man, I answered without a moment's
hesitation, 'An organ-grinder, of course, father.'

Those old boyish days, how long ago they seemed! What was the use of
recalling them? It would not bring back the mother I had lost, or the
father who had cared for me, and it only made me depressed to think of
them. What good, I asked myself, would my holiday do me if I spent it in
brooding over bygone sorrow? I must forget all this kind of thing, and
cheer up, and get back my spirits again.

'Now, little Jack,' I said, 'big Jack must go back to his picture; come
and climb into the old boat, and I'll see how you would do in the
foreground of it.' He looked such a merry little rogue, perched amongst
the nets and fishing tackle, that I felt I should improve my picture by
introducing him into it, and therefore from that day he came for a
certain time every morning to be painted. He was such a good little
fellow, he never moved a limb after I told him I was ready, and never
spoke unless I spoke to him. A more lovable child I never saw, nor a
more obedient one. With all his fun, and in spite of his flow of
spirits, he was checked in a moment by a single word. No one could be
dull in his company, and as the week passed on I began to regain my
usual cheerfulness, and to lose the uncomfortable impression left on my
mind by the sermon on the shore and the questions the preacher had asked
us.




[Illustration]




Chapter VI

THE TUG OF WAR


I had quite made up my mind not to attend the service on the following
Sunday, and when a pink paper floated down on my easel on the Saturday
morning, I caught it and thrust it into my pocket, without even looking
to see what the subject was to be.

'Have you got it, Mr. Jack?' said the child's voice above me.

'All right, little man,' I answered; 'it's all safe and sound.'

I made my plans for Sunday with great care. I asked for an early
breakfast, so that I might walk over to Kettleness, a place about two
miles off along the coast, and which could only be reached at low tide;
and when I was once there, on the other side of the bay, I determined to
be in no hurry to return, but to arrive at Runswick too late for the
service on the sands. If Duncan and Polly missed me, they would simply
conclude that I had found the walk longer than I had expected.

But, as I was just ready to set out for Kettleness, a tremendous shower
came on.

'You'll never set off in this weather, sir?' said Duncan anxiously.

'Oh no, of course not,' I answered lightly.

I fancied that he looked more concerned than the occasion warranted, and
I feared that he suspected the real reason for my early walk.

There was now nothing to be done but to wait till the shower was over,
and by that time I found it would be impossible for me to go to
Kettleness without seeming deliberately to avoid the service.

The sun came out, and the sky was quite blue before eleven o'clock, and
the fishermen spread tarpaulins on the sand for the congregation to sit
on, and I found myself--I must say very much against my will--being led
to the place by little Jack.

'Well, there is no need for me to listen,' I said to myself; 'I will
plan out a new picture, and no one will know where my thoughts are.'

But, in spite of my resolution to the contrary, from the moment that
Jack's father began to speak, my attention was riveted, and I could not
choose but listen.

'The Tug of War is our subject to-day, dear friends,' he began, 'and a
very suitable subject, I think, after what we have witnessed on this
green during the past week. We have seen, have we not, a long pull, a
strong pull, and a pull all together, as yon heavy crab boat was dragged
up from the beach? How well she came, what progress she made! with each
yoddel we brought her farther from the sea. We all of us gave a helping
hand; fishermen, wives, visitors, friends, all laid hold, and all
pulled, and the work, hard as it seemed, was soon accomplished. Why?
Because we were all united. It was a long pull, a strong pull, and a
pull all together.

'And now let me bring back to your memory another event during this past
week. The place is the same, our village green, the same rope is used,
and those who pull are the very same men, strong, brawny, powerful
fishermen. Yes, you pulled your very hardest; if possible you put forth
more strength than when the crab boat was drawn up, and yet, strange to
say, there was no result, the rope did not move an inch. What were you
pulling? What was the mighty weight that you had to move? What was it
that, for such a long time, baffled the strength of the strongest among
you? The weight you could not move was not a heavy boat, but a light
handkerchief!

'Why was there this difference? Why was the handkerchief harder to move
than the boat? The answer to that question was to be found at the other
end of the green. There were other pullers at the rope that day, pulling
with all their might in an exactly opposite direction. It was not a
united pull, and therefore for a long time there was no result, and we
watched on, until at length one side was proved the strongest, and the
handkerchief was drawn by them triumphantly across the line.

'To-day, dear friends, I speak to you of yet another tug of war. The
place is the same, Runswick Bay and our village green, but the weight to
be drawn is not a boat, not a handkerchief; the weight is _a human
soul._ It is your soul, my friend, your immortal soul; _you_ are
the one who is being drawn.

'And who are the pullers? Oh, how many they are! I myself have my hands
on the rope. God only knows how hard I am pulling, striving with all my
might, if possible to draw you, my friend, to Christ. But there are
other hands on the rope besides mine. Your conscience pulls, your good
old mother pulls, your little child pulls, your Christian mate pulls;
each sermon you hear, each Bible class you attend, each hymn you sing,
each prayer uttered in your presence, each striving of the Spirit, each
God-given yearning after better things, each storm you come through,
each danger you escape, each sickness in your family, each death in your
home, each deliverance granted you, gives you a pull God-ward,
Christ-ward, heaven-ward.

'Yet, oh, my dear friend, you know, as clearly as you know that you are
sitting there, that, so far, Christ's pullers are drawing in vain. You
have never yet, you know it, crossed the line which divides the saved
from the unsaved. Why is this? Why, oh, why are you so hard to move?

'Oh, my friend, do you ask why? Surely you know the reason! Is it not
because there are other hands on the rope, other pullers drawing in an
exactly opposite direction? For Satan has many an agent, many a servant,
and he sends forth a great army of soul-pullers. Each worldly friend,
each desire of your evil nature, each temptation to sin, each longing
after wealth, each sinful suggestion, gives you a pull, and a pull the
wrong way, away from safety, away from Christ, away from God, away from
heaven, away from Home. And towards what? Oh, dear friend, towards what?
What are the depths, the fearful depths towards which you are being
drawn?'

He said a good deal more, but I did not hear it. That question seemed
burnt in with a red-hot iron into my soul. What are the depths, the
fearful depths into which you are being drawn? I could not shake it off.
I wished I could get away from the green, but Jack had brought me close
to the boat where the choir stood, and there was no escape. I should
have to sit it out; it would soon be over, I said to myself.

The service ended with a hymn. Another of their queer, wild, irregular
tunes, I thought; I was not going to sing it. But when Jack saw that I
did not open my book, he leant over the side of the boat, and poked my
head with his hymn-book. 'Sing, big Mr. Jack, sing,' he said aloud, and
then, for very shame, I had to find my place and begin. I can still
remember the first verse of that hymn, and I think I can recall the tune
to which they sang it:--

  'Oh, tender and sweet was the Master's voice,
    As he lovingly called to me:
  "Come over the line! it is only a step--
    I am waiting, My child, for thee!"
      "Over the line!" Hear the sweet refrain!
      Angels are chanting the heavenly strain!
      "Over the line!" Why should I remain
      With a step between me and Jesus?'


I was heartily glad when the service was over, and I went on the shore
at once, to try to walk the sermon away. But I was not so successful as
I had been the Sunday before. That question followed me; the very waves
seemed to be repeating it. What are the depths, the fearful depths, to
which you are being drawn? I had not looked at it in that light before.
I had been quite willing to own that I was not religious, that I was
leading a gay, easy-going kind of life, that my Sundays were spent in
bed, or in novel reading, or in rowing, or in some other amusement. I
was well aware that I looked at these things very differently from what
my mother had done, and I had even wondered sometimes, whether, if she
had been spared to me, I should have been a better fellow than I knew
myself to be. But as for feeling any real alarm or anxiety with regard
to my condition, such a thought had never for one moment crossed my
mind.

Yet if this man was right, there was real danger in my position. I was
not remaining stationary, as I had thought, but I was being drawn by
unseen forces towards something worse, towards the depths, the fearful
depths, of which he had spoken.

At times I wished I had never come to Runswick Bay to be made so
uncomfortable; at other times I wondered if I had been brought there on
purpose to hear those words.

I went back to dinner, but I could not enjoy it, much to Polly's
distress. The rain fell fast all the afternoon, and as I lay on my bed
upstairs I heard Polly washing up, and singing as she did so the hymn we
had had at the service--

  'Come over the line to Me.'


There seemed no chance of forgetting the words which had made me so
uneasy.

That night I had a strange dream. I thought I was once more on the
village green. It was a wild, stormy night, the wind was blowing hard,
and the rain was falling fast; yet through the darkness I could
distinguish crowds of figures gathered on the green. On the side farther
from the sea there was a bright light streaming through the darkness.
I wondered in my dream what was going on, and I found that it was a tug
of war, taking place in the darkness of the night. I saw the huge cable,
and gradually as I watched I caught sight of those who were pulling.
I walked to the side from which the light streamed, and there I saw a
number of holy and beautiful angels with their hands on the rope, and
amongst them I distinctly caught sight of my mother. She seemed to be
dragging with all her might, and there was such an earnest, pleading,
beseeching expression on her dear face that it went to my very heart to
look at her. I noticed that close beside her was the preacher, little
Jack's father, and behind him was Duncan. They were all intent on their
work, and took no notice of me, so I walked to the other end of the
green, the one nearest the sea, that I might see who were there. It was
very dark at that end of the rope, but I could dimly see evil faces, and
dark, strange forms, such as I could not describe. Those on this side
seemed to be having it much their own way, I thought, for the weight,
whatever it was, was gradually drawing near to the sea; and, lo and
behold, I saw that they were close upon a terrible place, for mighty
cliffs stood above the shore, and they were within a very short distance
of a sheer and terrible precipice.

'What are you dragging?' I cried to them.

And a thousand voices seemed to answer, 'A soul! a soul!'

Then, as I watched on, I saw that the precipice was nearly reached, and
that both those who pulled and the weight they were dragging were on the
point of being hurled over, and suddenly it flashed upon me in my dream
that it was _my_ soul for which they were struggling, and I heard
the cry of the pullers from the other side of the green, and it seemed
to me that, with one voice, they were calling out that terrible
question, 'What are the depths, the fearful depths, to which you are
being drawn?' And through the streaming light I saw my mother's face,
and a look of anguish crossed it, as suddenly the rope broke, and those
who were drawing it on the opposite side went over with a crash,
dragging my soul over with them.

I woke in a terror, and cried out so loudly that Duncan came running
into my room to see what was the matter.

'Nothing, Duncan,' I said, 'I was only dreaming; I thought I had gone
over a precipice.'

'No, thank God, you're all safe, sir,' he said. 'Shall I open your
window a bit? Maybe the room's close; is it?'

'Thank you, Duncan,' I answered; 'I shall be all right now. I'm so sorry
I have waked you.'

'You haven't done that, sir; me and Polly have been up all night with
the little lad. He's sort of funny, too, sir, burning hot, and yet he
shivers like, and he clings to his daddy; so I've been walking a mile or
two with him up and down our chamber floor, and I heard you skriking
out, and says Polly, "Run and see what ails him." So you haven't
disturbed me, sir, not one little bit, you haven't.'

He left me then, and I tried to sleep, but sleep seemed far from me. I
could hear Duncan's footsteps pacing up and down in the next room; I
could hear little John's fretful cry; I could hear the rain beating
against the casement; I could hear the soughing and whistling of the
wind; I could hear Polly's old eight-day clock striking the hours and
the half-hours of that long, dismal night; but through it all, and above
it all, I could hear the preacher's question, 'What are the depths, the
fearful depths, to which you are being drawn?'

I found it impossible to close my eyes again, so I drew up the blind,
and, as morning began to dawn, I watched the pitiless rain and longed
for day. The footsteps in the next room ceased as the light came on, and
I concluded that the weary child was at last asleep. I wished that I was
asleep too. I thought how often my mother, when I was a child, must have
walked up and down through long weary nights with me. I wondered
whether, as she did so, she spent the slow, tedious hours in praying for
her boy, and then I wondered how she would have felt, and how she would
have borne it, had she known that the child in her arms would grow up to
manhood, living for this world and not for the Christ she loved. I
wondered if she _did_ know this now, in the far-off land where she
dwelt with God.

I think I must have dozed a little after this, for I was suddenly roused
by Polly's cheery voice, cheery in spite of her bad night,--

'Have a cup of tea, sir, it'll do you good. You've not slept over well,
Duncan says. I'll put it down by your door.'

I jumped out of bed and brought it in, feeling very grateful to Polly,
and I drank it before I dressed. That's just like a Yorkshire woman, I
thought. My mother came from Yorkshire.

'I think it must have been nightmare I had last night, Polly,' I said as
I finished my breakfast, and began to put all in order for my morning's
work.





[Illustration]




Chapter VII

OVER THE LINE


I was at my painting early the next morning, for the sun was shining
brightly, and the air was wonderfully clear. My portrait of little Jack
sitting in the boat promised to be a great success. As I was hard at
work upon it that day, I heard a voice behind me.

'I never thought my little lad would figure in the Royal Academy,' said
the voice.

It was the voice of Jack's father--the voice which had moved me so
deeply, the voice which had made me tremble, only the day before. Even
as he spoke I felt inclined to run away, lest he should ask me again
that terrible question which had been ringing in my ears ever since.
Even as I talked to him about my picture, and even as he answered in
pleasant and friendly tones, through them all and above them all came
the words which were burnt in upon my memory: 'What are the depths, the
fearful depths, to which you are being drawn?'

'I hope my children are not troublesome to you,' he said.

'Oh no,' I answered; 'I love to have them here, and Jack and I are great
friends. Do you know,' I went on, 'he took me into your study the other
day? I am afraid I was taking a great liberty; but the little man would
hear of no refusal--he wanted me to see the old barrel-organ.'

'What, my dear old organ!' he answered. 'Yes, Jack is nearly as fond of
it as his father is.'

'His father?' I replied, for it seemed strange to me that a man of his
years should care for what appeared to me scarcely better than a broken
toy.

'That organ has a history,' he said, as he noticed my surprise; 'if you
knew the history, you would not wonder that I love it. I owe all I am in
this world, all I hope to be in the world to come, to that poor old
organ. Some day, when you have time to listen, perhaps you may like to
hear the story of the organ.'

'Thank you,' I said; 'the sooner the better.'

'Then come and have supper with us to-night. Nellie will be very pleased
to see you, and the bairns will be in bed, and we shall have plenty of
time and quiet for story-telling.'

I accepted his invitation gratefully, for September had come, and the
evenings were growing dark, and my time hung somewhat heavily on my
hands. Polly, I think, was not sorry when she heard I was going out, for
Duncan was away in the boat fishing, and little John was so feverish and
restless that she could not put him down even for a moment.

The cottage looked very bright and pretty when I arrived, and they gave
me a most kind welcome. A small fire was burning in the grate, for the
evenings were becoming chilly. The bow window was hung with India-muslin
curtains, tied up with amber ribbon, the walls were adorned with
photographs framed in oak, the supper table was covered with a snowy
cloth, and a dainty little meal was laid out with the greatest taste and
care, whilst in the centre was a china bowl, containing the leaves of
the creeper which covered the house, interspersed with yellow bracken
and other beautiful leaves, in every varied shade of their autumn glory.
Jack's mother was evidently a woman of taste. She had a quiet, gentle
face, almost sad at times when it was at rest; but she had Jack's eyes
and Jack's bright smile, which lighted up her face, as a burst of
brilliant sunshine will stream suddenly down a dark valley, and make it
a perfect avenue of light.

I enjoyed the company of both husband and wife exceedingly, and as we
sat round the table and chatted over our supper all feeling of
constraint passed away, and I no longer heard the words of that question
which had so troubled me all day long. He did not mention the object for
which I had come whilst the meal was going on. We talked of Runswick Bay
and its surroundings, of the fishermen and their life of danger; we
spoke of the children, and of my picture, of my hopes with regard to the
Royal Academy, and of many other interesting topics.

Then the cloth was removed, and we drew near the fire. I had just said
to him, 'Now for your story,' and he was just beginning to tell it,
when, as I sat down in an arm-chair which Nellie had placed for me by
the fire, my eye fell upon a photograph which was hanging in a frame
close to the fireplace. I started from my seat and looked at it. Surely
I could not be mistaken! Surely I knew every feature of it, every fold
of the dress, every tiny detail in the face and figure. It was the
counterpart of a picture which hung opposite my bed in my London home.

'However on earth did you get that?' I cried. 'Why, it's my mother's
picture!'

I think I have never felt more startled than I did at that moment. After
all the thoughts of yesterday, after my dream of last night, after all
my recollection of my mother's words to me, and her prayers for
me--after all this, to see her dear eyes looking at me from the wall of
the house of this unknown man, in this remote, out-of-the-world spot,
almost frightened me.

I did not realize at first that my host was almost as much startled as I
was.

'Your mother!' he repeated; 'your mother! Surely not! Do you mean to
tell me,' he said, laying his hand on my arm, 'that your name is
Villiers?'

'Of course it is,' I said; 'Jack Villiers.'

'Nellie, Nellie,' he cried, for she had gone upstairs to the children,
'come down at once; who do you think this is, Nellie? You will never
guess. It is Jack Villiers, the little Jack you and I used to know so
well. Why, do you know,' he said, 'our own little Jack was named after
you; he was indeed, and we haven't heard of you for years--never since
your dear mother died.'

I was too much astonished at first to ask him any questions, and he was
too much delighted to explain where and how he had known me; but after a
time, when we had recovered ourselves a little, we drew our chairs round
the fire, and he began his story.

'I was a poor little street Arab once,' he said; 'a forlorn boy with no
one to love him or to care for him. But I made friends with an old man
in the attic of the lodging-house who had a barrel-organ.'

'_That_ barrel-organ?' I asked.

'The very same,' he said, 'and he loved it as if it was a child. When he
was too ill to take it out himself, I took it for him, and that was how
I first saw your mother.'

'Was she married then?' I asked.

'No,' he said with a smile; 'she was quite a little girl, about the age
of our Marjorie. She used to run to her nursery window as soon as she
heard me begin to play. I let her turn the organ one day, and she said
she liked all the tunes, but she liked "Home, Sweet Home" the best of
all.'

'Did she?' I said. 'Yes, I have often heard her sing it; she sang me to
sleep with it many a time.'

'As I played it,' he went on, 'she would speak to me of the Home, Sweet
Home above; child as she was, she knew the way to that home, and she
soon found out that I knew nothing about it. "You can't go to heaven if
you don't love Jesus, organ boy," she said, and the tears ran down from
her dear little eyes as she said it.

'I could not forget those words, and I was determined to find out the
way to the home of which she spoke.

'My old master was dying; he had only another month to live, and for his
sake I must learn quickly the way to be saved. I attended a mission
service, and I learnt first that no sin can enter the gates of the
Heavenly City. But I learnt more. I learnt that the blood of Jesus
Christ, God's Son, cleanseth from all sin.

'Your mother taught me a prayer one day when I went to see her. I have
said that prayer, morning and evening, ever since. She gave me a bunch
of snowdrops, tied up with dark green leaves, and she told me to say as
I looked at them, "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow."

He stopped for a minute or two after this, and gazed into the fire; the
memory of those old days had stirred him deeply.

'Please go on,' I said, for I longed to hear more.

'She came to our attic after that with her mother; they came to see my
old master, and she was pleased to see the snowdrops. She told me that
day, that if I would only say her prayer I should be sure to go to Home,
Sweet Home.

'Very soon after this my old master died, and on the very day that I was
following him to the grave I saw my poor little friend, your mother,
Jack, in a funeral coach, following her mother to the same place. Then
after that she went abroad, but she did not forget the poor organ boy.
She told her father about me, and he sent money for my education, and
had me trained to be a city missionary in the east of London, to work
amongst the very people amongst whom I had lived. All I am now I owe to
your grandfather.

'I did not meet your mother after this for many years, not until she was
married to the clergyman in whose parish I worked.

'Strange to say, we met one day in my old attic, the very attic where my
poor old master had died. She had gone there to visit a sick woman, and
as I went in she was reading to her from the very Testament out of which
her mother had read to my old master, when she had come to see him in
that place, fifteen years before.

'Soon after this we were married, Nellie and I, and it was your dear
mother who made our little home bright and pretty for us, and who was
there to welcome us to it. How we loved her then, how we love her still!

'When you were quite a tiny child, she would bring you to see us, and
Nellie used often to say you were the dearest, prettiest child she had
ever known!'

'I don't remember it,' I said.

'No, you would be too young to remember it; you were only three years
old when your father left London for a parish in the country, and soon
after came the news of his death, and only a year or so later we heard
your mother was gone too. It was a sorrowful day, Jack, when that news
came.

'We often wondered about you; we heard that you had gone to live with an
aunt, but we did not even know her name. We tried to find out more, but
we knew no one in the place where you lived, and we never heard what had
become of you.'

'How strange that I should have been brought here to meet you!' I said.

'No, not strange,' he said reverently; 'it is the hand of God.'

And then--I could not help it--I laid my head on my arm as I stood
against the mantel-piece, and I sobbed like a child.

He did not speak for some minutes, and then he put his arm round me as
tenderly as my mother could have done, and said, 'What is it, Jack? Is
it talking of your mother that has upset you so?'

'No,' I said, 'it isn't that--I love to talk of her; I love to hear of
her; everything she said is precious to me; it isn't that.'

'What then?' he said; 'what troubles you, Jack?'

'It's the thought that I shall never see her again,' I said; 'I know I
shall not. _She_ went one way and _I_ am going another.'

'Why not turn round and go her way, Jack?' he said cheerily.

'Oh, I can't,' I said; 'it's no use--I can't turn. There are too many
hands on the wrong end of the rope. I've been miserable ever since I
heard you talk of it. I could not sleep last night for thinking of it.
"What are the depths, the fearful depths, to which you are being drawn?"
those words have never left me, night or day, since you uttered them. I
have tried to shake them off, but I can't.'

'Don't attempt to shake them off,' he said. 'Oh, Jack, don't try to do
it, for they are the voice of the Spirit of God. But listen to-night to
the One who is calling you. "Come over the line--it is only a step. Come
over the line to _Me_."'

'I wish I could,' I said.

'You can do it, and you _must_ do it, Jack,' he said firmly,
'before you leave this room.'

'Before I leave this room?'

'Yes, this very instant,' he said.

'But how can I do it? I don't know how to cross,' I said.

'You are no dead, lifeless weight on the rope, like a boat or a
handkerchief; you have a will of your own, and it remains with you to
decide which way you want to be drawn, God-ward, Christ-ward,
heaven-ward, or to the fearful depths of which I spoke. God is drawing
you very strongly now, but He never forces a man against his will. He
puts in your hands the power to decide on which side of the line you
will be. Which is it to be, Jack?'

'Well,' I said, 'I will think it over.'

'So many have said, and their desire to cross the line has cooled down,
and they have been lost.'

'I'll come and have a talk with you another day, later on in the week,
if we can make it convenient.'

'So Felix said, "When I have a more convenient season I will send for
thee," but Felix never did send; he never crossed the line, but he was
drawn over to the fearful depths.'

'Well, suppose we say to-morrow. It's late now, and you're tired, I
know, and--'

'God says _to-day_ he said. '"To-day, if ye will hear His voice,
harden not your hearts. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day
of salvation."'

'Tell me _how_ I can come,' I said.

'"Come over the line to _Me_." There you have it,' he answered.
'The Lord calls you, and you have not far to go. It is only a step. He
stands in this room close to you. He holds out His arms to you. He does
not compel you. He does not force you forward. He calls, and He waits to
receive you. Jack, will you come?'

'Yes, I will,' I said earnestly; 'I will come.'

We knelt down together, and I cannot remember the words he said, but I
know that whenever I read in the Gospels those words in the first
chapter of St. John, 'He brought him to Jesus,' I think of that night. I
do not think that Peter and Andrew felt the Lord Jesus more near them in
the booth by the side of the Jordan than we felt Him in that little room
in Runswick Bay.

I know He was there, and I know something more--I know that I came to
Him. And I know that that night, before we rose from our knees, I
crossed the line, and I was able henceforth to take my place amongst the
glad, thankful people who can say, humbly and yet confidently, 'We know
that we have passed from death unto life.'




Chapter VIII

A NIGHT OF STORM


It was late when I got back to my lodging, and I walked like one in a
dream. Polly opened the door, and she seemed troubled about the child.
Little John was evidently in pain, for I heard him moaning as I went
upstairs.

'I should get a doctor, Polly,' I said.

'So Duncan says, sir; we shall have to send for him in the morning if
he's no better.'

I slept calmly and peacefully, and I woke up to feel that I was
beginning an entirely new life. Henceforth I was not my own. I was
standing on the heavenward side of the line, and I had taken my place
amongst the servants of Christ. I had never felt so happy before.

Duncan had set off for the doctor before I was down that morning. Little
John was better, Polly said, but was still very feverish, and would eat
nothing. She brought him down before I went off to my work, wrapped in a
shawl, and I thought he looked very ill, but I did not like to say so.

Duncan came in just at that moment, and the child put out his arms to
his father, and he took him on his knee by the fire, and when I came
home to dinner he was still lying there.

'Has the doctor been?' I asked.

'No, sir; he was out when I called this morning. He had gone to a bad
case, they said, ten miles off, but I left a message. I hope he'll come
before I go this evening. I should be more comfortable like if he did.'

However, the evening came, and Duncan's mates were whistling for him
from the shore, and the doctor had not appeared. The boy was still in
his father's arms, and he was walking up and down the kitchen to soothe
him.

'It's hard to leave him, sir,' he said, when he heard the whistle, 'but
he seems a bit better, I think, this afternoon; he hasn't cried so much,
has he, Polly?'

But I saw there were tears in his eyes as he gave the boy to his mother.

'I'll walk with you to the shore, Duncan,' I said, for I saw that the
poor fellow was very downcast.

'Thank you kindly, sir,' he answered.

I stood on the shore whilst the nets and fishing tackle were put on
board, then he said in a low voice,--

'It's a comfort to feel you will be near my poor lass to-night, sir. It
cuts me to the heart to leave her; if anything happens to little John,
whatever would me and my missus do! But the Lord knows, sir--He knows,'
he repeated, and he wiped away a tear which fell on my hand as he
grasped it.

I went back to Duncan's house, to find the doctor there. It was
influenza and pneumonia, he said, and the boy must be kept in one room.
He was a very silent man, and whether he thought it was a serious case
or not I could not discover.

I determined not to go to bed that night, but to sit up in my room, in
case I should be of any use. I was really glad of the quiet time for
thought and prayer.

I am ashamed to confess that I had brought no Bible with me to Runswick
Bay; I had not opened a Bible for years. But when all was quiet in the
house I stole quietly downstairs, and brought up Duncan's Bible, which
was lying on the top of the oak cupboard below. What a well-worn,
well-read Bible it was! I wondered if my mother's Bible had been read
like that. There was his name on the title-page, 'John Duncan, from his
affectionate father.' It had evidently been given to him when a boy, and
underneath the name was written this verse: 'Open Thou mine eyes, that I
may behold wondrous things out of Thy law.' I said that little prayer
before I began to read, and I have said it ever since each time that I
have opened my Bible.

About twelve o'clock that night the weather became very stormy. A sudden
gale set in, and in a very short time the sea became lashed into a fury.
I have never heard wind like the wind that night. It literally shrieked
and moaned as it blew, and every window and door in the house rattled,
and sometimes I felt as if the cottage itself would be swept away.

'What a time they must be having out at sea!' I said to myself.

I went to the window, and putting out my candle, I tried to see out into
the darkness; but I could distinguish nothing whatever, so black was the
sky and so tremendous was the rain.

It must have been about one o'clock that I heard a step on the stairs. I
opened my door and went out. It was Polly.

'How is he, Polly?' I asked.

'Very bad, sir; very bad,' she said. 'He doesn't know me now, and he
won't take anything; and oh, sir, do you hear the wind?'

Who could help hearing it? It was raging more furiously every moment,
and the house seemed to rock with the violence of the storm.

'Let me help you, Polly,' I said; 'let me come and sit with you beside
little John.'

'Well, sir, if you would just stay a few minutes whilst I fetch Betty
Green,' she said; 'I feel as if I dursn't be alone any longer, I'm
getting that nervous, what with little John talking so queer, sir, and
the wind blowing so awful, and his father on the sea!' and Polly burst
into tears.

'Polly,' I said, 'God is on the sea as well as on the land. Go and fetch
Betty, and I will sit by the child.'

She went down and opened the door, and the wind rushed into the house
and up the stairs, and I had to shut the bedroom door hastily to keep it
out. Then I heard Polly pulling and pulling at it, and vainly trying to
shut it, and I had to go down to help her. She was some minutes away,
for she had difficulty in rousing her neighbour, and I sat beside the
unconscious child. He was talking the whole time, but I could
distinguish very little of what he said. It seemed to be chiefly about
going with his daddy in his boat, and every now and then he would call
out quite loudly, 'Come, daddy, come, daddy, to little John.'

When Polly returned with old Betty, I had again to go down to help them
to close the door.

'What do you think of him, sir?' said Polly.

I did not like to say what I thought, so I answered, 'Well, perhaps it
would be as well to get the doctor to have another look at him. I'll go
for him if you like.'

'I don't believe you could manage it, sir,' said Betty. 'You can't stand
outside; me and Polly has been clinging on to the palings all the way,
and it will be terrible up on the top.'

'Shall I try, Polly?'

She gave me a grateful look, but did not answer by words. But the two
women gave me so long a description of the way to the doctor's house,
and interrupted each other so often, and at length both talked together
in their eagerness to make it clear to me, that at the end I was more
bewildered and hopelessly puzzled than at the beginning, and I
determined to go to Mr. Christie before I started, in order to obtain
from him full and clear directions.

It took me quite ten minutes to reach his house, and I felt as if I had
gone through a battle when I arrived there at length, quite spent and
breathless. I saw a light in the lower room, and I found Mr. Christie
and his wife and children sitting in the room where I had passed through
so much the night before. Marjorie and little Jack were in their
nightgowns, wrapped in a blanket, and sitting in the same arm-chair. My
mother's picture was looking at me from the wall, and I fancied that she
smiled at me as I came in.

'What a terrible night!' said Mrs. Christie. 'The children were so
frightened by the noise of the wind in their attic that we brought them
down here.'

I told them my errand, and Mr. Christie at once offered to go with me
for the doctor. I shall never forget that walk as long as I live. We
could not speak to each other more than a few necessary words, we were
simply fighting with the storm. Then, to our disappointment, when our
long walk was ended, we found that the doctor was away, and would
probably not return until morning.

The walk home was, if possible, worse than the walk there, for the wind
was dead against us as we came down the cliff. It had changed somewhat
the last hour, and was now blowing from the north-east.

'There will be trouble out at sea,' Mr. Christie said, as we stopped to
take breath.

'And what about the boats?' I asked.

'Yes,' he said, almost with a groan, 'what about the boats?'

We could see very little out at sea, though it was beginning to grow
light, but we determined to make our way to the shore, to see all that
it was possible to distinguish. He went home for a moment, and then
followed me to my lodging. Polly and her old friend were still watching
the child.

'I think he's a little better, sir,' she said; 'he's quieter. Oh, Mr.
Christie, I _am_ glad to see you, sir! Will you pray, sir? I think
I shall hear the wind less if you pray!'

We knelt down beside the child's bed, but the noise of the storm almost
drowned his voice. At the end of the prayer the child began once more to
cry for his father, so piteously, so beseechingly, that at last I could
bear it no longer, but ran downstairs, to be out of the sound of that
touching little voice. Mr. Christie soon followed me, and we went out
together in the grey light of that terrible morning.

'The child is dying, Jack,' he said.

'Oh, don't say so, Mr. Christie!' I answered; 'dying before his father
comes back.'

'God grant he _may_ come back!' he said; 'look at the sea, Jack.'

The sea was dashing wildly against the rocks, and the noise of the wind
was so great we could hardly hear our own voices. In the dim uncertain
light we could at length distinguish a group of anxious watchers on the
shore. Some old fishermen were there trying to hold a telescope steady
in the gale, that they might look across the water for any sign of a
boat, and mothers and wives and sweethearts of the absent fishermen were
there also, with shawls tied over their heads, and with troubled and
tear-stained faces, peering out into the dismal light of that sorrowful
morning.

Mr. Christie and I stood near them, and he spoke from time to time a
word of encouragement and hope to the anxious women beside him. As the
light increased the wind dropped somewhat, and the gale seemed to have
spent its violence. We were thankful to notice, that although the sea
was still very rough, and would be so for hours, the wind was gradually
subsiding; instead of howling and shrieking, as it had done the whole
night long, it was dying away with gentle moans, like a child weary with
passion who is crying himself to sleep. But still there was no sign of
the boats.

The women on the shore were wet through, and Mr. Christie tried to
persuade them to go home. Their men would want good fires and hot tea on
their return, he told them, and they ought to make ready for them. I was
glad to notice that one by one they followed his advice, and turned to
climb the hill towards their cottages. Then we turned also, and went
back to my lodging. We crept into the room, and found old Betty asleep
in her chair, and Polly holding the little hand in hers as the child
slept.

'Have the boats come, sir?' she said as we went in.

'Not yet, Polly; but please God they will come soon.'

We sat down beside her for a little time, but we presently heard a shout
from the shore.

'Thank God,' said Polly, 'he's come!'

The child seemed in some strange way to have heard that shout, and to
have understood its meaning, for he opened his eyes and said, 'Come,
daddy, come to little John.'

We hurried down to the shore, where a large crowd had already collected.
The whole of Runswick Bay seemed to have gathered together in that short
space of time. We could distinctly see the boats far out at sea, but
wind and tide were with them, and they, were coming rapidly nearer. What
a night they must have had, and what a welcome they would receive from
the watchers on the shore!

'How many boats went out last night, Bob?' said one man as they drew
nearer.

'There was eight, Jem,' he said--'the Jane Ann one, Lady Hilda two, the
Susan three, the Mary Ann four, Princess Alice five, the Lightning six,
the Eliza seven, the Alert eight.'

'Are you sure, Bob?'

'Quite sure, I saw them start.'

'Well, there's one missing, Jem,' he said; 'catch hold of this glass,
and just you count.'

'One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.'

There _was_ one missing, and I felt that I knew which it was before
they came in sight.

It was the Mary Ann.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




Chapter IX

ASK WHAT YE WILL


We had run down the hill as quickly as we possibly could, but we were in
no haste to return. We waited until the boats were drawn in, and the
worn-out fishermen had come on shore. They knew nothing of the Mary Ann;
they had lost sight of her soon after the beginning of the gale. They
told us they had had an awful night, and had thought they would never
reach home in safety.

'However shall we tell Polly?' I groaned.

But a cold hand was laid on mine at that instant, and I turned round to
see Polly herself just behind me. She could wait no longer, but had run
down to the shore to hasten her husband up the hill. She was trembling
from head to foot, and seemed ready to faint. The kind-hearted fishermen
crowded round her with words of cheer and comfort.

'He'll be all right, my lass, never fear. He's put into Saltburn or
Staithes maybe; these gales they drive so far. He'll be home all safe
and sound afore night.'

But Polly did not seem to hear them. She stretched out her hands feebly
to Mr. Christie and to me as she said:

'Take me home; I can bear it better there.'

The fishermen turned away sorrowfully, and there were very few dry eyes
amongst the group which we left on the shore.

When we reached the house again all was quite still, and as we entered
the bedroom I thought the little soul had passed away, but I bent over
him to listen and to my relief I found he was still breathing.

As I look back, I hardly know how we lived through that sorrowful day.
The doctor came, and did nothing but shake his head in the ominous way
which doctors have when they feel a case is beyond their power. I think
Polly had so little hope herself that she did not care to ask him what
his real opinion was.

I went out for a short walk in the afternoon, to get a little fresh air
to strengthen me for the coming night, when I had determined to watch
with Polly beside little John, if he was still living. My young friends,
Bob and Harry, joined me, and we were pacing up and down together
watching the tide come in when we thought we saw a dark speck far out to
sea.

There were others who saw it also. The coastguard was looking at it
through his telescope, and before very long the shore was covered with
fishermen and their wives, all gazing in the same direction. Whatever
the object was, it was coming rapidly shoreward; wind and tide were both
with it, and it was being borne swiftly along. After a little time we
could distinguish, even without the help of a telescope, what it was,
and I do not think there was anything which we could have been more
aghast to see, for the floating object was a boat bottom upwards, and
being driven rapidly before the tide.

A groan came from the group of fishermen who were watching, and as the
capsized boat neared shore they ran into the water to meet it. I do not
think it was necessary to look at the name upon it as it was dragged out
of the water: we all did look, however, and we found there the name
which we knew we should see before we looked. It was the Mary Ann.

I shall never forget the piercing shriek which came from the wife of one
of Duncan's mates, who was standing just behind me, when she read the
name on the boat. I thought the shock and the sorrow had driven her mad,
for she ran screaming up the hill; indeed, I firmly believe that for the
time she was quite out of her mind.

Poor Polly heard the shrieks of the woman as she ran under her window,
and looking out, she saw the boat on the shore, and guessed the truth at
once. _She_ did not scream nor cry, but she looked as if she had
been turned into stone. No word escaped her lips, not a tear was in her
eye; but she looked as if all her youth had gone in a moment, and as if
she had suddenly become an old and worn-out woman.

She never looked up as we went in, but bent over little John, moistening
his lips from time to time, and watching his every movement. We tried to
say a few words of comfort, but she did not seem even to hear our
voices. Yet no moan, no sigh from the child was unheard by her; she
seemed to be listening to every breath he drew, as if it might be his
last.

I thought that terrible day would never have an end. Mr. Christie stayed
with us until dark, and then he took me home with him to supper, that I
might get a little change and rest before my night watch. I think they
knew how tired I was, worn out more by feeling than by want of sleep,
and they were very good to me. I do not think my own mother could have
been more kind to me than Mrs. Christie was that night. She told me that
she would have had a boy nearly as old as I was if he had lived, but he
had died when he was very young; and then they had had no children for
many years, not until Marjorie was born.

'Your mother was so good to me when my baby died,' she said. 'I thought
I should never be happy again, but she came and talked to me, and made
me look from my sorrow to my little boy's gain, and I think her kindness
to me and the loving words she spoke made me love her more than ever.'

I felt much better for the good supper, and for the kind words of these
dear people, and I went back determined to do all I could for poor Polly
and her child through that sorrowful night. I felt so grateful to the
Lord Jesus Christ for all He had done for me, and I was very glad to be
able to do any little thing to show my love to Him. It seemed to me
then, and it seems to me still, that the way in which we can please Him
best is by showing kindness to His children. I remembered a verse about
a cup of cold water being noticed by Him, if given for His sake, and I
thought to myself, 'Polly is not in need of cold water, for she is too
cold already, but I might make her a cup of tea.'

The fire was out, and the little kitchen, which was usually so neat, was
all in confusion. I lighted the lamp that I might see what I was about,
and then I tried to put the little place in order. First I found sticks
and coal, and lighted a fire; then, whilst my fire was burning up, I
cleared the table, carried the dirty plates and cups into the small back
kitchen, found a tablecloth and a clean cup and saucer, and filled the
kettle. As soon as the fire was hot enough I put the kettle on, and
cutting a slice from the loaf I made some nice crisp toast, such as my
aunt used to like when she was ill. Then I heated a plate, and buttered
the toast, and set it down by the fire. By this time the kettle was
boiling and I made the tea, and I said in my heart when all was
finished, 'Lord Jesus, I do this for Thee.'

Then I went upstairs to my hardest task of all, namely, to persuade
Polly to come down to eat the little meal I had prepared.

Polly was, as I had expected, most unwilling to leave the child, and at
first she firmly declined to move, and would not listen to my pleading
words. Yet I could see that she was almost fainting, and I knew that she
would need all the strength that she could muster for the night which
lay before us. Who knew what that night would bring?

I therefore spoke to her very firmly, telling her that I was willing and
anxious to help her in her trouble, but that, if I was to be any use to
her, she must not refuse to go downstairs for a few minutes at least,
and I promised her to watch little John very carefully, and to call her
at once if I saw any change in the child. She obeyed me at last, and I
heard her weary footsteps descending the steep stairs.

When I was left alone, I saw that Polly's Bible was lying open by the
little oil-lamp which stood on the table, upon which had been placed the
medicine and milk for little John's use. I went up to it, and my eye
fell upon these words:--

'If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall ask _what ye
will_, and _it shall be done unto you_.'

It seemed to me as if that verse was God's direct message to me that
night. I saw it as clearly and distinctly as if the page had been
lighted with electric light. 'Two conditions and a promise,' I said to
myself; 'if only the conditions are fulfilled, the promise is sure.'

What are the two conditions? (1) 'If ye abide in Me.' I asked myself if
I was fulfilling _that_ condition. I humbly hoped I was; for, oh, I
longed to be in Christ, saved by Him, more than I longed for anything
else in this world.

(2) 'If My words abide in you.' Was I fulfilling the
second condition? Again I humbly hoped that I was;
for I felt that if Christ told me to go to the North
Pole, or to an African desert, I would obey gladly. I
would go anywhere, I would do anything, to show Him
how grateful I was for His love to me.

Then might I claim the promise? I believed that I might.

I laid Polly's Bible on the bed. I knelt down beside little John. I put
my finger on the promise, and I prayed, as I had never prayed before,
for help in this time of need. I felt very strongly that all power was
in the hands of Christ, and that He who healed the sick on earth had
lost none of His power, now that He was exalted to the throne of God. I
besought Him to come into that room that very night, and to touch and
heal little John. And as I rose from my knees I felt that my prayer was
heard.

Polly had not returned, so I went to the top of the stairs and listened,
and I heard the sound of sobbing. I was thankful to hear it; the tears
had come at last, and they would relieve the poor, weary, over-strained
heart.

Little John was very quiet, so I crept downstairs. I found to my joy
that Polly had eaten most of the toast, and had drunk the tea, and now
she was sitting with her feet on the fender and her head in her hands,
sobbing as if her heart would break. What was it that had brought the
tears? She had not cried when the empty boat had come ashore; she had
shed no tear when the doctor's face had told her that he had no hope for
the child; what was it that had helped her to give way to the tears
which were such a relief to her? It was a very simple thing. She had
picked up from the floor a little toy, a tiny roughly-shaped boat, which
Duncan had made for the child, and which had been little John's greatest
treasure. There had come over her such a rush of memories of the happy
days of the past, gone, as she believed, for ever, of the father whose
fingers had so busily carved the boat for his boy, but who would never
come back to her again, and of the little lad passing away from her
also, and leaving his treasured toy behind him. All these sad but lovely
memories came before her, as she took up the little boat and pressed it
to her lips. They came so strongly and with such power, that the tears
which had refused to come before came with them, and brought, as I felt
sure they would, wonderful relief to her over-strained heart.

'Polly,' I said, 'cheer up, don't lose heart; I believe little John will
recover.'

'Thank you, sir, thank you,' she said; as she dried her eyes. 'I feel
better now, a deal better, I do. You _have_ been good to me, sir.
I'll go up again to him now.'

'All right, Polly,' I said; 'I'll make up the fire, and then I'll come
and help you. He's asleep now, Polly.'

'I'll creep quietly up, then, sir,' she said, and I saw as she rose to
go that the stony look had gone out of her face and that she was herself
again.

That sleep lasted for hours. It was a quiet night, the wind had quite
gone down, and everything seemed more still after the tumult of the
previous night. I was glad to see that Polly herself at length fell
asleep in her chair; little John's hand lay in hers, and I knew she
would wake with his least movement; but I was pleased to see it, for I
felt sure that even a light sleep would soothe and strengthen her.

I had just looked at my watch, and had seen that it was nearly half-past
two, when I thought I heard footsteps outside, and a moment afterwards
there came a gentle knock at the door. It seemed a strange time for a
visitor, but I thought probably it was some neighbour come to offer to
help Polly in her long night watch, or perhaps it was Mr. Christie come
to see how we were getting on. I crept softly downstairs, lest either
Polly or the child should wake, and carefully unfastening the bolts I
opened the door.

I nearly yelled with joy when I saw who was standing there. Never in all
my life have I been more glad to see any man than I was that night to
see Duncan, alive and uninjured, whilst all day long I had been
picturing him being driven backwards and forwards by the waves, a
drowned corpse at the mercy of the relentless sea.

He grasped my hand and came in to the fire, but at first he could not
speak.

'Sir,' he said at last, in a broken voice, 'am I too late? Tell me the
truth, sir; don't hide it over like; is little John dead?'

'No, Duncan,' I said, 'he still lives, and he is asleep; and, Duncan, I
believe he will be given back to you.'

'Thank God!' he said; 'thank God for that!'

For just a moment a doubt crossed my mind as to whether I ought to give
him this hope, and yet I rebuked myself for this doubt, for I was
clinging to the promise, and the word of the Lord was sure, and I
believed that if what I asked was good for these poor souls it
_must_ be granted to me.

Duncan had now sat down in his arm-chair, and by the light of the fire I
could see that he was faint and exhausted. He leant back wearily for
some time and seemed unable to speak. I had left the kettle on the fire,
and I hastened to give him a cup of tea and something to eat.

Then I crept upstairs to see what was going on, but finding Polly and
little John were still both fast asleep, I came back to him. He was
better for the tea, and able to talk to me.

'I've had an awful time, sir,' he said, in answer to my inquiry. 'Many
and many's the time since I was a boy that I've been near the dark
valley, but this time, why, I think I've been half-way down it, sir.
How's my poor lass, sir?'

'Very cut up, Duncan,' I said. 'She thinks you are dead. Your boat came
up with last night's tide.'

'Poor Polly, poor lass!' he said; 'I'll go to her.'

'Wait a little, Duncan,' I said; 'she is asleep now, and she will bear
the joy better when she wakes.'

'And my little lad?' he asked.

'Sleeping too, Duncan, so peacefully and quietly.'

'Well, it's hard not to go up, sir, but may be you're right.'

He waited very patiently for an hour, and when I crept up again at the
end of that time Polly and the child were both awake, and she was giving
him some milk. Little John was quite conscious, and looked more like
himself than he had done since his illness began. He had no sooner
finished his milk, however, than he began his old weary cry, 'Come,
daddy, come to little John.'

Polly burst into tears again when she heard him calling for the father
whom she believed to be dead; but I bent over the child and said, 'Yes,
little John, daddy will come to you.'

I believe Polly fancied that I thought the child was dying, and that I
meant his father's spirit was coming to fetch him, for she only cried
the more bitterly and said, 'Oh, little John, little John!'

But when I added, 'Shall I fetch daddy, little John?' she sprang to her
feet and looked at me wildly, but without speaking a word.

There was no need for me to say more, for she heard the sound of a
well-known footstep on the stairs, and in another moment she was in her
husband's arms.

I felt then that my work was over, and that the best thing that I could
do would be to go to bed. But I glanced back from the door as I went
out, and I saw the little hands held out, and I heard Duncan sob like a
child as he cried, 'Oh, my little lad, my own little John, I never
thought to see you again!'




[Illustration]




Chapter X

WE KNOW


The next day Duncan was able to tell me what he had passed through
during that terrible night. It seems he was separated from the other
boats by the very first outburst of the gale, and never saw them again
through the long hours of that night of storm. For some considerable
time he and his mates, by straining every nerve, were able to keep the
water out of their boat; but as the night went on, and the sea grew
rougher and the waves seemed mountains high, they were compelled at last
to own that their attempt was hopeless. 'At that time,' said Duncan, 'I
just trusted my soul again to Christ, for I expected the next wave would
sweep us to the bottom.'

'Was I frightened, sir, did you say? No, I think not; I felt more awed
like, if you understand, and in them few moments all sorts of thoughts
seemed to be running through my head, but through them all was the
thought of my poor lass, of Polly and little John. Yes, sir, of Polly
and little John, and I cried to Him as alone could help me, "O God," I
said, "save me, for Polly and little John want me so bad!" And He heard
my prayer, sir. I've often thought how them fishermen cried to Him in
the storm that day, "Master, save us, we perish!" they said; and He
heard their cry, didn't He, sir? And He heard mine. Yes, He heard mine,
for when the wave did come which carried us over, the Mary Ann was
driven right past where we were struggling in the water, and we caught
hold on her. We clung on for dear life, sir, but we couldn't have clung
there many minutes, for the sea was that cold and icy our hands was
well-nigh frozen. But God Almighty knew how to save us, and He sent a
steamer to pick us up, in less than ten minutes after we went overboard.
And they _were_ good to us, sir, for all they were foreign folk
aboard. They warmed us, and gave us hot coffee, and lent us dry clothes,
and they ran into the Hull docks in the afternoon and landed us there.
Well, sir, you may be sure I came home as quick as ever I could, for I
thought maybe I should never see my little lad again. Hasn't God been
good to us, now hasn't He, sir?' he concluded, as he gently patted his
little boy's hand.

The doctor gave a much better report of little John that day, although
he said he was not yet out of danger. But from that time he improved
slowly but steadily, and before very long he was able to lie once more
in his father's arms, and to stroke his face with his little thin hand.

It was very touching to see the love and the gratitude of both Duncan
and Polly; they could not say enough about the help and comfort I had
given them in their time of trouble, small though I felt these to have
been. If I had been a prince, I think they could not have made more of
me, and I believe I should have been altogether spoiled if I had stayed
in Runswick Bay much longer.

I had not touched my picture the whole of that week, for whilst our
anxiety lasted I had no heart or desire to paint. On Saturday I saw
Marjorie and little Jack giving out their pink papers, and I went to
meet them.

'One for you, big Mr. Jack,' said the merry little rogue, as he threw it
up in the air for me to catch.

The subject for the following day I saw was to be these two words--WE
KNOW. I thought, as I put the paper in my pocket, how much had passed
since last Sunday, and I thought also how differently I felt with regard
to the service on the shore, from what I had done when I received the
last pink paper. I had certainly no wish to run away to Kettleness, to
be out of the way when it took place.

Sunday morning was bright and beautiful, and little John was so much
better that his father was able to leave him and to take his place in
the choir. I stood close to the old boat, and Jack put his hand in mine,
and let me look at his hymn-book as he sang.

There was a large congregation, the fine day had tempted them out, and I
think the danger of their companions and their narrow escape from death
had stirred the hearts of the fishermen, and had made many of them feel
that 'it is not all of life to live, nor all of death to die.'

'My mates are here to-day, sir,' whispered Duncan, as he went forward to
take his place in the boat; 'it's the first time I've been able to
persuade them to come. They see the good of it now, sir, you see.'

Never have I heard any man pray more earnestly for a blessing than Mr.
Christie did that day, but I do not think even he prayed more earnestly
than I did. My whole heart went out to God that day, for was it not my
first Sunday on the right side of the line?

And then came the address, and I never noticed a congregation more
attentive than was that one gathered on the shore that September
morning. I can remember even now a good deal of the sermon.

'WE KNOW,' he said; 'those are strong words, confident words. It is not,
_We imagine_, or _We think_. It is not even _We hope_, that would be
wonderful; but it is something clearer and far more distinct than that;
it is WE KNOW.

'If I were to ask you fishermen, you visitors, you mothers, you little
children, this question, "Do you _imagine_ you are on the shore
now? Do you _think_ you are here to-day? Do you _hope_ you are
listening to me?" what would you answer me?

'You would say, "Mr. Christie, it is not a case of imagining, or
thinking, or hoping; we _know_ we are here; we are sure of it."

'Now notice, that is the strong, confident word used in my text to-day.
The holy apostle John stands side by side with all of us who have come
to Christ, and he bids us join with him in these glad, happy, thankful
words, "We know that we have passed from death unto life." We know, we
are persuaded, we are sure, that we are on the right side of the line.
We know that we have left the company of the servants of sin, and are
now the servants of the Lord Jesus Christ.

'Dear friends, I would now ask each of you very earnestly, Can you say
that? Can you take your stand by the apostle John, and say, "_I
know_ that _I_ have passed from death unto life?"

'I think I hear some one answer in his heart, "Well, that's a great deal
for any man to say, and I don't see that any man can know in this life
if he is saved or not; when he gets to heaven he'll know he is all
right, but not till then."

'Now look again at my text. It does not say, "We _shall_ know"; it
does not say, "We hope soon to know"; but it speaks in the present. It
runs thus: "We _know_ that we have passed from death unto life." So
you see it _is_ possible, nay, it is right, that you and I should,
one by one, take up the words and say, "_I know_."

'Do I hear some one saying in his heart, "I do wish I could say that? I
should be a happier man if I could. When I go out in my boat, and the
storm rages, and I don't know whether I shall ever see land again, it
would be a good thing if I could look up through the wind and tempest,
and could say gladly, I know that I have passed from death unto life."'

I thought I heard a groan when he said this, and I looked round, and saw
one of Duncan's mates burying his face in his hands.

'Do I hear one of you mothers say, "When I lie awake at night, and the
baby will not let me sleep, and I get out and look from my window at the
stars shining down upon me, I would give a great deal to say, as I think
of the heaven above those stars, 'I know that I have passed from death
unto life'"?

'And you, my friend, when the day comes, as come it will, when you lie
on your bed, and you see by the doctor's face that you will never get
out of it again; when you say to yourself, as the neighbours sit round,
"This is my dying bed, and they are watching to see me die," oh, what
would you not give at that solemn time to be able to say, "I know that I
have passed from death unto life"?

'Do you want to be able to say it? You cannot want it more than God
wants to hear you say it. The Christ stands on the shore beside us
to-day, and He yearns with unutterable longing, that each man, each
woman, each child here present, should be able to take up the words of
my text, and say, "I know that I have passed from death unto life."'

Then he went on to tell us that it was not a long, weary, toilsome
journey which we had to travel to reach the Christ. He was present
amongst us now. He was very near to each one of us; His arms were wide
open. He was waiting to receive each one who was willing to cross the
line; one step would be sufficient, one step into those open arms. Then
we ended by singing a hymn, which seemed to me a very beautiful one:--

  'Only a step to Jesus!
    Believe, and thou shalt live:
  Lovingly now He's waiting,
    And ready to forgive.

  Only a step to Jesus!
    A step from sin to grace:
  What has thy heart decided?
    The moments fly apace.

  Only a step to Jesus!
    Oh, why not come and say,
  "Gladly to Thee, my Saviour,
    I give myself away?"
    Only a step, only a step,
    Come, He waits for thee;
    Come, and thy sin confessing,
    Thou shalt receive a blessing:
    Do not reject the mercy
    He freely offers thee.'


I was glad to see at the end of the service that Duncan's mate was still
sitting under the old boat with his hands over his face. He had
evidently felt the sermon very much, and when he rose to go home after
the others had dispersed, I saw Mr. Christie walking by his side.

That was a lovely Sunday evening. The storm of the week before seemed to
have cleared the air, and there was a golden light over everything,
until the sun went down behind the hill. I spent the evening at Mrs.
Christie's, for Polly was still fully occupied with the child, and was
not able to attend to much of the work downstairs. Duncan did the
cooking now, and the washing up and the cleaning, and I never saw a more
handy man. He waited on me hand and foot, as if I was a lord; but I felt
that I was giving the dear fellow a great deal of trouble, and was glad,
therefore, to accept Mrs. Christie's invitation to have tea and supper
at their house.

Little Jack welcomed me with the greatest joy. He was so delighted to
have me at tea, and contemplated me with so much delight and interest
from his high chair by my side, that he quite forgot to eat his own tea,
and had to be recalled from his admiration of me, time after time, by
his mother. After tea he told her he had a great secret to confide to
her; he dragged her from the room and led her upstairs, and then with
closed doors, and in a whisper so low that she could scarcely
distinguish the words, he told her solemnly, 'I do love big Mr. Jack
very much,' which secret his faithless mother was treacherous enough to
reveal to me, after we had been upstairs that evening to see little Jack
in bed.

After we came down, Mrs. Christie lighted the lamp, and we were sitting
cosily round the fire talking of my mother, when suddenly there came a
knock at the outer door.

'Who can it be?' said Mrs. Christie hastily; 'some one must be ill, I
think, so few people come on Sunday.'

She was going to the door, but her little maid had already opened it,
and coming into the parlour she announced,--

'There's a gentleman, sir, at the door, says as how he wants Mr.
Villiers, sir.'

'A gentleman!' I repeated in astonishment, 'wanting me!'

'Yes, sir, he says he wants you very pertickler, he does.'

I went quickly to the door, wondering very much who could be there, and
to my great astonishment I found my friend Tom Bernard, with a black bag
in his hand, eagerly awaiting my approach.

'Found at last, old chap,' he cried when he saw me; 'why, I've been
hunting for you all over in this rabbit-warren of a place, till at last
some of these fisher-lads told me you were in here.'

'And what are you doing here, Tom?' I exclaimed.

'Doing here! Why, I've come to see you, of course, old fellow; what else
should I have come for? I set off early this morning, and I thought I
would give you a bit of a surprise. Are these your diggings?'

'No,' I said, 'I'm only spending the evening here; but I'll come back
with you at once.'

I went in for a moment to explain my sudden departure to Mr. and Mrs.
Christie, and then I went with Tom to my lodgings. He looked vastly
amused when he saw Duncan's house, and when I told him that I had been
there all the time he seemed to think it a capital joke.

'There's no room for me, I'm afraid,' he said, as he looked with an
amused smile round my bedroom.

'No, indeed, Tom,' I said, 'and, joking apart, I would not ask you to
come here if there was room; the hotel at the top of the hill will suit
you better.'

Polly was sitting beside little John, but I tapped at the door, and told
her a friend of mine had just arrived from London, and asked her if she
thought it would be possible to get him some tea. Just at this moment
Duncan came in, and the two good souls did all in their power to do
honour to my guest. The whitest tablecloth was spread on the round
table, the very finest herrings were cooked, round after round of crisp
brown toast was buttered and put before the fire to keep hot, and all
was ready in so short a time that Tom was astonished.

He did full justice to the meal, and seemed to appreciate my quarters
better after he had partaken of it. Then he declared himself tired out,
so I walked with him up to the hotel. He was in high spirits, and was
much looking forward to the time we were to have there together, and to
all the walks we should take to the places round.

Was I glad that he had come? I asked myself this question many times
that night. I was fond of Tom; he had been like a brother to me, and
yet--and yet--I wished he had not come to Runswick Bay.

Why was this? Why would I have kept him away if I could? I asked myself
this question many times, as I came slowly down the hill that night.

Was it because it would be a hindrance to my work? No, for my picture
had made good progress, and I could work it up even better in my studio
at home. Besides which, Tom was a good-natured fellow, and would sit
smoking and chatting in the old boat whilst I painted.

Was it that I wanted to be quiet, and to enjoy my present surroundings
without interruption? No, surely, for Tom's company had always been
pleasant to me, and I could not look upon him as a stranger.

Why was it, then, that I felt almost sorry that he had followed me here?
I had a suspicion of the right answer to that question, but I did not
own it, even to myself, till I entered my lodging.

Duncan was reading a chapter aloud to Polly, as he always did before
going to bed. He stopped when he saw me come in, but I said, 'Go on,
Duncan, never mind me; I shall like to listen.' And the very first words
that Duncan read seemed to me to contain the answer to my question.

'He that is ashamed of Me and of My words, of him shall the Son of Man
be ashamed.'

Yes, that was the reason. I was sorry that Tom had come, because I was
ashamed of my Master. Since I had seen him last I had changed my
service. I used to be a servant of sin, living for self, pleasing self
in all things. Now, I had crossed the line, I had joined the company of
Christ's servants, and I was afraid of Tom finding it out.

In London I thought I should have seen less of him, and it would have
dawned on him gradually; but here he would discover it at once. And I
dreaded his doing so. Yes, I was a downright coward, ashamed of the One
who had died for me. This was not a comfortable reflection, but I was
convinced that it was the truth.

What would be the best thing to do? Should I say anything to Tom about
it in the morning? I thought at first that I would speak, and I made up
several sentences with which I meant to begin; but the more I thought of
it so much the more my heart failed me, and I decided at length that my
best plan would be to let Tom find it out for himself.




Chapter XI

LITTLE JACK AND BIG JACK


I think Tom very much enjoyed that week at Runswick Bay. The more he saw
of the place the more he liked it. He and Duncan got on famously
together. They smoked together on a seat above the house, and Duncan
told him stories of shipwrecks and storms, whilst I sat painting just
below them.

One night he even persuaded Duncan to let him go out with him fishing,
and Duncan confided to me afterwards, 'That there friend of yours, sir,
he's a real handy chap; knows how to use his fingers, sir, and isn't
afraid of a drop of salt water neither.'

We came across Mr. Christie on the shore the very first time that we
went out together, and I introduced him as a friend of my mother whom I
had been delighted to find in this out-of-the-way place; and Tom talked
very pleasantly to him, and I think liked him.

'What is he doing here, Jack?' he said. 'He does not look like the rest
of them.'

'He is a lay-preacher,' I said.

'Whatever in the world is a lay-preacher?' said Tom laughing.

I did not answer, but called his attention to little Jack, who was
running along the shore after his red cap, which had been carried off by
a gust of wind.

'That's his little boy,' I said, 'and my namesake; they lived in my
father's parish in London, and Mr. Christie and his wife adored my
mother. It was seeing her photograph on the wall of their room which
made them discover who I was.'

'What a splendid little fellow!' said Tom as the child came up to us.
'So you are Jack, are you?'

'Yes, I'm little Jack, and he's big Jack,' said the boy roguishly,
looking at me.

I was not surprised that Tom made friends very quickly with my little
favourite, for he was wonderfully fond of children, and many were the
games which he and the two children had together whilst I was at work.

Every evening Tom and I walked together, and we explored all the country
for miles around. Sometimes we went by train and walked back by the
cliffs. The train seemed to land us at each station in the midst of
fresh beauty, and I came to the conclusion that Yorkshire was indeed,
what I had always been told by my mother, the most beautiful county in
England.

'Now, Jack,' said Tom on Saturday morning, 'we'll have a really good day
to-morrow. You won't want to paint, will you?'

'No,' I said hurriedly, 'I don't paint on Sundays.'

'All right,' he said, 'it's much the best plan; you come fresher to it
on Monday. "All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy." That old
couplet must have been made for you, Jack. Well, then, let's see, where
shall we go? Suppose we make a long day of it, and go to Scarborough. We
must see Scarborough before we go home, must we not? We will go by the
early train, and come back as late as we can. The worst of it is there
are not so many trains to choose from on Sunday, but I daresay we shall
find one that will suit'; and, without saying another word, he went off
to my lodging for a _Bradshaw_.

What was I to do? A few weeks ago a Sunday spent in pleasure would have
been just what I should have chosen, and many a time had Tom and I been
up the river on Sunday together. There was hardly a place within easy
distance up the Thames which we had not visited in this way. But now I
felt very differently about these things. Sunday was my Master's own
day: every moment of it, I felt, must be consecrated to Him. No one had
talked to me about Sunday observance, but my conscience told me very
clearly what was right in the matter. Yet, although I had no doubt as to
what I ought to do in the matter, I am ashamed to say that for some time
I hesitated. Tom would be so terribly disappointed, I said to myself,
and he had been a good friend to me, and I did not want to vex him;
surely there would be no great harm in obliging him this once! Besides,
when I get to Scarborough I may have time to go to church, and then,
after all, where is the difference? I argued with myself; I shall take a
longer journey to church, that is all.

And then Tom came back, full of his plans for the day. He had already
settled the train we were to catch, and he told me that he looked
forward to seeing Scarborough immensely, as his mother had stayed there
a year ago, and she had told him it was the most beautiful
watering-place she had ever visited.

I tried to feel pleased with what Tom had arranged, but in my heart I
was very miserable, and just at that moment who should appear but
Marjorie and Jack, distributing the pink papers containing the
invitation to the service on the shore. I turned away when I saw them
coming. I looked towards the sea, and took my little telescope from my
pocket, that I might seem to be intent on watching a distant steamer.
What would Duncan say? What would Mr. Christie say? What would my little
friend Jack say, when I did not appear at the shore service? And how
shocked they would be when they heard I had gone off for a day's
pleasure!

I hoped that the children would pass us by, and would go to a large
group of fishermen standing on the shore just beyond us. But I was not
to escape thus. Marjorie came up to Tom and presented him with a paper,
and she was going to give one to me, but my little friend stopped her,
'No, no, Marjorie,' he said in his most fascinating tones, 'let me give
one to my own Mr. Jack. I always give you one my own self, don't I, big
Jack?'

I patted him on the head and took the paper, but I did not answer, and
the children passed on. Tom opened his paper and read it aloud,--

'"There will be a short service on the shore next Sunday morning." Oh,
indeed,' he said, 'that's what they're after, is it? Distributing
notices for some Methodist meeting. Is that where Christie holds forth?'

'Yes,' I said, 'he preaches every Sunday.'

'Well, Mr. Christie,' he went on, 'you won't have _me_ there to
hear you. I hate those canting meetings, don't you, Jack?
_Subject_. Ah, he tells us his subject beforehand, does he? Very
kind of him, I'm sure! _Subject: Where are you going_? Ah,' said
Tom, 'that's soon answered: I'm going to Scarborough, old fellow, and a
jolly good day I hope to have there'; and he threw the little pink paper
into the air, and the wind carried it far out to sea.

[Illustration]

All this time I had never spoken a word. A great battle was going on in
my heart. Conscience was speaking very loudly, and telling me that I
could not possibly take my pleasure on my Master's own day, but the
tempter's voice was arguing that the time to speak had not yet come, and
that perhaps for this once it would be better to yield to Tom's wishes,
and that I might talk to him quietly about it, and make a fresh start
after our return to London.

And so the day wore away, and evening came, and Tom had no idea whatever
that I had even hesitated about going with him to Scarborough. I never
spent a more unhappy day. I avoided Mr. Christie, lest he should say
anything to me about the service on the following day. I was not even
happy with Duncan. Tom had gone off to Saltburn, leaving me, as he
supposed, to put some finishing touches to my picture; but I had no
heart for painting, and only got my easel and painting materials out to
put them away again directly.

Polly was in good spirits that day, for little John was so much better
that he was able to sit on the floor and play, and, as I stood looking
out of my small casement window, I watched her washing up in a tub
standing on a wooden stool outside her door, and I heard her singing to
herself as she did so. Most of the visitors had left Runswick Bay now,
for it was late in the season, but the shore was covered with the
village children--boys and girls without shoes and stockings, wading in
the pools and running far out into the shallow sea. It was a pretty
sight, the grey, quiet water, the strips of yellow sand, and the cliff
covered with grass and flowers.

But I could not enjoy the scene that Saturday evening; even my artistic
eye, of which I used sometimes to boast, failed me then. I was feeling
thoroughly uncomfortable, and the most lovely view on earth would have
failed to charm me at that moment.

There is a verse in the Bible which says, 'A little child shall lead
them,' and whenever I hear that verse I think of that evening in
Runswick Bay. For I was still gazing out of my window, looking at I knew
not what, when I heard a well-known little voice just beneath me.

It was Jack. He had come down the hill beneath Duncan's cottage, so that
I had not seen him until he spoke to me below the window.

'Mr. Jack,' he said, 'what are you doing up there? Are you _very_
busy?'

'No, old man,' I said, 'I'm not busy.'

'Then _do_ come out, that's a dear, big Mr. Jack; I do want you so
much.'

Who could resist the pleading little face, and the pretty, fascinating
voice of that child? He would have a hard heart who could do so. I ran
downstairs, and a minute afterwards I was racing with Jack on the wet
sands, for the tide was fast going out, and was helping him to fly a
small kite which his father had bought for him in Whitby. We had a fine
time together on the shore, until at last a towel was hung out of the
top window in the Christies' house, as a sign that it was Jack's
bedtime. Though he was wild with joy and excitement, the obedient little
fellow at once stopped his play, and told me mother wanted him, and he
must go.

'I'm coming for you to-morrow morning, Mr. Jack,' he said.

'To-morrow morning, Jack?'

'Yes, for church,' said the child, putting up his dear little chubby
face to be kissed. 'Don't go without me, will you, Mr. Jack?'

'Well, I'm not sure I'm going to-morrow, little man,' I said
reluctantly, 'so you had better not call for me.'

'Not going to church!' said Jack, in a very shocked voice. 'Why not,
Mr. Jack?'

'I'm going to Scarborough for the day with my friend Tom,' I said.
'I shall go to church in Scarborough, Jack.'

I shall never forget the expression of that child's face as long as I
live; it was a mixture of surprise, sorrow and dismay. 'Mr. Jack, do you
know it's God's day to-morrow?' was all that he said, however; and as at
this moment his mother called him from the bedroom window, he ran off
without another word.

'Do you know it's God's day?' I asked myself when the little boy had
gone. 'Yes, I do know,' I answered aloud, 'and He is my Master, and my
Master's day shall be kept for Him and for His service.'

I walked to a lonely place on the shore where the sea had undermined the
cliff, and had made strange holes and caves, which could only be entered
at low tide. I clambered over the rocks, and crossed about half a mile
of slippery seaweed, until I came to one of these weird places. Creeping
inside, I felt myself safe from any human eye. I was alone--alone with
my Master.

I cannot tell you all that passed during the half-hour that I spent in
that lonely cave, but I know this, that I came out of it feeling that my
Master had indeed given me the strength for which I had pleaded, the
strength to act as His faithful and true servant.

I was waiting outside the station when Tom's train came in from
Saltburn. He had not expected to see me again that night, and seemed
pleased that I had come to meet him.

'I think we shall have a fine day to-morrow, old boy,' he said; 'what
a dew there is! My feet are quite wet with it.'

'Tom,' I said, 'I came to meet you to-night because I wanted to tell you
something. I am sorry, very sorry, to disappoint you, but I can't go
with you to-morrow.'

'Why ever in the world not, Jack?' he said. 'I thought you were so keen
on seeing Scarborough.'

'Yes, Tom,' I said, 'but I am still more keen on something else.'

'What's that?' he asked; 'do you mean Redcar? It's a stupid place, Jack:
nothing in the world to see, I assure you.'

'No, Tom, I don't mean that. I don't want to change our plan. I had
rather see Scarborough than any other place; I'll give myself a holiday
on Monday, and go with you gladly, Tom; but I can't go to-morrow.'

'Nonsense, Jack!' he said angrily. 'You _can_ go if you like;
what's to hinder you? If you are willing to go at all, why on earth
can't you go to-morrow?'

'Simply because to-morrow is Sunday, Tom.'

'And if it is Sunday, what of that?' said my friend. '"The better the
day, the better the deed," and it's ridiculous your talking in this
saintly way about Sunday, when to my certain knowledge you've spent
every fine Sunday boating on the river for the last two years or more.
No, no, my friend, that won't go down with me.'

'Tom,' I said, 'it's all quite true what you say. I have, I know I have,
spent my Sundays in boating or in taking my pleasure in some other way,
and I am more sorry for it, Tom, than I can tell you. But since I came
here--'

'Since you came here,' Tom interrupted me, 'you've gone and turned
Ranter or Methodist, or something of that sort, and you've got your head
full of all sorts of insane and ridiculous ideas.'

'Since I came here, Tom,' I said, taking no notice of his last remark,
'I have seen what I never saw before--that I am a great sinner; and I
have found what I never found before--that Jesus is a great Saviour.'

'Well, I wish you had never come to Runswick Bay, if this is the absurd
way you are going on, Jack, and after all the good old times we've had
together too.'

'And why shan't we have good times together still, dear old Tom?' I
said. 'I have entered the service of a new Master, that's all; and,
Tom,' I said timidly, 'I wish He was your Master too.'

Tom made no answer, but swung his stick round and round, and slashed at
the thistles and the ox-eye daisies which grew by the roadside. I tried
to make one or two remarks, but I saw he was very much upset by what I
had said, and he did not answer me. He was vexed with me, and perhaps he
was a little uncomfortable besides, and I felt it was far wiser to say
no more.

He did not speak again until we reached the hotel, and then he simply
said, 'Good-night, Jack, I'm sorry you've gone and made such a fool of
yourself'; and I went down the hill, feeling as if I had lost my friend,
and as if the old days and old companionship were dead and buried for
ever.

But if I had lost one friend, I felt I had gained another. Mr. Christie
was waiting for me at the bottom of the hill, and he proposed that we
should take a turn together on the shore. Nellie was expecting me to
supper, he said; he had told Duncan I was going there, and the moon was
coming out, and a good stretch on the sands would make us enjoy it all
the more.

We had walked across the bay, and were standing gazing out seawards,
when he suddenly put his arm in mine.

'What is it, Jack?' he said kindly, 'something is troubling you this
evening.'

'Yes, you are right,' I said. 'However did you know, Mr. Christie? I am
bothered a bit; the fact is, I'm ashamed of myself, I've been such a
coward.'

'What have you been doing, Jack? You don't mind telling me, do you?'

'Not at all, Mr. Christie, I would rather tell you,' I said; and then I
gave him an account of the last week, of my fear of Tom, and how very
nearly--I was ashamed to say it--I had yielded to him about the outing
to-morrow. Then I spoke of my friend, and I told him I was afraid I had
lost him through my plain speaking.

'Never mind, Jack,' he said, 'the Master must come first, and it does
happen very often that when He is put in His right place we have to give
up a great deal. He knew we should have to do it, and He spoke some very
plain words about it: "He that loveth father or mother more than Me is
not worthy of Me, and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not
worthy of Me." You would like to be worthy of Him, Jack?'

'I shall never be that, Mr. Christie,' I said.

'No,' he said; 'you are right, we are all unworthy of Him; but when we
love Him, we do long to do that which is pleasing in His sight. And,
remember, there is always the hundredfold, Jack, always the Master's
reward for anything we give up for Him.'

'Yes, in heaven,' I said softly.

'No, Jack, not in heaven, but on earth. Do you remember how the Master's
words run: "He shall receive an hundredfold _now, in this time_,
and in the world to come, life everlasting." The hundredfold is to be
enjoyed _here_, the everlasting life _there_.'

'I never noticed that before,' I said.

'I have proved it true, Jack, abundantly true. I sometimes think I have
got beyond the hundredfold. And then beyond, there lies the life
eternal.'

'My mother is enjoying that,' I said.

'Yes, indeed,' he answered; 'and her boy will enjoy it too in God's good
time, for does not the Master say of all those who belong to Him, "I
give unto them eternal life?" "I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly"?'




[Illustration]




Chapter XII

WHERE ARE YOU GOING?


I shall never forget my last Sunday in Runswick Bay. It was at the end
of September, and was one of those gloriously brilliant days which we
get in the early autumn, when the sky is cloudless, when the air is
fresh and clear, and when the autumnal tints on trees, hedges, ferns and
brambles make the landscape gorgeous and extremely beautiful and
fascinating.

The high cliff above the bay was a perfect study in colour that morning;
I have never seen more splendid colouring, every varied shade of red and
gold and green was to be found there.

'Tom will be off to Scarborough,' I said to myself as I dressed. 'What a
grand day he has got!'

But I did not wish myself with him; no, I was both glad and thankful to
look forward to a quiet and peaceful Sunday.

There were not many visitors still at Runswick, most of them had left
the week before; but the fishermen came in great numbers to the service,
and the green was covered with them when little Jack and big Jack
appeared, hand-in-hand as usual. Duncan was in the choir, but Polly
thought the wind rather cold for little John, so had remained with him
at home. A good many women and children were present, however, and the
bank was covered with mothers and babies, sitting at a little distance,
lest the noise of the children should disturb the preacher or the
listeners.

What was it that made me think of Tom just as the service began? Was it
a shepherd's plaid cloth cap, of the kind Tom wears, which I saw on the
head of some visitor who was sitting almost out of sight on the seaward
side of the bank? Such small things bring people and things before us
sometimes, and my thoughts wandered to Scarborough for a few minutes,
and I wondered what Tom was doing at that moment. I thought to myself
how he would smile, if he saw me sitting under the old boat and
listening attentively to an open air preacher.

But my thoughts did not wander long, for when the service began every
word of it seemed to be for me.

WHERE ARE YOU GOING? I had worked the subject out in my mind before I
came to the service, and had quite decided what line of thought Mr.
Christie would take. I thought he would picture the two roads, the one
leading to life, the other to destruction; and then I imagined that he
would speak of the blessedness of being on the narrow road, and would
dwell very vividly on the awful consequences of continuing to walk on
the road leading to hell. But I found that my idea of what his sermon
would be was quite a mistaken one.

'Where are you going? My question to-day,' he said, 'is addressed only
to some of you; would to God it were addressed to you all! I speak
to-day to those who have crossed the line, who have run into the loving
Saviour's arms, who have become servants of Christ.

'My friends, my dear friends, where are you going? What does the Master
say? He calls to every one of His servants, and He says, "If any man
serve Me, let him follow Me, and _where I am_ there shall also My
servant be."

'Servant of Christ, where are you going? The Master answers you, WHERE
I AM.

'And where is that? A little group of men are standing on the Mount of
Olives; above them is the deep blue sky, and they are gazing earnestly
upward, for their Master is rising far above them, and even as they
watch a cloud receives Him out of their sight. Yet still He ascends
higher and yet higher, and as He rises countless angels attend Him. He
is joined by company after company of the heavenly host, who have come
out to meet their King. At length heaven's gates are reached, and the
cry goes forth, "Lift up your heads, O ye gates, even lift them up, ye
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in." Amidst heaven's
most joyful music the Master passes within to the Heavenly Jerusalem,
the glad, glorious Home. Every care, every sin, every sorrow is left
outside; within all is sunshine, all is joy. And as heaven's gates are
closing, we hear the Master's voice. He leaves us a word of hope, "Where
I am, _there_ shall also My servant be."

'Oh, fishermen, oh, friends, think of that! If you are His servants,
those gates will open for you. Your life may be hard now: some of you
have large families, and heavy work, and long, cold, comfortless nights
tossing on the stormy sea; but never mind, home is coming, heaven is
coming, for "Where I am, there shall also My servant be."

'But that is not all. There is something more wonderful still. For where
is the Master now? He is not only inside the gates of the city, He is
not only walking through the golden streets; but He is in the midst of
the glory of God, He has sat down on the right hand of the throne of
God. Will you and I, dear friends, ever dare to go near that throne?
Will not the glory be too dazzling? Will not the place be holy ground,
too holy for us to approach? Will He allow us to draw near to His
footstool, and even there, close to His glory, to lie low before Him?

'Listen, O servant of Christ, again the Master says, "Where I am,
_there_ shall also My servant be."

'What, on the throne of God! Yes, even _there_ He bids you come;
for what does He say? "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
Me in My throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with My Father
in His throne." Oh, what a wonderful promise! We could never have
thought of it; we could never have believed it; we could never even have
dreamt of such a thing, if the Master had not told us Himself.'

And then he concluded by asking us to remember our glorious future.
'Sometimes,' he said, 'you get downhearted, full of sorrow and fear, and
you say, "I shall never hold on to the end." Oh, dear friends, it is
worth an effort, for at the end lies home, at the end stands the throne
of God, with a place waiting for you upon it. "Where I am, there shall
also My servant be."

'What if you have to bear something for the Master's sake? What if you
have to give up friends or comforts for Him? What if you have to take up
your cross and follow Him? It is only for a few days, only for a little
while, and home is coming. "Where I am, there shall also My servant be."
Is it not worth while?'

Then, as he ended, he spoke a few words to all who were there, and he
begged those who were not servants of Christ, to consider what they were
losing. 'All this might be yours,' he said, 'the wide-open gates, the
Heavenly City, the seat on the glorious Throne; but you are turning your
backs on it all, and you are choosing instead--what? A few of earth's
fleeting pleasures, a little of this world's passing enjoyment. Oh, dear
friends, think before it is too late, what your eternal loss will be!'

He said much more, but I cannot remember it now. I only know that I came
away feeling that I had been very near the golden gates of which he
spoke, and had heard the Master's voice saying to me, 'Where I am, there
shall also My servant be.'

The tide was coming in as we left the service, and I was standing on the
shore watching the waves rolling in over the rocks, when I felt an arm
slipped in mine, and when I looked round, to my great surprise, I found
that it was Tom.

'Why, Tom!' I said, 'back already? how early you have come home!'

'Back, Jack?' he said, laughing; 'why, I've never been.'

'Do you mean you haven't been to Scarborough?'

'No, of course not; you didn't think I would go without you, old boy.
We'll go to-morrow, of course. I thought we settled that last night.'

'Why, I've been thinking of you in Scarborough all day!' I said.

'Then your thoughts have gone in a wrong direction for once, Jack,' he
replied, 'for I've been here all the time.'

'I'll walk with you up the hill,' I said; 'it isn't quite dinner-time.'

I was very pleased to see him, and to find that he did not appear to be
vexed with me. We chatted for some time, and then he said casually, 'He
does not speak badly, that lay preacher of yours, Jack.'

I stood still in astonishment. 'Who?' I said, 'Mr. Christie? Why, you
surely were not at the service, Tom! Oh, I know,' I cried, before he
could answer, 'you were behind the bank; I saw a black and white cap,
and I thought how much it was like yours.'

'It could not be much more like, seeing that it was the very same,' said
Tom.

'I'm so glad you heard him,' I ventured to say.

He made no answer, so I thought it was better to say no more; but when
we reached the top of the hill, and he was just leaving me, he said:

'Jack, I'm afraid I was a bit crusty last night. You must not think any
more of it, old fellow. We'll have a jolly day at Scarborough to-morrow.
And, Jack,' he went on, 'I was very much annoyed at the time, I own I
was; but I'm not sure after all that you're not right.'

He said no more, but hurried away, and it was many years before he
referred to the subject again; but the day came when he did mention it,
and when he told me, with tears in his eyes, that he looked upon that
Sunday at Runswick as the first link in the chain of God's loving
Providence, by means of which He had led him to Himself. He told me then
that he had never forgotten my firm refusal to go with him, and he had
never forgotten the sermon to which he had listened hidden from sight by
the bank.

Our day at Scarborough exceeded all our anticipations. The weather was
glorious, and Tom was in excellent spirits, and we thoroughly enjoyed
everything.

I could not help feeling sorry when Thursday came, which was to be my
last day at Runswick Bay. It had been such a happy and so eventful a
time. I seemed to have passed through so much, and to have learnt so
much unknown to me before, that I felt very reluctant to bring my
holiday to a close. As for Duncan and Polly, they were quite melancholy
as the time for my departure drew near.

'We _shall_ feel lost without you, sir,' said Duncan. 'We shan't
know what to do'; and there were tears in Polly's eyes as she said
mournfully, when she set the herrings on the table for my supper,
'Them's the last herrings I shall fry you, sir, and I feel as if there
was going to be a death in the house.'

'Cheer up, Polly,' I said, 'who knows? Perhaps you may have to put up
with me next time I get a holiday, and you may be sure I shall want
plenty of herrings then.'

She brightened a little at this, and little John, who was quite well
now, and who had become very friendly with me since his illness, climbed
up on my knee, and stroked my face with his little thin hand, as if he
were trying to coax me to come back to them again.

There was one thing which I had a great desire to do before leaving
Runswick. I knew that Duncan was much troubled about the Mary Ann. She
had been terribly knocked about in the storm, which was no wonder,
seeing that she had drifted about, bottom upwards, and had been driven
hither and thither on the waves. When Duncan had examined her the day
after his arrival, he had found that she leaked in several places, and
was altogether unseaworthy, and he had been obliged to hire a boat until
such time as the Mary Ann could be properly repaired. Then he went over
to Whitby, and brought an experienced man back with him, and he
overhauled her thoroughly, and gave it as his opinion that it would be a
waste of money to try to patch her up.

When Duncan came in that night I saw that the poor fellow was terribly
downcast. 'The Mary Ann's days are numbered, sir; she'll never be able
to rough it again,' he said. 'She's been a good old boat to me and my
father before me, and it will be like parting from an old friend to give
her up. Yon man, he says she might be cobbled together a bit; but you
would never make a good job of her; she'd do maybe well enough for fine
weather, but you couldn't trust to her in a storm.'

I saw Polly turn pale as he said this. 'Duncan,' she said, going up to
him, and laying her hand on his arm, 'you'll never go in her again;
promise me that. Think of me and little John, Duncan.'

'Ay, my lass,' he said; 'ay, Polly, I do think of thee and little John;
but the worst of it is there's bread must be earnt for thee and little
John. I can't let thee starve, wife.'

'What about the bank-book, Duncan?' I said.

He went to the old oak-chest, and brought it out. I was much touched by
his handing it to me, and bidding me see how it stood. He was perfectly
open with me, and spoke to me as freely as if I had been an old and
tried friend. I added up the amount and read it out to him.

'Well, sir,'he said, 'it's getting on; but it's a good ten pound short
yet. We shall have to hire Brown's boat a bit and do as well as we can,
though it isn't a very paying business when one takes to hiring: it will
be hard enough to make two ends meet, you see, sir, let alone saving up
for the new boat. But I can't see nothing else for it, sir; that is, if
Polly won't let me risk it in the Mary Ann.'

'Duncan,' she said solemnly, 'if thee went to sea in the Mary Ann, and
she went to the bottom, I could _never_ say, "The will of the Lord
be done," for I don't believe it _would_ be God's will for thee to
go in that rotten old thing.'

'Polly is right, Duncan,' I said; 'you must never go in the Mary Ann
again.'

'Well, sir,' he said, 'I see what you mean, you and Polly too, and the
Lord will show us what's to be done.'

Nothing more was said about the Mary Ann at that time, but I had already
made my own plan about the new boat. My aunt had just left me her little
property, and a very nice little property it was. I felt myself a rich
man, for in addition to money invested in various ways, about L200 of
ready money had been placed to my account at the bank.

What could be more delightful, I thought, than to spend the first ten
pounds of this in helping Duncan to complete the purchase of the new
boat? The only difficulty would be to get Duncan to accept the money,
for he had all the honest independence of a Yorkshireman, and I knew
would hesitate about receiving help from any one. But, at the same time,
I knew that in this instance his need was great, and his kindly feeling
towards myself was so strong, that I was not without hope that I might
be able to manage what I had contemplated without giving the dear fellow
offence. I thought, at one time, that I would take Mr. Christie into my
confidence, and would consult with him, but on second thoughts I decided
that it would be wiser not to do so, and felt that I should be more
likely to succeed if no one else was in the secret. So I folded my
bank-note in paper, put it into an envelope, and wrote outside, 'With
little John's love to his daddy, to help him to buy another Little
John.' This I determined to slip into the child's hand when I said
good-bye.

That evening I had supper with the Christies. They were kindness itself,
and told me what a great pleasure it had been to them to meet me. 'Not
only because you are your mother's son, Jack, but for your own sake as
well as hers,' said Mr. Christie with a smile.

I wanted to say something in return, but the words would not come--at
least not then. But, just before I left, I went with Mr. Christie into
his study, and he said, 'Jack, I thought perhaps we might have a little
prayer together before we part'; and then the words came,--

'Mr. Christie,' I said, 'I can never, never thank God enough that I came
here.'

'Let us thank Him together, Jack,' he said.

Then we knelt down, he by the table, and I with my arms resting on the
old organ, and he thanked God for His mercy in bringing me across the
line, and he committed me to His care and keeping to bring me safely
along the road which leads home.

The next morning I was up early, for our train started at eight, and we
had two miles to walk. I had told Polly I should want nothing but a cup
of tea before I set off, but when I came down I found a most tempting
breakfast prepared for me--ham and eggs, and toast in abundance, and
fresh lettuces from Duncan's small garden.

'Well, Polly,' I said, 'you are spoiling me to the last.'

'We can never make enough of you, sir,' said Polly, and there were tears
in her eyes as she said it.

I ran up to pack my bag and collect my things, and I determined to start
in good time, so that I might allow myself a few minutes to say good-bye
to the Christies.

'I must be off, Duncan,' I said.

He was standing outside with little John in his arms, and Polly, with
her hat on, was standing beside him.

'We're coming along with you, sir, to the station,' said Duncan. 'You
won't think it a liberty will you, sir? but me and Polly and little John
would like to see the last of you.'

'Come, that _is_ good of you,' I said. 'I shall have a grand escort
up the hill!'

Polly took the child from his father, and Duncan carried my bag and
easel, and would not even hear of my giving him a hand with them.

I ran into the Christies, but could find no one below; however, I heard
a great running backwards and forwards overhead, and presently Mr.
Christie called out of the bedroom window, 'Wait one moment, Jack; we
are all coming to see you off.'

So my escort increased as I proceeded, and Tom, as he came out of the
hotel, said he thought the whole of Runswick must be going by the early
train, when he saw us, one after another, come toiling up the hill.
Little Jack rode up the whole way on my back, and his horse was very hot
when the top was reached.

Though it is now so many years ago I can see that little party of
friends standing together on the platform, as the train moved out of the
station. I can feel again the warm grasp of Mr. Christie's hand, and can
hear his whispered, 'God bless you, Jack!' I can see Mrs. Christie
holding Marjorie by the hand, and waving her handkerchief to me, and can
hear little Jack crying out, 'Come back soon, do, big Mr. Jack.' I can
see Duncan bareheaded, with little John in his arms, the child waving
the envelope which I had put in his hand as I stepped into the carriage,
and which was still unopened. I can see Polly wiping her eyes with her
apron, and then holding it up and waving it till I was lost to sight. I
can see them all as they appeared to me that day, kind hearts and true,
not one of them ranking amongst the number whom the world counts great,
and yet all of them well known to Him who calleth His own sheep by name
and leadeth them out.

I must just mention here that I had a very touching letter from Duncan
at the end of that week. The spelling was most wonderful, and the
grammar was quite of his own making; but it was full, from end to end,
of the most simple-hearted affection, and of the deepest gratitude.

'Me, and my missus, and little John, can never be thankful enough, sir,'
he said, 'and when the other 'Little John' is afloat, as please God she
soon will be, we hopes as how you will come and have a sail in her.'

So ended my visit to Runswick; and when I consider all that happened
during those few weeks, I think it is small wonder that the little bay
is still fresh in my memory, and that Ella's yellow ragwort made me
dream of it so distinctly. For surely that month was the most important
month in my life, for was it not the beginning of a new life, which,
thank God, has continued ever since?

I can say to-day, even as I said then, 'One is my Master, even Christ,'
and I can look forward, humbly but hopefully, to the time when the
golden gates will open to me, and when the Master's promise will be
fulfilled to me, 'Where I am, there shall also My servant be.'

  O Jesus Christ, my Master,
    I come to Thee to-day;
  I ask Thee to direct me
    In all I do or say:
  I want to keep my promise
    To be Thy servant true,
  I come to Thee for orders;
    Dear Lord, what shall I do?

  I want a heart not heeding
    What others think or say;
  I want a humble spirit,
    To listen and obey.
  To serve Thee without ceasing,
    'Tis but a little while,--
  My strength, the Master's promise,
    My joy, the Master's smile.


A.C.W.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTIE, THE KING'S SERVANT***


******* This file should be named 10728.txt or 10728.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/7/2/10728


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
