The Project Gutenberg eBook, Michelangelo's Shoulder, by John Moncure
Wetterau


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **




Title: Michelangelo's Shoulder

Author: John Moncure Wetterau

Release Date: February 9, 2004  [eBook #11003]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MICHELANGELO'S SHOULDER***


Copyright (c) 2003 by John Moncure Wetterau






Michelangelo's Shoulder




John Moncure Wetterau





(c) copyright 2003 by John Moncure Wetterau.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NoDerivs-NonCommercial License. Essentially, anyone is free
to copy, distribute, or perform this copyrighted work for
non-commercial uses only, so long as the work is preserved verbatim and
is attributed to the author. To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd-nc/1.0/ or send a letter to:

Creative Commons
559 Nathan Abbott Way
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

ISBN #: 0-9729587-3-8

Published by:
Fox Print Books
137 Emery Street
Portland, ME 04102

foxprintbooks@earthlink.net
207.775.6860

Some of these stories first appeared in Archipelago and The Paumanok
Review. Cover drawing: "Shan" by Finn.




for w.cat




Michelangelo's Shoulder


It dawned hot in Georgia.  Don rubbed his head and blinked. He got out
of bed and paused before a makeshift easel where a drawing, taped to a
board, showed a woman sitting on a park bench. She was large, dressed
in layers of multi-colored cotton. She reminded him of the Renoir woman
in her plush living room, the dog sprawled at her feet, but she was
smarter. The line across her eyebrows and tapering along her jaw was
right. He'd left out a lot, but that didn't matter. If what was there
was true enough, you knew the rest--like a Michelangelo shoulder
emerging from stone.

He went into the bathroom and splashed water on his face.

After coffee and a piece of toast, he rolled the drawing and took it to
the park where the woman fed pigeons every day. She wasn't there. She
wasn't there the next day, either. The following day Don brought a loaf
of bread, sat on her bench, and tossed white pellets into the air.
Birds fought for each piece. He prepared the remaining bread and
scattered it in one throw. "There you go--something for everybody.
She'll be back soon."

A week later, she showed up. Don moved aside and asked, "Where you
been?"

"Took sick."

"I've been feeding the pigeons."

"I was worrying. Thank you."

"I did a drawing of you. I wanted to name it, but--I didn't know your
name."

"Ruby."

"Ruby, ah. I'm Don. You want to see it? I'll bring it tomorrow."

"Sure."

"O.K. How you feeling?"

"Better, now."

"Good." He walked to his usual bench and sat down. The sun beat on the
live oak trees and sage-green strings of Spanish moss while the birds
made happy sounds in front of Ruby. She had lost weight, he thought,
but it was hard to tell, the way she dressed. She was a beauty once. He
remembered his bloodshot eyes in the bathroom mirror. None of us
getting any younger. He would give her the drawing in the morning and
take off.  It was time to leave Savannah, past time. Head for Portland
again. Look up Lorna.

Lorna. The Art Students League. It seemed like last week that she was
looking carefully into his eyes and shaking his hand, curious and
unafraid, different from him in many ways, but similar in that.
Painter's eyes, he thought, clear and unblinking. Couldn't tell how
good she was, though--eyes are one thing; talent is another. And hard
work is another.

She lived in a studio behind her parents' house on a mountain
road--what was it called?--the Glasco Turnpike. Her father, Lad
Charles, was a painter, a friendly guy who wore bow ties and was well
liked in town. Lorna was protected, highly educated, out of reach for
Don Delahanty.

He was blocky. She was slim. His neck was thick and turned with his
body; her neck was graceful and turned by itself. His eyes were a
slatey blue--the color of the sea on a cloudy day. Hers were almond
with flecks of green. He was fair skinned. Lorna was tanned. His hair
was sand colored, prematurely grizzled. Hers was light brown, sun
streaked, thick, and cut short--perfect for small gold earrings. She
brought with her the smell of spring. He smelled like upstate New
York--dirt, dairy farms, and industrial towns. She was kind. They both
were, although he had a bitter streak that dragged at him.

The pigeons took off in a sudden rush, flapping and swerving around the
trees. Don stood and walked slowly across the square. "So long, Ruby."

"Be good, now," she said.

You can survive unloved, but you can't make it without loving
somebody--or something. Ruby loved her birds. And who knows who else?
He loved Lorna. Lorna loved Pike, or used to, and Molly, their
daughter. Molly herself would be falling in love any time now, if she
weren't already. Round and round we go, getting the job done. Except he
hadn't gotten the job done, not unless you counted the paintings as
kids. Not a happy train of thought. Piss on it, he'd have a waffle at
Cleary's. Tide him over until the big feed.

On Thursdays they had the big feed, he and Riles and Kai. Thursdays,
because weekends were unpredictable. He walked the six blocks to
Cleary's, just around the corner from the house--Riles's house, Kai's
house--he couldn't call it home exactly, although he'd spent more
winters than he cared to remember in the basement studio reserved for
caretakers or indigent relatives. He was a little of each--an old
friend of Riles and useful around the place, watching the gallery
several times a week and doing the framing jobs that came along.

The Cleary's waitresses were wearing _Midnight in the Garden of Good
and Evil_ T-shirts. Not a bad image, from the cover of the best seller,
but it annoyed him to see his friends wearing advertisements.

"Pecan waffle, Don?"

"Yes, Ma'm--for my strength. It's that time again. I'm going north."

"Take me with you."

"Can't afford you."

"Next year," she suggested.

"Do my best," Don said. "Something to live for. There's not much up
there, Jilly, just Yankees, shivering and eating beans."

"I could stand the shivering. Want some grits?"

"Read my mind," Don said.

He ate slowly, drank an extra cup of coffee, left a big tip, and got on
with packing. By cocktail hour he had cleaned his room and stashed his
belongings in a footlocker and a duffel bag. The easel and the painting
gear stayed, part of the decor. He packed his best brushes, his
watercolors, and a block of good paper. There was no limit to the
number of lighthouse and/or lobster boat paintings he could sell, if
they were cheap enough. The portraits and the figures were different.
Drawn or done fully in oils, they were given away, or nearly. It was
hard to put a price on them.

"How well you look, Don," Kai said.

"Thank you. I'm having my annual burst of optimism. Did Riles tell you
that I'm off to Maine tomorrow?"

"Riles never tells me anything."

"Mother, really!" Riles appeared and put an arm around her shoulders.
They were handsome together, short and dark with identical flashing
smiles. Riles's hairline had receded  considerably, and Kai's hair had
long ago turned a tarnished silver, but they both were slim and upright
and moved with a lack of effort that made Don feel as though he were
dragging a wagon behind him. "I only just found out. Don is secretive,
you know."

"Don is not good at planning," Don said.

"We must count on the turning of the seasons, Mother, the great
migrations, to bring him back to Sherman's Retreat."

"He is not a goose, Dear." She turned to Don. "The sooner you come
back, the better."

"Honk," Don said, embarrassed, and added, "if you love Jesus."

"I think this calls for a Riles Blaster. Don? Mother?"

Riles Blasters were made from light rum, Grand Marnier, lime juice, and
other secret ingredients combined with ice and served, after great
roaring from the blender, in sweating silver tumblers. Riles claimed
that they prolonged life by rendering stress inoperable and irrelevant.
A Riles Blaster, he pronounced, allowed one to focus on what mattered.
"What mattered" was left undefined, allowing to each a certain
latitude. They toasted what mattered and then "Absent loved ones."

Blasters were reliable--one brought a sigh; two put a helpless smile on
your face. It was best to switch to wine at that point. Another virtue:
"A modest red becomes--acceptable." Riles pronounced each syllable of
"acceptable" so lightly and with such pleasure that you had to agree.
The dark side of Riles was private. Don understood and left it alone.

"Will you be seeing that attractive friend of yours?" Kai made her
innocent face.

"I usually do--at least once. I'll try."

"I love that oil of her as a young woman. Would you part with it? We
think it belongs in the permanent collection."

Riles raised his eyebrows, indicating that "we" meant "she."

"You may have it, of course."

"We can't afford what it's worth."

"You don't have to buy it. I'll give it to you. It's yours."

"Don, you must take something at least--for the materials." She went
into the living room and returned with a check which she handed to him.
"I have wanted that painting for so long," she said, breaking a silence.

"That's a hell of a lot of materials."

"Good. More paintings! It's worth ten times that."

"Quite so," Riles said.

"Well." Don raised his glass. "Thanks."

"Bon voyage." They clinked glasses and that was that. Riles and Kai
were skilled at such things; they had a knack for moving on. It was a
part of their youthfulness. Good genes helped, too, Don thought. Not to
mention the financial wisdom of dear departed Redmond.

An hour later Don said goodnight. Feeling almost a member of the
family, he went downstairs and fell asleep on the bed in the basement.

The next day he made his way to the park. "Mornin', Ruby."

"Morning to you. You late today."

"Going to be a long day. I'm taking the train north."

"Oh, my."

Don pulled the drawing from the cardboard tube and unrolled it, holding
it up for her to see.

"Wooo," she said, "I used to be better lookin'."

"You still good looking."

"I like it."

"I signed it here." He pointed.

"Don Dela--hanty," she read.

"An original Delehanty. You hang on to it, maybe it will be worth
something, someday."

"What you mean?"

He rolled the drawing and put it back in the tube. "It's for you; it's
a present." He held it out. Ruby hesitated and then took it.

"Been a while since I had a present."

"So," Don said, "take care. See you when I get back."

"Lord willing. Thank you. Thank you for the present." The walls came
down and she smiled like a girl.

"My pleasure." He bowed and walked toward the river. The Silver Meteor
was due at 5:50.



Don got to bed with Lorna that summer. She wasn't quite it, though he
loved her and would never tell her that. He did a portrait of her, his
best yet, and gave it to Molly knowing that Lorna wouldn't accept it or
would feel guilty for not paying if she did. The days were long and
intense, but the summer was gone in a flash.

Strangely, he was offered a show in New York--his other long time
dream--by a gallery owner who was after Lorna. He did not want to be
involved in their relationship. He turned the show down, pretending
that the requirements were too much trouble. It probably wouldn't have
worked out, anyway, he thought. Some people have a knack for dangling
what you want in front of you; when you reach for it, it disappears.

Late in October he went over to Lorna's and said goodbye. She seemed
sad and a bit relieved. Molly had tears in her eyes and hugged him
wholeheartedly.

The next morning a cold rain was bringing down the leaves as Don
carried his bag to the bus station. The shoulders of his tan raincoat
were wet through when he boarded the Greyhound for Boston. Three rows
back, he found an empty seat by a window and looked out at the
glistening street. He saw a painting, full of light.





Waiting for Happiness


Spring comes late in Maine. Snow changes to rain; branch tips redden;
you can see your breath. Not a whole lot different than winter until
the daffodils, crab apples, and forsythia bloom. The sun skips off the
water, impossibly bright, impossibly blue. You can almost almost hear
the cracking of seeds, buried and forgotten.

Charlie Garrett was as hardnosed as most. He kept going, did what he
had to. "Ninety percent of success is showing up," Woody Allen said.
Charlie repeated that in dire times--before medical checkups or visits
to his brother, Orson.

Orson knew a lot about success and never hesitated to pass it on. "What
you need, Charlie, is a Cessna. You aren't supposed to spin them, but
you can. That'll clear your head, Charlie, straight down, counting as a
barn comes around--one time, two times, three times--correct and pull
out nice and easy." Orson dipped his knees, lowering his flattened
palm. Or a catboat: "A solid little Marshall, Charlie. Putter around,
take some cutie coasting. You're in sailor heaven, man, all those
islands."

"I know some cuties," Miranda had said.

"Last cutie took my silver garlic press. Well, she didn't take it; she
borrowed it and never returned it."

"Call her up and get it back," Orson said.

"That's what she wants you to do." Miranda was the best thing about
Orson.

"I got another one."

"Where the hell did you find a silver garlic press?" Orson was
impressed.

"It's aluminum, I think, or a composite material."

"Oh."

It was always like that; motion was Orson's answer to everything.
Charlie stretched and checked his watch. The ten o'clock ferry from
Peaks Island was edging to the dock. Soon a few dozen passengers would
walk off the ramp, carrying shopping bags, slipping day packs over one
or both shoulders, holding dogs on leashes. Margery, short and polite,
would be toward the end of the line, one hand on the railing, blinking
as she looked up at the city buildings and around for him.

They were similar physically and recognized each other as related, not
lovers, not brother and sister, but distant cousins perhaps or members
of a tribe--the patient, the witness bearers. "There you are," she
said. Charlie stood and they patted one another's shoulders.

"You look very well, not a day over forty," Charlie said, standing
back. "Here, let me  take that." She handed him a stout canvas bag.
"Jesus! What's in here?"

"Rocks and books. You're looking pleased with life. How's the world of
architecture?"

"All right. Still looking for the perfect client." He rubbed his
stomach with his free hand and pointed across the street to Standard
Baking Company. "Croissants," he said. "A croissant a day keeps the
doctor away. Are you hungry?"

"No. Let's get on with it."

Charlie led the way to his car, an elderly red Volvo. "Rocinante,"
Margery remembered.

"As good as ever." Charlie lowered the bag into the back seat.

"Could we swing by the library? I need to return these books."

"Sure. What have you been reading?"

"Tolstoy. The Russians. Dostoyevsky, Chekhov."

"That'll get you through a long night."

"There's no one like Tolstoy," Margery said. "So serene. Cosmic and
down to earth at the same time."

"I wrote a novel once," Charlie said.

"What happened?"

"It wasn't very good." Charlie stopped by the library book drop.

"At least you finished."

He watched her slide three souls and twenty years work through the
brass slot. "There's a story I love about Chekhov," she said, getting
back into the car. "He paid a visit to Tolstoy. Late in the evening, on
his way home after a certain amount of wine, he cried out to his horse
and to the heavens: 'He says I'm worse than Shakespeare. Worse than
Shakespeare!'"

"Wonderful," Charlie said. "Chekhov--didn't he die after a last swallow
of champagne?"

"It was sad," Margery said. She turned and stared out the side window.

They drove out of town in silence. The cemetery where Margery's father
and son were buried was an hour and a half up the coast and midway down
a long peninsula. The drive had become an annual event. Margery had no
car. Charlie drove her one year and then had just continued. This was,
what, the fourth or fifth trip? He couldn't remember.

"Margery, did you see that picture of President Bush on the carrier
deck, wearing the pilot get up?"

"I did."

"Wasn't that ridiculous? The little son of a bitch went AWOL when he
was in the National Guard. I read that it delayed the troops their
homecoming by a day and cost a million dollars."

"Light comedy," Margery said. "The Emperor Commodus fancied himself a
gladiator. Romans had to watch him fight in the colosseum many times.
He never lost. His opponents were issued lead swords."

"Nothing's changed," Charlie said. "Commodus?"

"Second century, A.D. We're not a police state, yet. Things get really
crazy under one man rule. Have you not read Gibbon?"

"The Decline and Fall--never got around to it."

"Good for perspective," Margery said.

"That green!" Charlie waved at the trees along I-95. "We only get it
for a week when the leaves are coming out."

"Yes." Margery settled into her seat. Perspective was a good thing,
Charlie thought. Even keel and all that. But there was something to be
said for losing it. If he could have his choice of cuties, he'd just as
soon have one of those dark eyed Mediterranean fireballs--breasts,
slashing smile--someone who spoke with her whole body.

They arrived at the cemetery in good time. Margery declined his offer
to carry the special rocks, wanting to bring them herself.  They were
intended to protect the base of a rugosa she'd planted the previous
year. As usual, Charlie accompanied her and then returned to the car.
She would take as long as  she needed to arrange the rocks and to say
or hear or feel whatever she could.

Charlie had no children; it was hard to  imagine what she felt. Her son
had skidded on a slick road and been wiped out by a logging truck, a
stupid accident, pure bad luck. Her father had died later the same
year. Margery had been on hold since, he supposed, although he hadn't
known her when she was younger. The lines in her face seemed to have
been set early. We were all full of hope once, he thought.

 He leaned against the car and watched a man approach. The man was
carrying a shovel. He had a white handlebar moustache and a vaguely
confederate look. "Hey," Charlie said.

"Yup," the man said. He stopped and  leaned on his shovel.

"Nice day," Charlie said, after a moment.

"Yessir. Black flies ain't woke up yet."

"Don't disturb them."

"No. Jesus, no. I guess we got a couple of days yet." He tested the
ground with the shovel and looked into the cemetery. "Margery Sewell,"
he said.

"You know Margery?"

"Since she was about so high." He gestured toward his knees. "Used to
go smelting with her father, Jack."

"I'm Charlie, friend of Margery's."

"Tucker," the man said. "Tucker Smollett."

"That's an old name."

"Smolletts go way back around here. Smolletts and Sewells, both." They
stared into the graveyard. "You from around here, then?" He knew that
Charlie was from away; he was being polite.

"Live in Portland, born in New York. Family came over in the famine."

"Well, then." The world divides into people who have been hungry and
those who haven't. Charlie felt himself grandfathered into the right
camp. It was strange how some people you got along with and some you
didn't. "I'll tell you one thing," Tucker said, "there weren't nobody
smarter than Margery Sewell ever come out of here. She got prizes,
awards--some kind of thing from the governor, even. Whoever he was.
Can't recall."

Charlie nodded. "She's a professor--classics--Latin and Greek."

"It don't surprise me," Tucker said.

They talked, from time to time glancing into the graveyard. Tucker was
waiting for Margery, Charlie realized. When she appeared, she was
walking slowly. Her head was up but her attention was dragging, as
though she were pulling part of herself left behind. She was nearly to
them before she focused. "Hello, Tucker."

"Hello, Margery."

"Good to see you," she said. "It's been a while."

"Yep. Since the service, I guess." Tucker straightened. He seemed
younger.

"Tucker lived up the road from us," she said to Charlie. "He made me
the most marvelous rocking horse. I think that was the nicest present I
ever got. When William--" She swallowed. "When--I'm sorry." She turned
away. "William loved it too," she said in a low voice.

There wasn't anything to say. Margery gathered herself and turned back
to them.

Tucker cleared his throat. "I was--thinking you might come over for a
bite to eat, for old times sake." Charlie expected Margery to decline,
but something in the old man's tone had caught her attention.

"Well, that's nice of you. You have time, don't you, Charlie?"

"Plenty of time." A few years earlier, she had shown him where she
lived, not far from the cemetery. "Ride or walk?"

"Ride," Tucker said. "I'll just put this shovel in the shed."

Tucker's house was a weathered collection of gray boxes that were
settling away from each other. A reddish dog got down from a couch on
the porch and came to meet them. There was white around her muzzle.
"Company, Sally. Margery Sewall and her friend, Charlie." The dog
received Tucker's hand on her head and greeted them, sniffing each in
turn. "Sally don't see as well as she used to--do you girl?" Her tail
wagged and she led them to the house.

"You've got bees." Charlie pointed at four hives that stood on 2x4's at
the end of a narrow garden.

"Yep. Good year, last year."

"The lilacs are even bigger than I remember," Margery said.

"They keep right on going." Tucker took them through the house and
kitchen to a screened back porch. Charlie and Margery sat at a large
table while he brought bread, cheese, pickles, salami, mayonnaise,
mustard, a bowl of lettuce, and a smaller bowl of radishes. He set
plates and three glasses. "I've got beer, water, and--a little milk."

"Beer," Charlie said.

"Margery?"

"Beer."

"Three sodas coming up," Tucker said.

He and Margery reminisced. "Jack had a taste for the good stuff,"
Tucker said. "Five o'clock, regular. Never minded sharing, did Jack."
Charlie ate steadily and accepted another can of beer.

"Not bad, Tucker," he said. He had noticed a small wooden horse on a
shelf when he first entered the porch. During lunch, as Tucker and
Margery talked, his eyes kept returning to it. He got up and walked
over to the shelf. "What's this?"

"Something I made."

"Do you mind if I look at it?"

"Nope."

Charlie carried the horse back to the table. It was carved from wood,
light colored, about five inches high, galloping across a base of
wooden grasses and flowers. There was an air of health about it. It
seemed to belong where it was. "Nice," he said. "What kind of finish is
that on there?"

"Nothing much. Linseed oil, thinned some."

"Mighty nice."

"It's beautiful, Tucker."

"I made it for your mother." It was a statement of fact, but it carried
something extra, like the horse. "You probably don't remember Mesquite,
Margery."

"Mesquite--" Her face began to open.

"Must have died when you were about four or five."

"I'm remembering, now."

"Mr. Randolph brought him back for your mom--Helen," he said. "Got him
at a show down south somewhere. He was a quarter horse, Mesquite. From
Oklahoma originally, if I remember right. Damn fine horse." Tucker
tilted his glass for two swallows. "I used to take care of him once in
a while--when the family was away, you know. Well, one day Helen was
out riding and I was walking along. It was in June. The flowers was all
out. Mesquite got to cantering and I run along to keep up. Never forget
it. The flowers all different, blurring together and flowing along like
I was running through a river all different colors. And Helen sitting
up tall--she had hair just like yours, Margery, short and thick, straw
colored, went with her blue eyes." Tucker slowed down. "Well, I had to
do something. I made the horse."

"Mesquite."

"Yep."

"Why didn't you give it to her?"

"It's a long story, I guess. Took me a while to make it. Your mom took
a fancy to Jack. What with one thing and another, I went in the Navy.
When I got out, I guess you was three years old already."

"Oh, Tucker."

"How's she doing? She still in Florida where they went?"

"St. Augustine. She's down to one lung. She lives in one of
those--assisted living places, they call them. She has her own space,
but there's help if need be. She gets around on a walker." Margery
paused.

"Tucker, why do we cling so to life?"

"Guess we ain't done yet."

Margery looked at him for a long moment, and they exchanged what could
be exchanged in small smiles. Tucker went inside the house and returned
with a heavy cardboard box. "While I'm at it," he said and began taking
out carvings and putting them on the table--more horses, deer,
squirrels, birds of all kinds, a woodchuck. Charlie held up a fox and
looked at it from different angles. Its tail was full, straight out
behind him, level with his back. His ears were sharply pointed, his
head tilted slightly, all senses alert. Charlie was sure it was a he;
the fox was elegant and challenging, superior.

"Damn near alive," Charlie said. "You could make money with these."

Tucker shook his head negatively. "Only do one a year. In the winter,
not much going on." He  looked  into the back yard. "Try to get it done
on February 15th."

"Mother's birthday."

"We used to talk about them a lot--animals and birds. Walk in the
woods, talk."

"Tucker, does she know about these?"

"Nope."

"But she should see them!"

"She'd like them, you think?"

"Of course she would. They're beautiful."

"I'm not much for writing,"

"I could mail them to her if you'd like." He looked at the carvings,
rubbed his chin, and inclined his head. A _why not_ expression crossed
his face. He pulled a twenty dollar bill from a scarred black wallet.
"Tucker, for heavens sake!" He insisted that she take it.

"Ask her, if she don't mind--I might take a ride down, say hello.
Probably get a train down there." He looked at Charlie.

"Amtrak," Charlie said. "Or you could fly."

"I like trains."

They finished lunch and put the box of  carvings on the back seat of
the car. "I'll wrap tissue paper around them so they don't get banged
up. I'll mail them tomorrow," Margery said. "Tucker, thank you so much
for lunch. It was so good to see you."

"I thought I'd be seeing you again one of these days," Tucker said.

"We'll keep in touch," Margery said.

"Take care of yourself," Charlie said. "You want a ride back?"

"I'll walk."

They drove away slowly as Tucker and Sally watched. Tucker lifted one
hand in farewell.

"You just never know, do you?" Charlie said.

"Tucker Smollett," Margery said. "Good old Tucker."

Halfway back to Portland, Charlie looked over at Margery and asked
about her husband. "He cared for me," she said. "He just cared more for
someone else."

"Damn shame," Charlie said. Margery brushed the fingers of one hand
through the back of her hair. Charlie thought she was going to say
more, but she didn't. At the ferry, he helped her with the box and said
goodbye.

The next morning was again bright and sunny. Charlie returned to the
bench near the ferry and sat, savoring his coffee, croissant, and the
salty air. His brother Orson came to mind. Orson was a pain in the ass,
but he had a point--sometimes you have to make a move.

Two men wearing similar clothes--pressed jeans, T-shirts, white running
shoes, and sunglasses--walked up and took benches closer to the water.
One was older, softer, beginning to put on weight. He sat with his
elbows on his knees, looking across the harbor. The other, fitter one,
stretched full length on his bench, arms out flat behind his head, and
stared into the sky. Neither looked happy. They remained unmoving, as
though they were waiting for a delivery.

That is not the way, Charlie thought. He stood, dropped the empty bag
and cup into a trash can, and walked in the direction of  the unknown
furled inside him.





Coming To


"I made a box. It was about so big." The speaker spread his hands on
the counter. "By about so wide." He indicated the other  dimension, one
palm by his stomach, the other out by a napkin holder.

The outer hand rose over a plate of eggs. "About so high."

A smaller man at the next stool nodded, lifting his coffee mug. "About
so high."

About so high, Will repeated to himself.

"Made it for my daughter."

"For your daughter."

Made it for his daughter. Will joined the chorus. He couldn't see the
box, but he could hear it.

"Took me some shiplap--nice and dry. Made her tight. No cracks."

"No sir."

No way.

It was four o'clock in the morning. Fluorescent lights cast a bluish
glow over wooden booths, plastic covered stools, the grill, and a
double doored refrigerator. A waitress leaned against the wall by a
kitchen door and lit a cigarette.

The man's voice rose and fell. There was a question of hinging. To
hinge or not. Maybe a plain top with a handle? A hinge, but--you didn't
want the top just flopping around. "I got me some light brass chain,
put about fifteen inches on each side, inside, running to the underside
of the top. Little screw in each end. Not going to pull out _those_
hinges."

The other man shook his head.

"I sanded her up good--you know--finished it nice."

The waitress bent forward and tapped her cigarette on an ashtray hidden
behind the counter. "You want more coffee, Herbert?"

"Don't believe I will." Herbert turned to his friend. "What do you say?"

"Don't get paid for sitting."

They left and the waitress cleared their places, sweeping a tip into
her pocket. She turned toward Will. "More coffee?"

He pushed his mug forward. "Thanks." He could see the box now. It was
solid. It had a quiet glow.

"Long night?"

"Yes." It hurt to think about it. He was still disoriented. The diner
had appeared in the night like a miracle. "We all got troubles, I
guess," he said to break the silence.

"What's her name?"

"Heidi," he said, surprised. The name tore through him.

"Heidi, huh." The waitress took a drag from her cigarette. "You're a
good looking guy. She good looking?"

He could have said, not like you, but he didn't have it in him. He
nodded.

"It's hard sometimes," she said. "I don't mean to be telling you what
to do, but you might feel better if you cleaned up a little, got those
pieces of leaf or whatever out of your hair." Will reached up and felt
the back of his head.

"I slept in the woods a couple of hours."

"You look it. Your mother'd give you hell."

"Don't have a mother."

"Oh. I _am_ a nosy bitch."

"You're not a bitch," Will said. It was important to get something
right. "You're not a bitch. I was at a concert. We were."

"You and Heidi."

"And a bunch of her friends. It was at Cornell. String quartet. I had
to wear a tie."

"Guess you got rid of the tie."

"It's in the car--with the rest of the uniform. I'm in the service, the
Air Force. Only dress up clothes I had."

"My brother was in the Navy twenty years. Gets a check now, every
month."

"I won't make twenty."

"I've never been to a quartet," she said. "Cornell is big bucks."

"The music was great. Haydn. But her friends were laughing at me.
What's Heidi doing with an airman? They don't see too many airmen at
Cornell. We've been together since we were fifteen--high school."

"Oh, Jesus," the waitress said, "first time's the worst."

"She didn't say anything, but I saw it in her eyes--just like I saw she
was going to be mine when I asked her in the hallway to go roller
skating." Will shook his head. "I didn't even know _how_ to roller
skate. She looked down and then she looked up and her eyes said yes and
then she said, yes. And that was that. Five years ago."

The waitress took a last drag and stubbed out her cigarette. "You want
something to eat?"

"I don't think so."

"You sure? Piece of toast?"

"Well--toast, maybe." Heidi's friends surrounded him. Their faces were
soft and excited, sure of themselves. They wore expensive sweaters and
sports jackets. They seemed to belong to a club where everything was
taken care of.

The waitress set a plate of toast in front of him. He took one bite and
then another. "Tastes good."

"You gotta eat," she said.

"I drank a lot of beer, after. Heidi had to go back to her dorm. I was
on this path near where the car was parked, and I just lay down in the
path. When I woke up, there was a roaring and a weird light in the
trees. It was a power plant or something that fired up in the middle of
the night. I couldn't sleep, so I found the car. I just wanted to get
out of there."

"Get moving," she said. "I know it's easy to say--but it might be it's
for the best. People do go in different directions."

"Maybe," Will said. "Maybe she'll marry one of those rich guys and live
happily ever after."

The sky outside the window had turned from black to light gray.
"Getting light." He left a ten dollar bill on the counter. "Thanks for
the company."

"You stop in next time by, you hear?"

"O.K. What's your name?"

"Lee."

"O.K., Lee. I'll do that. I'm Will. Take it easy."

The car started right up, that was one good thing. He drove off,
adjusting the rear view mirror, catching a glimpse of the diner before
he went around a curve. He and Heidi had made a whole, and now she was
gone. He drove, and, as the daylight grew stronger, he thought about
the diner--that little room of light in the dark, Lee, and the man
talking about his box. That was something you could hang on to.





Guayaquil


At the sound of wooden blocks struck together, Arthur adjusted his
sitting position and emptied his mind. The echo diminished to a memory
and changed to a tree. A palm tree. Not this again. An expanse of empty
beach curved to a familiar headland. Sometimes his grandmother would
appear, coming toward him on her fitness walk, legs moving quickly,
scarcely bending at the knees, like the birds that chased and retreated
at the water's edge. She never noticed him.

This morning Penn stepped from the water and approached, his long thin
body tanned ivory brown, his eyes blue-green, clear as a cat's. Things
came easy to Penn. Arthur exhaled the past and inhaled it again. Not
that way, he told himself. No struggle. Let it float away. He
straightened and followed his breathing. Penn disappeared as casually
as he had twenty years ago.

Arthur put his cheek against the palm tree. The bark was like cloth,
raspy and flexible, wrapped around and around the heart of the tree.
Someday, years of balmy weather would be violently interrupted. This
tree, which grew in sand, would have to bend horizontal or be uprooted.

Arthur exhaled the satisfaction that attended this insight. No
attachment.

When the blocks sounded again, he stood and walked with the others
around the zendo, careful not to look at Martin for approval. He wasn't
sure why Martin was hard on him. Martin was enlightened, but wisdom
hadn't erased narrow lines in his face, resentful lines. Arthur was
respected in the scientific community, well paid. Martin had been an
insurance adjuster or something before he found his vocation. He had
shaved his head, but the cheap haircut remained.

The blocks signalled and sitting resumed, the group settling into a
shared breathing. A quiet euphoria rose and faded, replaced by an edgy
pre-verbal clarity. Kwok! Over. Arthur rejoined the world of choice and
demand. He felt that he was making progress.

"Excuse me." The elderly woman who had been directly in front of him as
they walked around the room was blocking his way. "Are you Arthur
Wells? Dr. Arthur Wells?"

"Why, yes." He raised his eyebrows modestly.

"Forgive me for intruding," she said. "My niece insisted that I ask.
She saw you last week when she picked me up. She thinks she had a
seminar with you once."

"Oh dear. I hope I wasn't difficult. What is your niece's name?"

"Pookie."

Arthur's mouth filled with the taste of anchovies.

"Pookie," he said. "Really? Your niece. Some time ago, I think." The
woman waited. "Pookie, umm--her last name?"

"Willet, now. It _was_ Kennecutt."

"Yes, of course! I remember now," Arthur said, falsely triumphant. "I
thought she had great promise." He tossed his hands. "But--life--who
knows?" He smiled acceptance.

"She married an idiot."

"Ah," Arthur said. She hadn't married Penn, at any rate.

"On the positive side, they have two wonderful children."

Only children don't get to be uncles. "Lucky Auntie," Arthur said.  "Do
give her my best. There's biology and then there's _biology_."

"Yes," she said. "Well, I must be going." Arthur watched her leave,
wishing for a drink of water. He was fifteen years older than Penn, and
Penn was a lot older than Pookie; it was absurd to be jealous. They did
make a handsome couple. At least they had the one time they'd driven by
in an old Porsche with the top down--Penn talking, his head turned to
Pookie. He was still youthful. If anyone could manage a relationship
with a big age difference it would be Penn. No doubt he worked in a
hospital or a clinic surrounded by women. I forgive myself for giving
her a B, Arthur thought. It should have been a C, but he had been
unnecessarily cold with her in class. Let it go.

He emerged from his thoughts too late. "Chop wood, carry water," Martin
said and launched into an explanation of the latest fund drive.

"Of course," Arthur said. "After the I.R.S., my gambling debts, the
Sierra Club, and Psi Upsilon, you shall have everything."

"Thank you, Arthur. We know we can count on you. You have been a great
help to the zendo."

"Chop wood, carry water," Arthur said, trying to remember where he'd
parked the Land Rover. He walked away trustingly and turned at the
corner. There it was, by the bodega near the end of the block. He
lowered the car windows and sat listening to mariachi music pouring
from the store.

 The beat was attractive, maddening. It made him want to be a part of
things, to dance in the town square. He worked hard. But. He never had
any--fun. The word caught in his throat, emerged, and hung before him
like the coast of Antarctica. He gripped the steering wheel. Mother had
been on him about that earlier. _You ought to go out and have a good
time, Arthur. Never mind those science trips._ Mother specialized in
good times. Her round of social events would drive him crazy. He was
content to see her alone at their weekly breakfast. Quite content. In
fact, meditation was helpful after breakfast with Mother. He remembered
to exhale, and he loosened his grip on the wheel.

Trumpets blared above guitars. It was a sunny day, a good day to be
outside. He started the car and drove away. When he reached the
intersection where he normally turned toward home, he steered right and
then impulsively left, veering back into the traffic going straight
ahead. Someone leaned on his horn and passed him, too close. The driver
turned his head. Arthur could see his mouth moving but couldn't hear
the words. Fucking something something something. It hadn't been that
dangerous. Amazing how people need to get angry, be righteous.

"Get a life," Arthur said. The man cut in front of him. A bumper
sticker declared: "My Kid Beat Up Your Honor Student." I could knock
him right off the road, Arthur thought. His mood brightened, and he
floored the gas pedal. "Don't mess with honor students," he said,
roaring past. He reached for the radio and found a Spanish music
station.

Gambling debts--what a laugh. He had been to two conventions in Vegas
and never gambled once. Give your money to a casino? Stupid. The flow
of traffic carried him to the edge of the city. He kept going and then
turned toward the mountains. The higher he drove, the better he felt.
He had lived entirely in California except for business trips and
visits to his father in Hawaii. His life spread out behind him, below
him, as he climbed toward Nevada. He stopped for gas, looked at the
stands of Douglas fir, and decided to spend the night in Tahoe.

He was pleased when he coasted into town. The lake was clear blue. The
streets were impersonal and commercial; he had credit cards; he knew
the rules. He signed for a room and strolled down the main street, his
small notebook and pen secure in his jacket pocket. The air was
sharper. Winter was coming, very different up here. He looked around
for a place to eat.

"Got any spare change?" The meaning of the words and the sound of the
voice were like light blows to opposite sides of his head. He turned,
disoriented. "Hey, Art," Penn said.

"Is that you, Penn?" Arthur struggled to reconcile the young man in his
mind with the man in front of him. Penn's hair was thinning. He needed
a shave.

"Indeed so. You are looking a bit crazed, Arthur. You need a drink to
acclimatize."

"I just got here." Penn seemed to know that. "I--maybe you're right.
Will you join me?"

"I could force down a single-malt."

"Lead the way. It's good to see you, Penn." They sat at the end of a
polished bar in one of the smaller casinos.

"Feels strange to sit on a bar stool," Arthur said.

"You get used to it. As an ex-doc, let me toast your health."

"Thank you. And yours." There was a moment of silence--appreciation for
the Glenlivet and a chance to think back.

"I've seen notice of you in the papers now and then," Penn said.
"Distinguished career and all that."

"Same old stuff. I untangled a couple of mysteries about smells and
flavors."

"Chip off the old block. Your father was a biologist."

"Still is," Arthur said. "Marine. He got fish; I got plants."

"Could make for conversation at a seafood place," Penn said.

"If we ate out. If we talked."

"I remember that trip we took to Hawaii. He didn't say much. Nice guy,
though, over on the windward side in--what was the name?"

"Lanikai."

"Right, Lanikai."

"So, what about you? I guess you gave up medicine."

"Yeah. It was a cruise, learning, but when I got to doing it--I don't
know--all that misery. I ducked into management. That was worse.
Boring. I chucked it for the business game, the market." He paused.
"You know how they used to say: sometimes you get the bear; sometimes
the bear gets you." He flashed the old Penn smile.

"Where are you living these days?"

"One of my buddies has a boat on the lake. He's not using it right now."

"Getting cool, isn't it?"

"Just right," Penn said, "for another couple of months." Arthur didn't
want to ask: then what?"

"Then what?" Penn said. He finished his drink. "It's O.K. to ask. I
don't know." He leaned toward Arthur. "Do me a favor, Arthur--try
saying, out loud: I don't know." Arthur hesitated. "Come on now."

"I don't know," Arthur said and found himself smiling.

"You see," Penn said. "It's not a bad state." They had another round.

"I saw you once--driving by with one of my students."

"Pookie," Penn said. "I should have gotten in touch, but I thought
you'd disapprove."

"She wasn't the brightest," Arthur said. "Attractive, though."

"Pookie could drink! Loved to swim, good dancer. How's _your_ love
life? Any little Arthurs around?"

"No."

"Me neither. I did have some step-kids for a while." Penn's expression
lifted. "That was a good thing."

"When was that?"

"Let's see--about four years ago, now."

"Where are they?"

"Oakland. Sergio, Consuela, and Esperanza. What a crew."

"And their mother?"

"Gorgeous. Constanza. I met her on a bus in Guayaquil."

"Guayaquil?"

"I was just back from the Galapagos. Remember, we talked about going
there sometime."

"Blue-footed boobys," Arthur said.

"Exactly," Penn said. "And the tortoises. Amazing! I was in the money.
I took a couple of months to go down and check out some of the places
we lived when I was a kid. My Spanish came back. Had a good time.
Anyway, I was on a city bus when Constanza got on with the kids. The
bus was full, so I gave her my seat. The kids were crawling all over
her. She had that long black hair, you know, red cheeks, bright eyes,
one of those solid bodies for the ages--we started joking around, made
a date to meet at a park the next day. Have you been there?"

"Never have."

"You can imagine--hot, steamy, crowded, flowers everywhere. We had fun,
the five of us. She turned out to be smart, full of life. She'd just
come from Quito and was trying to find work and a place to live. She
was staying with a cousin and running out of money."

"The father was in Quito?"

"Yes. A hell of a thing. He was from a family that had been there for
centuries. I guess he and Constanza got into it when they were very
young. The family allowed her to stay on one of their properties, paid
all the bills. She kept having babies. The situation changed, and she
was let go. I don't know whether the guy was tired of her or whether he
married or took a position in the family empire that wouldn't allow the
arrangement or what."

"Terrible," Arthur said.

"Constanza was sad, but she wasn't bitter. She loved him. She was from
a poor family, and she had a good life for a while--that's how she
looked at it. When she told me the story I thought, for once in your
life, be useful. I married her. In a couple of months we were all set
up in California, kids in school learning English, the whole trip."

"Incredible," Arthur said.

"It was fine for a few years. Then I got restless. The kids kept us
going, but the relationship was out of gas. I didn't know what to do. I
had cash flow problems. But I got lucky and made a good call in the
market. I figured I'd better change things while I could, so I told
Constanza that we were going to take a vacation in Quito. Took her and
the kids, and, as soon as we got there, I explained that I had to leave
the marriage. I gave her all the money I had, enough to buy her a house
and get her started. You know what she said? 'No way! We're going back
to California.' She took the money, and two weeks later she and the
kids were back in the city. She rented a place in Oakland. Still there,
I'm pretty sure."

"Are you in touch?"

"Not really. She's got a new life. It would confuse the kids. I worry
about them sometimes. Not Constanza, she's strong, good looking--she'll
do fine. But the kids--I used to take Esperanza to school on a bike,
pulled her behind me on a little cart." He looked at Arthur and shook
his head. "Maybe later on, when I get ahead a little bit."

"They're better off for what you did."

"I hope so. I guess so." He held up his glass. "Another?"

"Let's get something to eat," Arthur said. Penn pulled out his wallet.
"On me," Arthur said.

"Good man. You got something to write on?" He took a worn business card
from his wallet and copied into Arthur's notebook an address written on
the back of the card. And the names: Constanza, Sergio, Consuela, and
Esperanza. "It's a hell of a favor to ask," he said, but could you
check up on them sometime, for me." His voice dropped. "See if they
need anything?" He looked up helplessly.

"I will."

It was as close as they had come to acknowledging the bond between
them. Arthur took a deep breath. "How will I reach you?"

"I'll look you up at the university--you'll be there, adding to the
body of scientific knowledge."

"I suppose so," Arthur said. "Trying anyway."

"Good old Art, slow and steady wins the race."

They had a couple of steaks, split a Caesar salad, and drank wine while
they talked about old times and the state of the world. Penn explained
craps and convinced Arthur to try his luck. People who play with me get
the rolls, he told Arthur. They bought two hundred dollars worth of
chips. Penn insisted that Arthur place the bet, but they waited until
the dice were passed to a middle-aged blonde. "She's lucky," Penn said.

The dice skittered and rolled to a seven. Loud cheers. Arthur was forty
dollars richer. They played for nearly an hour. Arthur was instructed
to bet lightly unless Lucky was throwing. He was six hundred dollars
ahead when the food and drink and the long day began to get to him.
"Time to turn in," he told Penn.

"Where you staying?"

"Harrah's."

"How about coffee in the morning?" They arranged to meet in the café at
ten.

"Here," Arthur handed Penn his chips. "A stake."

"Right on. What do you say, Lucky, want to look around a little?" Lucky
shrugged agreeably and Penn put his arm around her shoulders. "You get
half the winnings in the morning," he said to Arthur.

"No need," Arthur said. "It's on the house."

"No, no. See you at ten." He and Lucky walked away. Penn looked back
once and smiled. Same old Penn.

The night air was clear and crisp. People on the sidewalks seemed to be
enjoying themselves. Arthur went to his room and fell asleep
immediately, but he did not sleep well. He kept waking and seeing
Penn's smile--amused, helpless, oddly gallant. He had a premonition
that he might not see him again.

In the morning, Arthur waited an hour, but Penn didn't show up. He
walked back to Harrah's and checked out. The desk clerk gave him five
casino silver dollars--"Our way of saying thank you, Sir."

Arthur stopped at a slot machine near the exit and dropped the dollars
in, pulling the long handle and waiting after each one. He looked down
the rows of machines at other gamblers with their arms in the same
position. Sometimes you win; mostly you lose. In the end you lose.
That's what Penn got from the place--that truth, underscored.

Sure, you can quit when you're ahead. But then you're out of the game;
you're not playing. That's what I've done with my life, he thought. But
he would lose too, in the end. Maybe the best strategy was to pass
along the winnings, if you had any, the way he had last night. Penn had
done that in Guayaquil--a good thing, as he'd put it--although he
hadn't finished the job. Probably wouldn't, either, the way his life
was going. Arthur felt for his notebook and Constanza's address. That
was at least something he could do, for himself and for Penn--he could
help those kids. That was something, anyway.

Bells and sirens exploded in the next aisle. Jackpot. An elderly woman
stared at flashing lights, bemused, a bit bewildered. Arthur realized
that tears were running down his face, that he was both sad and
grateful, and that it was time to leave.





Four Pictures and a Flower Thief


I have these pictures--two in fog, two in sun. Fog: a man in a deck
chair is playing a trumpet, his feet on the stern railing of a ferry.
Fog: a telephone pole seen through a windshield. Sun: a young woman on
a bicycle is climbing a cobblestoned street, blonde hair bouncing,
white blouse, solid breasts. Sun: a snake falling back to the bank of a
stream, a dragonfly in its mouth, dazzling, iridescent.

Put in a certain order, riffled through, they make a silent
movie--until sounds grow more insistent. A Jeep honks twice,
accelerating past the biker, driver and passenger turning to look. She
ignores them. She doesn't notice me watching from a doorway. I suppose
my heart leaping toward her made no sound. She was locked into my blood
and bone before I knew any words for her, her name even. The shock of
recognition left me wide-eyed and strangely blind. Nothing would be
seen for itself, only in terms of her--whether she was there or not,
how likely it was that she might appear, how _not her_ everything else.

Nantucket is ten miles long with one central town. I worked in a
restaurant on the main street. The following day I saw her stop at a
bakery/cafe which became my hangout. When she came in again, my throat
went dry and my knees shook. I don't remember what I first said to her,
but she responded to some sort of signal. She was willing for me to pay
more attention. We began to meet in the cafe.

It is hard not to put what I know now into what I knew then. I
presented what plumage I had--no money, but a small currency of
integrity. I had survived childhood by learning to please. Eventually,
I could no longer do that and I started over, was reborn at nineteen.
While I was only five, by that count, when Jamie (her name) pedaled up
the main street of Nantucket, I was uncompromised; I offered myself for
whatever waited inside that white blouse.

One wet morning, she agreed to a picnic on my next day off. I stood in
the bakery entrance and listened to water running from the roofs and
downspouts, down the sidewalk and street. It didn't matter that I would
be soaked by the time I got to my room. Nothing mattered except that we
had a date. Because we had a date--were together already, really--the
universe made sense. The rain fell equally on us all, rich kids with
Jeeps, waitresses, cooks, masons and roofers, the young and the old.
It's raining, I said to myself. The words meant more than they did
before. It's raining, I said again. All over the town.

Harry, the chef, made a mixture of spices for me. He handed me a
plastic bag and told me to shake a swordfish steak in the bag and not
to broil the fish too long. She'll never forget you, he said without
smiling. Harry cooked breakfast at the Gray Gull and lunch and dinner
at The Upper Deck, a sixteen hour day. Our relationship was respectful.
Eight hours a day was enough for me, but while I was working I did my
best. When Harry, under stress,  snapped at me, I learned to hear him
say, "Take another shrimp, Joe." Cocktail shrimp, waiting in the
cooler, out of sight from the grill. I acquired a reputation for good
humor.

I borrowed my buddy Morgan's truck on a clear evening in late July and
picked up Jamie. Madaket was her favorite beach, less known, wilder. We
drove out and made a driftwood fire, opened a bottle of wine, and
talked as the sun went down and the moon rose. We were easy with each
other by then, although we had never touched, let alone hugged or
kissed. The swordfish was a success. The moon sent its ivory path over
the wave tops, inviting and promising. Jamie told me how she liked to
swim that path and how, several times, she nearly hadn't made it back.
We were young.

I was giddy with accomplishment as we finished a second bottle of wine.
She was wearing a tight T-shirt and shorts, apparently unaware of the
effect her body had on me as she told me about her parents and her
friends on the island. She had summered on Nantucket for years. She was
in a suspended state--too heavy for ballet, too young for graduate
school. She did not want to marry an engineer and live in a suburb of
Philadelphia. She was clear about that. I offered a possible
alternative: an honest life built one stone at a time.

We put out the fire and walked along the beach. Fog blew in, softening
the lines of the horizon and dune, thickening as we reached the truck.
We drove back happily involved with each other, unconcerned with
anything else. A telephone pole appeared directly in front of me. I
whipped the steering wheel to the left and almost missed the pole. The
right headlight smashed and I was thrown against the wheel, striking it
with my shoulder and bending it nearly double. Jamie went through the
windshield. After the crash, there were only hot sounds of metal
uncrinkling and moans from Jamie. Don't let me die, she was saying over
and over.

I pulled her back on to the seat and reassured her. Her hair was bloody
and glinted with broken glass. She was half-conscious. I took her in my
arms and walked away from the wreck. We were at a tiny unmarked traffic
circle with a house nearby. Lights were on in the house. I carried
Jamie to the front door which was opened by a woman who had heard the
crash. I waited while she spread newspapers on the floor, and then I
brought Jamie inside. An ambulance came within a few minutes and took
her to the hospital. I was taken to the police station to answer
questions.

She was all right, thank God, after a few days in the hospital. Some
dental work, a small scar. I had bruises. We got off easy. Morgan's
truck was totaled. The cop was tired and made a typo on the accident
form. I paid a fine and didn't even get a mark on my out of state
license. The little traffic circle was notorious, I learned. I went
back and nailed reflectors all over the place.

Every afternoon I visited Jamie in the hospital, and we became close.
Two days after she was released and life was getting back to normal, I
took a walk during the break between lunch and dinner. Things had been
happening fast; I needed to slow down. I followed a stream through a
marshy area to a dry bank shaded by a tree where I stretched out and
listened to the sounds of birds and insects. It was hot and the sounds
began to still. A dragonfly darted back and forth above the stream.
Movement caught my eye. A snake, three feet long, was winding along the
opposite bank, unhurried, almost casual. A dark snake, unremarkable. It
struck, too fast to see. It was falling back to the ground before I
could focus, the dragonfly in its mouth. The snake caught the dragonfly
in midair without coiling. Impossible. The most athletic move I've ever
seen. It was as though the universe had stopped, allowed the snake to
strike, and then started again for everyone else.

We made plans, Jamie and I, to be together in the fall in the
mountains. I turned down a flattering offer to follow Harry to a
hunting lodge in New Hampshire and from there to Florida for the winter
season. I had a different future. Jamie was coming.

I caught the ferry to Woods Hole on a foggy morning. It was chilly; the
passengers stayed inside. I went out on deck and heard jazz coming from
the stern. A man with his feet up on a chair was playing a trumpet
pointed toward the ocean and an American flag fluttering in the fog. He
played freely, a concert for the two of us, a farewell to the island
and summer.

Jamie arrived for a day several weeks later. When I put her on the bus
to Philadelphia to go home for her stuff, life was bright. I met her
bus that weekend, but she wasn't on it. A terrible emptiness spread
through me.

We wrote to each other for a year. She did, eventually, step down from
that bus. Two weeks later I put her back on. It had all been a kind of
sexual mirage, a passion that had nothing to do with who she was. Watch
out when your throat goes dry and you begin to shake!

We each have a type--someone visually our lost other self, male or
female. I've seen a few since, always blonde, earthy and radiant at the
same time, a particular combination. But they don't affect me the same
way. I shake my head and say, there's another one.




"What happened to Jamie?" W.cat and I were sitting on a bench that
looked out toward the White Mountains.

"She married into a wealthy Boston family. She escaped Philadelphia.
Thirty-five years ago. What did we know?"

"Not much," W.cat said. "Shall we go?"

As we were walking through the West End, she pointed to a poppy that
had fallen over on the grass at the edge of a flower bed. We crossed
the lawn, and she held up the blossom while I looked around for
gardeners and German shepherds; W.cat is sometimes unable to resist
flowers. The poppy had four unusually large petals, deep lavender, each
bearing a dark, nearly black, irregular circle. It might have been a
hall of flags or a gallery of abstract sunsets, regal and empty,
waiting for its visitors. I suppose it is the fleetingness of life that
makes us story tellers and flower thieves.







***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MICHELANGELO'S SHOULDER***


******* This file should be named 11003.txt or 11003.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/0/11003


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
