Project Gutenberg's The Case of Jennie Brice, by Mary Roberts Rinehart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Case of Jennie Brice

Author: Mary Roberts Rinehart

Release Date: February 17, 2004 [EBook #11127]
[Date last updated: March 25, 2006]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF JENNIE BRICE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst and Project Gutenberg Distributed
Proofreaders







                      THE CASE _of_ JENNIE BRICE

                                _By_
                         MARY ROBERTS RINEHART


                             _Author of_
               THE MAN IN LOWER TEN, WHEN A MAN MARRIES
                      WHERE THERE'S A WILL, ETC.


                           _Illustrated by_
                           M. LEONE BRACKER



                                1913




CHAPTER I

We have just had another flood, bad enough, but only a foot or two of
water on the first floor. Yesterday we got the mud shoveled out of the
cellar and found Peter, the spaniel that Mr. Ladley left when he "went
away". The flood, and the fact that it was Mr. Ladley's dog whose body
was found half buried in the basement fruit closet, brought back to me
the strange events of the other flood five years ago, when the water
reached more than half-way to the second story, and brought with
it, to some, mystery and sudden death, and to me the worst case of
"shingles" I have ever seen.

My name is Pitman--in this narrative. It is not really Pitman, but
that does well enough. I belong to an old Pittsburgh family. I was
born on Penn Avenue, when that was the best part of town, and I lived,
until I was fifteen, very close to what is now the Pittsburgh Club. It
was a dwelling then; I have forgotten who lived there.

I was a girl in seventy-seven, during the railroad riots, and I recall
our driving in the family carriage over to one of the Allegheny hills,
and seeing the yards burning, and a great noise of shooting from
across the river. It was the next year that I ran away from school to
marry Mr. Pitman, and I have not known my family since. We were never
reconciled, although I came back to Pittsburgh after twenty years of
wandering. Mr. Pitman was dead; the old city called me, and I came. I
had a hundred dollars or so, and I took a house in lower Allegheny,
where, because they are partly inundated every spring, rents are
cheap, and I kept boarders. My house was always orderly and clean,
and although the neighborhood had a bad name, a good many theatrical
people stopped with me. Five minutes across the bridge, and they were
in the theater district. Allegheny at that time, I believe, was
still an independent city. But since then it has allied itself with
Pittsburgh; it is now the North Side.

I was glad to get back. I worked hard, but I made my rent and my
living, and a little over. Now and then on summer evenings I went to
one of the parks, and sitting on a bench, watched the children playing
around, and looked at my sister's house, closed for the summer. It is
a very large house: her butler once had his wife boarding with me--a
nice little woman.

It is curious to recall that, at that time, five years ago, I had
never seen my niece, Lida Harvey, and then to think that only the day
before yesterday she came in her automobile as far as she dared, and
then sat there, waving to me, while the police patrol brought across
in a skiff a basket of provisions she had sent me.

I wonder what she would have thought had she known that the elderly
woman in a calico wrapper with an old overcoat over it, and a pair of
rubber boots, was her full aunt!

The flood and the sight of Lida both brought back the case of Jennie
Brice. For even then, Lida and Mr. Howell were interested in each
other.

This is April. The flood of 1907 was earlier, in March. It had been a
long hard winter, with ice gorges in all the upper valley. Then, in
early March, there came a thaw. The gorges broke up and began to come
down, filling the rivers with crushing grinding ice.

There are three rivers at Pittsburgh, the Allegheny and the
Monongahela uniting there at the Point to form the Ohio. And all three
were covered with broken ice, logs, and all sorts of debris from the
upper valleys.

A warning was sent out from the weather bureau, and I got my carpets
ready to lift that morning. That was on the fourth of March, a Sunday.
Mr. Ladley and his wife, Jennie Brice, had the parlor bedroom and the
room behind it. Mrs. Ladley, or Miss Brice, as she preferred to be
known, had a small part at a local theater that kept a permanent
company. Her husband was in that business, too, but he had nothing to
do. It was the wife who paid the bills, and a lot of quarreling they
did about it.

I knocked at the door at ten o'clock, and Mr. Ladley opened it. He
was a short man, rather stout and getting bald, and he always had a
cigarette. Even yet, the parlor carpet smells of them.

"What do you want?" he asked sharply, holding the door open about an
inch.

"The water's coming up very fast, Mr. Ladley," I said. "It's up to the
swinging-shelf in the cellar now. I'd like to take up the carpet and
move the piano."

"Come back in an hour or so," he snapped, and tried to close the door.
But I had got my toe in the crack.

"I'll have to have the piano moved, Mr. Ladley," I said. "You'd better
put off what you are doing."

I thought he was probably writing. He spent most of the day writing,
using the wash-stand as a desk, and it kept me busy with oxalic acid
taking ink-spots out of the splasher and the towels. He was writing a
play, and talked a lot about the Shuberts having promised to star him
in it when it was finished.

"Hell!" he said, and turning, spoke to somebody in the room.

"We can go into the back room," I heard him say, and he closed the
door. When he opened it again, the room was empty. I called in Terry,
the Irishman who does odd jobs for me now and then, and we both got to
work at the tacks in the carpet, Terry working by the window, and I by
the door into the back parlor, which the Ladleys used as a bedroom.

That was how I happened to hear what I afterward told the police.

Some one--a man, but not Mr. Ladley--was talking. Mrs. Ladley broke
in: "I won't do it!" she said flatly. "Why should I help him? He
doesn't help me. He loafs here all day, smoking and sleeping, and sits
up all night, drinking and keeping me awake."

The voice went on again, as if in reply to this, and I heard a rattle
of glasses, as if they were pouring drinks. They always had whisky,
even when they were behind with their board.

"That's all very well," Mrs. Ladley said. I could always hear her, she
having a theatrical sort of voice--one that carries. "But what about
the prying she-devil that runs the house?"

"Hush, for God's sake!" broke in Mr. Ladley, and after that they spoke
in whispers. Even with my ear against the panel, I could not catch a
word.

The men came just then to move the piano, and by the time we had taken
it and the furniture up-stairs, the water was over the kitchen floor,
and creeping forward into the hall. I had never seen the river come up
so fast. By noon the yard was full of floating ice, and at three that
afternoon the police skiff was on the front street, and I was wading
around in rubber boots, taking the pictures off the walls.

I was too busy to see who the Ladleys' visitor was, and he had gone
when I remembered him again. The Ladleys took the second-story front,
which was empty, and Mr. Reynolds, who was in the silk department in a
store across the river, had the room just behind.

I put up a coal stove in a back room next the bathroom, and managed to
cook the dinner there. I was washing up the dishes when Mr. Reynolds
came in. As it was Sunday, he was in his slippers and had the colored
supplement of a morning paper in his hand.

"What's the matter with the Ladleys?" he asked. "I can't read for
their quarreling."

"Booze, probably," I said. "When you've lived in the flood district as
long as I have, Mr. Reynolds, you'll know that the rising of the river
is a signal for every man in the vicinity to stop work and get full.
The fuller the river, the fuller the male population."

"Then this flood will likely make 'em drink themselves to death!" he
said. "It's a lulu."

"It's the neighborhood's annual debauch. The women are busy keeping
the babies from getting drowned in the cellars, or they'd get full,
too. I hope, since it's come this far, it will come farther, so the
landlord will have to paper the parlor."

That was at three o'clock. At four Mr. Ladley went down the stairs,
and I heard him getting into a skiff in the lower hall. There were
boats going back and forth all the time, carrying crowds of curious
people, and taking the flood sufferers to the corner grocery, where
they were lowering groceries in a basket on a rope from an upper
window.

I had been making tea when I heard Mr. Ladley go out. I fixed a tray
with a cup of it and some crackers, and took it to their door. I had
never liked Mrs. Ladley, but it was chilly in the house with the gas
shut off and the lower floor full of ice-water. And it is hard enough
to keep boarders in the flood district.

She did not answer to my knock, so I opened the door and went in.
She was at the window, looking after him, and the brown valise, that
figured in the case later, was opened on the floor. Over the foot of
the bed was the black and white dress, with the red collar.

When I spoke to her, she turned around quickly. She was a tall woman,
about twenty-eight, with very white teeth and yellow hair, which she
parted a little to one side and drew down over her ears. She had a
sullen face and large well-shaped hands, with her nails long and very
pointed.

"The 'she-devil' has brought you some tea," I said. "Where shall she
put it?"

"'She-devil'!" she repeated, raising her eyebrows. "It's a very
thoughtful she-devil. Who called you that?"

But, with the sight of the valise and the fear that they might be
leaving, I thought it best not to quarrel. She had left the window,
and going to her dressing-table, had picked up her nail-file.

"Never mind," I said. "I hope you are not going away. These floods
don't last, and they're a benefit. Plenty of the people around here
rely on 'em every year to wash out their cellars."

"No, I'm not going away," she replied lazily. "I'm taking that dress
to Miss Hope at the theater. She is going to wear it in _Charlie's
Aunt_ next week. She hasn't half enough of a wardrobe to play leads in
stock. Look at this thumb-nail, broken to the quick!"

If I had only looked to see which thumb it was! But I was putting the
tea-tray on the wash-stand, and moving Mr. Ladley's papers to find
room for it. Peter, the spaniel, begged for a lump of sugar, and I
gave it to him.

"Where is Mr. Ladley?" I asked.

"Gone out to see the river."

"I hope he'll be careful. There's a drowning or two every year in
these floods."

"Then I hope he won't," she said calmly. "Do you know what I was doing
when you came in? I was looking after his boat, and hoping it had a
hole in it."

"You won't feel that way to-morrow, Mrs. Ladley," I protested,
shocked. "You're just nervous and put out. Most men have their ugly
times. Many a time I wished Mr. Pitman was gone--until he went. Then
I'd have given a good bit to have him back again."

She was standing in front of the dresser, fixing her hair over her
ears. She turned and looked at me over her shoulder.

"Probably Mr. Pitman was a man," she said. "My husband is a fiend, a
devil."

Well, a good many women have said that to me at different times. But
just let me say such a thing to _them_, or repeat their own words
to them the next day, and they would fly at me in a fury. So I said
nothing, and put the cream into her tea.

I never saw her again.




CHAPTER II

There is not much sleeping done in the flood district during a spring
flood. The gas was shut off, and I gave Mr. Reynolds and the Ladleys
each a lamp. I sat in the back room that I had made into a temporary
kitchen, with a candle, and with a bedquilt around my shoulders. The
water rose fast in the lower hall, but by midnight, at the seventh
step, it stopped rising and stood still. I always have a skiff during
the flood season, and as the water rose, I tied it to one spindle of
the staircase after another.

I made myself a cup of tea, and at one o'clock I stretched out on a
sofa for a few hours' sleep. I think I had been sleeping only an hour
or so, when some one touched me on the shoulder and I started up. It
was Mr. Reynolds, partly dressed.

"Some one has been in the house, Mrs. Pitman," he said. "They went
away just now in the boat."

"Perhaps it was Peter," I suggested. "That dog is always wandering
around at night."

"Not unless Peter can row a boat," said Mr. Reynolds dryly.

I got up, being already fully dressed, and taking the candle, we went
to the staircase. I noticed that it was a minute or so after two
o'clock as we left the room. The boat was gone, not untied, but cut
loose. The end of the rope was still fastened to the stair-rail. I sat
down on the stairs and looked at Mr. Reynolds.

"It's gone!" I said. "If the house catches fire, we'll have to drown."

"It's rather curious, when you consider it." We both spoke softly, not
to disturb the Ladleys. "I've been awake, and I heard no boat come
in. And yet, if no one came in a boat, and came from the street, they
would have had to swim in."

I felt queer and creepy. The street door was open, of course, and the
lights going beyond. It gave me a strange feeling to sit there in
the darkness on the stairs, with the arch of the front door like the
entrance to a cavern, and see now and then a chunk of ice slide into
view, turn around in the eddy, and pass on. It was bitter cold, too,
and the wind was rising.

"I'll go through the house," said Mr. Reynolds. "There's likely
nothing worse the matter than some drunken mill-hand on a vacation
while the mills are under water. But I'd better look."

He left me, and I sat there alone in the darkness. I had a
presentiment of something wrong, but I tried to think it was only
discomfort and the cold. The water, driven in by the wind, swirled at
my feet. And something dark floated in and lodged on the step below. I
reached down and touched it. It was a dead kitten. I had never known a
dead cat to bring me anything but bad luck, and here was one washed in
at my very feet.

Mr. Reynolds came back soon, and reported the house quiet and in
order.

"But I found Peter shut up in one of the third-floor rooms," he said.
"Did you put him there?"

I had not, and said so; but as the dog went everywhere, and the door
might have blown shut, we did not attach much importance to that at
the time.

Well, the skiff was gone, and there was no use worrying about it until
morning. I went back to the sofa to keep warm, but I left my candle
lighted and my door open. I did not sleep: the dead cat was on my
mind, and, as if it were not bad enough to have it washed in at my
feet, about four in the morning Peter, prowling uneasily, discovered
it and brought it in and put it on my couch, wet and stiff, poor
little thing!

I looked at the clock. It was a quarter after four, and except for
the occasional crunch of one ice-cake hitting another in the yard,
everything was quiet. And then I heard the stealthy sound of oars in
the lower hall.

I am not a brave woman. I lay there, hoping Mr. Reynolds would hear
and open his door. But he was sleeping soundly. Peter snarled and ran
out into the hall, and the next moment I heard Mr. Ladley speaking.
"Down, Peter," he said. "Down. Go and lie down."

I took my candle and went out into the hall. Mr. Ladley was stooping
over the boat, trying to tie it to the staircase. The rope was short,
having been cut, and he was having trouble. Perhaps it was the
candle-light, but he looked ghost-white and haggard.

"I borrowed your boat, Mrs. Pitman," he said, civilly enough. "Mrs.
Ladley was not well, and I--I went to the drug store."

"You've been more than two hours going to the drug store," I said.

He muttered something about not finding any open at first, and went
into his room. He closed and locked the door behind him, and although
Peter whined and scratched, he did not let him in.

He looked so agitated that I thought I had been harsh, and that
perhaps she was really ill. I knocked at the door, and asked if I
could do anything. But he only called "No" curtly through the door,
and asked me to take that infernal dog away.

I went back to bed and tried to sleep, for the water had dropped an
inch or so on the stairs, and I knew the danger was over. Peter came,
shivering, at dawn, and got on to the sofa with me. I put an end of
the quilt over him, and he stopped shivering after a time and went to
sleep.

The dog was company. I lay there, wide awake, thinking about Mr.
Pitman's death, and how I had come, by degrees, to be keeping a cheap
boarding-house in the flood district, and to having to take impudence
from everybody who chose to rent a room from me, and to being called
a she-devil. From that I got to thinking again about the Ladleys, and
how she had said he was a fiend, and to doubting about his having gone
out for medicine for her. I dozed off again at daylight, and being
worn out, I slept heavily.

At seven o'clock Mr. Reynolds came to the door, dressed for the store.
He was a tall man of about fifty, neat and orderly in his habits, and
he always remembered that I had seen better days, and treated me as a
lady.

"Never mind about breakfast for me this morning, Mrs. Pitman," he
said. "I'll get a cup of coffee at the other end of the bridge. I'll
take the boat and send it back with Terry."

He turned and went along the hall and down to the boat. I heard him
push off from the stairs with an oar and row out into the street.
Peter followed him to the stairs.

At a quarter after seven Mr. Ladley came out and called to me: "Just
bring in a cup of coffee and some toast," he said. "Enough for one."

He went back and slammed his door, and I made his coffee. I steeped a
cup of tea for Mrs. Ladley at the same time. He opened the door just
wide enough for the tray, and took it without so much as a "thank
you." He had a cigarette in his mouth as usual, and I could see a fire
in the grate and smell something like scorching cloth.

"I hope Mrs. Ladley is better," I said, getting my foot in the crack
of the door, so he could not quite close it. It smelled to me as if he
had accidentally set fire to something with his cigarette, and I tried
to see into the room.

"What about Mrs. Ladley?" he snapped.

"You said she was ill last night."

"Oh, yes! Well, she wasn't very sick. She's better."

"Shall I bring her some tea?"

"Take your foot away!" he ordered. "No. She doesn't want tea. She's
not here."

"Not here!"

"Good heavens!" he snarled. "Is her going away anything to make such
a fuss about? The Lord knows I'd be glad to get out of this infernal
pig-wallow myself."

"If you mean my house--" I began.

But he had pulled himself together and was more polite when he
answered. "I mean the neighborhood. Your house is all that could be
desired for the money. If we do not have linen sheets and double
cream, we are paying muslin and milk prices."

Either my nose was growing accustomed to the odor, or it was dying
away: I took my foot away from the door. "When did Mrs. Ladley leave?"
I asked.

"This morning, very early. I rowed her to Federal Street."

"You couldn't have had much sleep," I said dryly. For he looked
horrible. There were lines around his eyes, which were red, and his
lips looked dry and cracked.

"She's not in the piece this week at the theater," he said, licking
his lips and looking past me, not at me. "She'll be back by Saturday."

I did not believe him. I do not think he imagined that I did. He shut
the door in my face, and it caught poor Peter by the nose. The dog ran
off howling, but although Mr. Ladley had been as fond of the animal as
it was in his nature to be fond of anything, he paid no attention.
As I started down the hall after him, I saw what Peter had been
carrying--a slipper of Mrs. Ladley's. It was soaked with water;
evidently Peter had found it floating at the foot of the stairs.

Although the idea of murder had not entered my head at that time, the
slipper gave me a turn. I picked it up and looked at it--a black one
with a beaded toe, short in the vamp and high-heeled, the sort most
actresses wear. Then I went back and knocked at the door of the front
room again.

"What the devil do you want now?" he called from beyond the door.

"Here's a slipper of Mrs. Ladley's," I said. "Peter found it floating
in the lower hall."

He opened the door wide, and let me in. The room was in tolerable
order, much better than when Mrs. Ladley was about. He looked at the
slipper, but he did not touch it. "I don't think that is hers," he
said.

"I've seen her wear it a hundred times."

"Well, she'll never wear it again." And then, seeing me stare, he
added: "It's ruined with the water. Throw it out. And, by the way, I'm
sorry, but I set fire to one of the pillow-slips--dropped asleep, and
my cigarette did the rest. Just put it on the bill."

He pointed to the bed. One of the pillows had no slip, and the ticking
cover had a scorch or two on it. I went over and looked at it.

"The pillow will have to be paid for, too, Mr. Ladley," I said. "And
there's a sign nailed on the door that forbids smoking in bed. If you
are going to set fire to things, I shall have to charge extra."

"Really!" he jeered, looking at me with his cold fishy eyes. "Is there
any sign on the door saying that boarders are charged extra for seven
feet of filthy river in the bedrooms?"

I was never a match for him, and I make it a principle never to bandy
words with my boarders. I took the pillow and the slipper and went
out. The telephone was ringing on the stair landing. It was the
theater, asking for Miss Brice.

"She has gone away," I said.

"What do you mean? Moved away?"

"Gone for a few days' vacation," I replied. "She isn't playing this
week, is she?"

"Wait a moment," said the voice. There was a hum of conversation from
the other end, and then another man came to the telephone.

"Can you find out where Miss Brice has gone?"

"I'll see."

I went to Ladley's door and knocked. Mr. Ladley answered from just
beyond.

"The theater is asking where Mrs. Ladley is."

"Tell them I don't know," he snarled, and shut the door. I took his
message to the telephone.

Whoever it was swore and hung up the receiver.

All the morning I was uneasy--I hardly knew why. Peter felt it as I
did. There was no sound from the Ladleys' room, and the house was
quiet, except for the lapping water on the stairs and the police
patrol going back and forth.

At eleven o'clock a boy in the neighborhood, paddling on a raft, fell
into the water and was drowned. I watched the police boat go past,
carrying his little cold body, and after that I was good for nothing.
I went and sat with Peter on the stairs. The dog's conduct had been
strange all morning. He had sat just above the water, looking at it
and whimpering. Perhaps he was expecting another kitten or--

It is hard to say how ideas first enter one's mind. But the notion
that Mr. Ladley had killed his wife and thrown her body into the water
came to me as I sat there. All at once I seemed to see it all:
the quarreling the day before, the night trip in the boat, the
water-soaked slipper, his haggard face that morning--even the way the
spaniel sat and stared at the flood.

Terry brought the boat back at half past eleven, towing it behind
another.

"Well," I said, from the stairs, "I hope you've had a pleasant
morning."

"What doing?" he asked, not looking at me.

"Rowing about the streets. You've had that boat for hours."

He tied it up without a word to me, but he spoke to the dog. "Good
morning, Peter," he said. "It's nice weather--for fishes, ain't it?"

He picked out a bit of floating wood from the water, and showing it to
the dog, flung it into the parlor. Peter went after it with a splash.
He was pretty fat, and when he came back I heard him wheezing. But
what he brought back was not the stick of wood. It was the knife I
use for cutting bread. It had been on a shelf in the room where I had
slept the night before, and now Peter brought it out of the flood
where its wooden handle had kept it afloat. The blade was broken off
short.

It is not unusual to find one's household goods floating around during
flood-time. More than once I've lost a chair or two, and seen it after
the water had gone down, new scrubbed and painted, in Molly Maguire's
kitchen next door. And perhaps now and then a bit of luck would come
to me--a dog kennel or a chicken-house, or a kitchen table, or even,
as happened once, a month-old baby in a wooden cradle, that lodged
against my back fence, and had come forty miles, as it turned out,
with no worse mishap than a cold in its head.

But the knife was different. I had put it on the mantel over the stove
I was using up-stairs the night before, and hadn't touched it since.
As I sat staring at it, Terry took it from Peter and handed it to me.

"Better give me a penny, Mrs. Pitman," he said in his impudent Irish
way. "I hate to give you a knife. It may cut our friendship."

I reached over to hit him a clout on the head, but I did not. The
sunlight was coming in through the window at the top of the stairs,
and shining on the rope that was tied to the banister. The end of the
rope was covered with stains, brown, with a glint of red in them.

I got up shivering. "You can get the meat at the butcher's, Terry," I
said, "and come back for me in a half-hour." Then I turned and went
up-stairs, weak in the knees, to put on my hat and coat. I had made up
my mind that there had been murder done.




CHAPTER III

I looked at my clock as I went down-stairs. It was just twelve-thirty.
I thought of telephoning for Mr. Reynolds to meet me, but it was his
lunch hour, and besides I was afraid to telephone from the house while
Mr. Ladley was in it.

Peter had been whining again. When I came down the stairs he had
stopped whimpering and was wagging his tail. A strange boat had put
into the hallway and was coming back.

"Now, old boy!" somebody was saying from the boat. "Steady, old chap!
I've got something for you."

A little man, elderly and alert, was standing up in the boat, poling
it along with an oar. Peter gave vent to joyful yelps. The elderly
gentleman brought his boat to a stop at the foot of the stairs, and
reaching down into a tub at his feet, held up a large piece of raw
liver. Peter almost went crazy, and I remembered suddenly that I had
forgotten to feed the poor beast for more than a day.

"Would you like it?" asked the gentleman. Peter sat up, as he had been
taught to do, and barked. The gentleman reached down again, got a
wooden platter from a stack of them at his feet, and placing the
liver on it, put it on the step. The whole thing was so neat and
businesslike that I could only gaze.

"That's a well-trained dog, madam," said the elderly gentleman,
beaming at Peter over his glasses. "You should not have neglected
him."

"The flood put him out of my mind," I explained, humbly enough, for I
was ashamed.

"Exactly. Do you know how many starving dogs and cats I have found
this morning?" He took a note-book out of his pocket and glanced at
it. "Forty-eight. Forty-eight, madam! And ninety-three cats! I have
found them marooned in trees, clinging to fences, floating on barrels,
and I have found them in comfortable houses where there was no excuse
for their neglect. Well, I must be moving on. I have the report of a
cat with a new litter in the loft of a stable near here."

He wiped his hands carefully on a fresh paper napkin, of which also
a heap rested on one of the seats of the boat, and picked up an oar,
smiling benevolently at Peter. Then, suddenly, he bent over and looked
at the stained rope end, tied to the stair-rail.

"What's that?" he said.

"That's what I'm going to find out," I replied. I glanced up at the
Ladleys' door, but it was closed.

The little man dropped his oar, and fumbling in his pockets, pulled
out a small magnifying-glass. He bent over, holding to the rail, and
inspected the stains with the glass. I had taken a fancy to him at
once, and in spite of my excitement I had to smile a little.

"Humph!" he said, and looked up at me. "That's blood. Why did you
_cut_ the boat loose?"

"I didn't," I said. "If that is blood, I want to know how it got
there. That was a new rope last night." I glanced at the Ladleys' door
again, and he followed my eyes.

"I wonder," he said, raising his voice a little, "if I come into your
kitchen, if you will allow me to fry a little of that liver. There's a
wretched Maltese in a tree at the corner of Fourth Street that won't
touch it, raw."

I saw that he wanted to talk to me, so I turned around and led the way
to the temporary kitchen I had made.

"Now," he said briskly, when he had closed the door, "there's
something wrong here. Perhaps if you tell me, I can help. If I can't,
it will do you good to talk about it. My name's Holcombe, retired
merchant. Apply to First National Bank for references."

"I'm not sure there _is_ anything wrong," I began. "I guess I'm only
nervous, and thinking little things are big ones. There's nothing to
tell."

"Nonsense. I come down the street in my boat. A white-faced gentleman
with a cigarette looks out from a window when I stop at the door, and
ducks back when I glance up. I come in and find a pet dog, obviously
overfed at ordinary times, whining with hunger on the stairs. As
I prepare to feed him, a pale woman comes down, trying to put a
right-hand glove on her left hand, and with her jacket wrong side out.
What am I to think?"

I started and looked at my coat. He was right. And when, as I tried to
take it off, he helped me, and even patted me on the shoulder--what
with his kindness, and the long morning alone, worrying, and the
sleepless night, I began to cry. He had a clean handkerchief in my
hand before I had time to think of one.

"That's it," he said. "It will do you good, only don't make a noise
about it. If it's a husband on the annual flood spree, don't worry,
madam. They always come around in time to whitewash the cellars."

"It isn't a husband," I sniffled.

"Tell me about it," he said. There was something so kindly in his
face, and it was so long since I had had a bit of human sympathy, that
I almost broke down again.

I sat there, with a crowd of children paddling on a raft outside the
window, and Molly Maguire, next door, hauling the morning's milk up in
a pail fastened to a rope, her doorway being too narrow to admit the
milkman's boat, and I told him the whole story.

"Humph!" he exclaimed, when I had finished. "It's curious, but--you
can't prove a murder unless you can produce a body."

"When the river goes down, we'll find the body," I said, shivering.
"It's in the parlor."

"Then why doesn't he try to get away?"

"He is ready to go now. He only went back when your boat came in."

Mr. Holcombe ran to the door, and flinging it open, peered into the
lower hall. He was too late. His boat was gone, tub of liver, pile of
wooden platters and all!

We hurried to the room the Ladleys had occupied. It was empty. From
the window, as we looked out, we could see the boat, almost a square
away. It had stopped where, the street being higher, a door-step rose
above the flood. On the step was sitting a forlorn yellow puppy. As
we stared, Mr. Ladley stopped the boat, looked back at us, bent over,
placed a piece of liver on a platter, and reached it over to the dog.
Then, rising in the boat, he bowed, with his hat over his heart, in
our direction, sat down calmly, and rowed around the corner out of
sight.

Mr. Holcombe was in a frenzy of rage. He jumped up and down, shaking
his fist out the window after the retreating boat. He ran down the
staircase, only to come back and look out the window again. The police
boat was not in sight, but the Maguire children had worked their raft
around to the street and were under the window. He leaned out and
called to them.

"A quarter each, boys," he said, "if you'll take me on that raft to
the nearest pavement."

"Money first," said the oldest boy, holding his cap.

But Mr. Holcombe did not wait. He swung out over the window-sill,
holding by his hands, and lit fairly in the center of the raft.

"Don't touch anything in that room until I come back," he called to
me, and jerking the pole from one of the boys, propelled the raft with
amazing speed down the street.

The liver on the stove was burning. There was a smell of scorching
through the rooms and a sort of bluish haze of smoke. I hurried back
and took it off. By the time I had cleaned the pan, Mr. Holcombe was
back again, in his own boat. He had found it at the end of the next
street, where the flood ceased, but no sign of Ladley anywhere. He had
not seen the police boat.

"Perhaps that is just as well," he said philosophically. "We can't go
to the police with a wet slipper and a blood-stained rope and accuse a
man of murder. We have to have a body."

"He killed her," I said obstinately. "She told me yesterday he was a
fiend. He killed her and threw the body in the water."

"Very likely. But he didn't throw it here."

But in spite of that, he went over all the lower hall with his boat,
feeling every foot of the floor with an oar, and finally, at the back
end, he looked up at me as I stood on the stairs.

"There's something here," he said.

I went cold all over, and had to clutch the railing. But when Terry
had come, and the two of them brought the thing to the surface, it was
only the dining-room rug, which I had rolled up and forgotten to carry
up-stairs!

At half past one Mr. Holcombe wrote a note, and sent it off with
Terry, and borrowing my boots, which had been Mr. Pitman's,
investigated the dining-room and kitchen from a floating plank; the
doors were too narrow to admit the boat. But he found nothing more
important than a rolling-pin. He was not at all depressed by his
failure. He came back, drenched to the skin, about three, and asked
permission to search the Ladleys' bedroom.

"I have a friend coming pretty soon, Mrs. Pitman," he said, "a young
newspaper man, named Howell. He's a nice boy, and if there is anything
to this, I'd like him to have it for his paper. He and I have been
having some arguments about circumstantial evidence, too, and I know
he'd like to work on this."

I gave him a pair of Mr. Pitman's socks, for his own were saturated,
and while he was changing them the telephone rang. It was the theater
again, asking for Jennie Brice.

"You are certain she is out of the city?" some one asked, the same
voice as in the morning.

"Her husband says so."

"Ask him to come to the phone."

"He is not here."

"When do you expect him back?"

"I'm not sure he is coming back."

"Look here," said the voice angrily, "can't you give me any
satisfaction? Or don't you care to?"

"I've told you all I know."

"You don't know where she is?"

"No, sir."

"She didn't say she was coming back to rehearse for next week's
piece?"

"Her husband said she went away for a few days' rest. He went away
about noon and hasn't come back. That's all I know, except that they
owe me three weeks' rent that I'd like to get hold of."

The owner of the voice hung up the receiver with a snap, and left me
pondering. It seemed to me that Mr. Ladley had been very reckless. Did
he expect any one to believe that Jennie Brice had gone for a vacation
without notifying the theater? Especially when she was to rehearse
that week? I thought it curious, to say the least. I went back and
told Mr. Holcombe, who put it down in his note-book, and together we
went to the Ladleys' room.

The room was in better order than usual, as I have said. The bed was
made--which was out of the ordinary, for Jennie Brice never made a
bed--but made the way a man makes one, with the blankets wrinkled and
crooked beneath, and the white counterpane pulled smoothly over the
top, showing every lump beneath. I showed Mr. Holcombe the splasher,
dotted with ink as usual.

"I'll take it off and soak it in milk," I said. "It's his fountain
pen; when the ink doesn't run, he shakes it, and--"

"Where's the clock?" said Mr. Holcombe, stopping in front of the
mantel with his note-book in his hand.

"The clock?"

I turned and looked. My onyx clock was gone from the mantel-shelf.

Perhaps it seems strange, but from the moment I missed that clock my
rage at Mr. Ladley increased to a fury. It was all I had had left of
my former gentility. When times were hard and I got behind with the
rent, as happened now and then, more than once I'd been tempted to
sell the clock, or to pawn it. But I had never done it. Its ticking
had kept me company on many a lonely night, and its elegance had
helped me to keep my pride and to retain the respect of my neighbors.
For in the flood district onyx clocks are not plentiful. Mrs. Bryan,
the saloon-keeper's wife, had one, and I had another. That is, I _had_
had.

I stood staring at the mark in the dust of the mantel-shelf, which Mr.
Holcombe was measuring with a pocket tape-measure.

"You are sure you didn't take it away yourself, Mrs. Pitman?" he
asked.

"Sure? Why, I could hardly lift it," I said.

He was looking carefully at the oblong of dust where the clock had
stood. "The key is gone, too," he said, busily making entries in his
note-book. "What was the maker's name?"

"Why, I don't think I ever noticed."

He turned to me angrily. "Why didn't you notice?" he snapped. "Good
God, woman, do you only use your eyes to cry with? How can you wind a
clock, time after time, and not know the maker's name? It proves my
contention: the average witness is totally unreliable."

"Not at all," I snapped, "I am ordinarily both accurate and
observing."

"Indeed!" he said, putting his hands behind him. "Then perhaps you can
tell me the color of the pencil I have been writing with."

"Certainly. Red." Most pencils are red, and I thought this was safe.

But he held his right hand out with a flourish. "I've been writing
with a fountain pen," he said in deep disgust, and turned his back on
me.

But the next moment he had run to the wash-stand and pulled it out
from the wall. Behind it, where it had fallen, lay a towel, covered
with stains, as if some one had wiped bloody hands on it. He held it
up, his face working with excitement. I could only cover my eyes.

"This looks better," he said, and began making a quick search of the
room, running from one piece of furniture to another, pulling out
bureau drawers, drawing the bed out from the wall, and crawling along
the base-board with a lighted match in his hand. He gave a shout of
triumph finally, and reappeared from behind the bed with the broken
end of my knife in his hand.

"Very clumsy," he said. "_Very_ clumsy. Peter the dog could have done
better."

I had been examining the wall-paper about the wash-stand. Among the
ink-spots were one or two reddish ones that made me shiver. And seeing
a scrap of note-paper stuck between the base-board and the wall, I
dug it out with a hairpin, and threw it into the grate, to be burned
later. It was by the merest chance there was no fire there. The next
moment Mr. Holcombe was on his knees by the fireplace reaching for the
scrap.

"_Never_ do that, under such circumstances," he snapped, fishing among
the ashes. "You might throw away valuable--Hello, Howell!"

I turned and saw a young man in the doorway, smiling, his hat in his
hand. Even at that first glance, I liked Mr. Howell, and later, when
every one was against him, and many curious things were developing, I
stood by him through everything, and even helped him to the thing he
wanted more than anything else in the, world. But that, of course, was
later.

"What's the trouble, Holcombe?" he asked. "Hitting the trail again?"

"A very curious thing that I just happened on," said Mr. Holcombe.
"Mrs. Pitman, this is Mr. Howell, of whom I spoke. Sit down, Howell,
and let me read you something."

With the crumpled paper still unopened in his hand, Mr. Holcombe took
his note-book and read aloud what he had written. I have it before me
now:

"'Dog meat, two dollars, boat hire'--that's not it. Here. 'Yesterday,
Sunday, March the 4th, Mrs. Pitman, landlady at 42 Union Street, heard
two of her boarders quarreling, a man and his wife. Man's name, Philip
Ladley. Wife's name, Jennie Ladley, known as Jennie Brice at the
Liberty Stock Company, where she has been playing small parts.'"

Mr. Howell nodded. "I've heard of her," he said. "Not much of an
actress, I believe."

"'The husband was also an actor, out of work, and employing his
leisure time in writing a play.'"

"Everybody's doing it," said Mr. Howell idly.

"The Shuberts were to star him in this," I put in. "He said that the
climax at the end of the second act--"

Mr. Holcombe shut his note-book with a snap. "After we have finished
gossiping," he said, "I'll go on."

"'Employing his leisure time in writing a play--'" quoted Mr. Howell.

"Exactly. 'The husband and wife were not on good terms. They quarreled
frequently. On Sunday they fought all day, and Mrs. Ladley told Mrs.
Pitman she was married to a fiend. At four o'clock Sunday afternoon,
Philip Ladley went out, returning about five. Mrs. Pitman carried
their supper to them at six, and both ate heartily. She did not see
Mrs. Ladley at the time, but heard her in the next room. They were
apparently reconciled: Mrs. Pitman reports Mr. Ladley in high good
humor. If the quarrel recommenced during the night, the other boarder,
named Reynolds, in the next room, heard nothing. Mrs. Pitman was up
and down until one o'clock, when she dozed off. She heard no unusual
sound.

"'At approximately two o'clock in the morning, however, this Reynolds
came to the room, and said he had heard some one in a boat in the
lower hall. He and Mrs. Pitman investigated. The boat which Mrs.
Pitman uses during a flood, and which she had tied to the stair-rail,
was gone, having been cut loose, not untied. Everything else was
quiet, except that Mrs. Ladley's dog had been shut in a third-story
room.

"'At a quarter after four that morning Mrs. Pitman, thoroughly awake,
heard the boat returning, and going to the stairs, met Ladley coming
in. He muttered something about having gone for medicine for his wife
and went to his room, shutting the dog out. This is worth attention,
for the dog ordinarily slept in their room.'"

"What sort of a dog?" asked Mr. Howell. He had been listening
attentively.

"A water-spaniel. 'The rest of the night, or early morning, was quiet.
At a quarter after seven, Ladley asked for coffee and toast for one,
and on Mrs. Pitman remarking this, said that his wife was not playing
this week, and had gone for a few days' vacation, having left early in
the morning.' Remember, during the night he had been out for medicine
for her. Now she was able to travel, and, in fact, had started."

Mr. Howell was frowning at the floor. "If he was doing anything wrong,
he was doing it very badly," he said.

"This is where I entered the case," said Mr. Holcombe, "I rowed into
the lower hall this morning, to feed the dog, Peter, who was whining
on the staircase. Mrs. Pitman was coming down, pale and agitated over
the fact that the dog, shortly before, had found floating in the
parlor down-stairs a slipper belonging to Mrs. Ladley, and, later, a
knife with a broken blade. She maintains that she had the knife last
night up-stairs, that it was not broken, and that it was taken from a
shelf in her room while she dozed. The question is, then: Why was the
knife taken? Who took it? And why? Has this man made away with his
wife, or has he not?"

Mr. Howell looked at me and smiled. "Mr. Holcombe and I are old
enemies," he said. "Mr. Holcombe believes that circumstantial evidence
may probably hang a man; I do not." And to Mr. Holcombe: "So, having
found a wet slipper and a broken knife, you are prepared for murder
and sudden death!"

"I have more evidence," Mr. Holcombe said eagerly, and proceeded to
tell what we had found in the room. Mr. Howell listened, smiling to
himself, but at the mention of the onyx clock he got up and went to
the mantel.

"By Jove!" he said, and stood looking at the mark in the dust. "Are
you sure the clock was here yesterday?"

"I wound it night before last, and put the key underneath. Yesterday,
before they moved up, I wound it again."

"The key is gone also. Well, what of it, Holcombe? Did he brain her
with the clock? Or choke her with the key?"

Mr. Holcombe was looking at his note-book. "To summarize," he said,
"we have here as clues indicating a crime, the rope, the broken knife,
the slipper, the towel, and the clock. Besides, this scrap of paper
may contain some information." He opened it and sat gazing at it in
his palm. Then, "Is this Ladley's writing?" he asked me in a curious
voice.

"Yes."

I glanced at the slip. Mr. Holcombe had just read from his note-book:
"Rope, knife, slipper, towel, clock."

The slip I had found behind the wash-stand said "Rope, knife, shoe,
towel. Horn--" The rest of the last word was torn off.

Mr. Howell was staring at the mantel. "Clock!" he repeated.




CHAPTER IV

It was after four when Mr. Holcombe had finished going over the room.
I offered to make both the gentlemen some tea, for Mr. Pitman had been
an Englishman, and I had got into the habit of having a cup in the
afternoon, with a cracker or a bit of bread. But they refused. Mr.
Howell said he had promised to meet a lady, and to bring her through
the flooded district in a boat. He shook hands with me, and smiled at
Mr. Holcombe.

"You will have to restrain his enthusiasm, Mrs. Pitman," he said. "He
is a bloodhound on the scent. If his baying gets on your nerves, just
send for me." He went down the stairs and stepped into the boat.
"Remember, Holcombe," he called, "every well-constituted murder has
two things: a motive and a corpse. You haven't either, only a mass of
piffling details--"

"If everybody waited until he saw flames, instead of relying on the
testimony of the smoke," Mr. Holcombe snapped, "what would the fire
loss be?"

Mr. Howell poled his boat to the front door, and sitting down,
prepared to row out.

"You are warned, Mrs. Pitman," he called to me. "If he doesn't find a
body to fit the clues, he's quite capable of making one to fill the
demand."

"Horn--" said Mr. Holcombe, looking at the slip again. "The tail of
the 'n' is torn off--evidently only part of a word. Hornet, Horning,
Horner--Mrs. Pitman, will you go with me to the police station?"

I was more than anxious to go. In fact, I could not bear the idea of
staying alone in the house, with heaven only knows what concealed
in the depths of that muddy flood. I got on my wraps again, and Mr.
Holcombe rowed me out. Peter plunged into the water to follow, and had
to be sent back. He sat on the lower step and whined. Mr. Holcombe
threw him another piece of liver, but he did not touch it.

We rowed to the corner of Robinson Street and Federal--it was before
Federal Street was raised above the flood level--and left the boat in
charge of a boy there. And we walked to the police station. On the way
Mr. Holcombe questioned me closely about the events of the morning,
and I recalled the incident of the burned pillow-slip. He made a note
of it at once, and grew very thoughtful.

He left me, however, at the police station. "I'd rather not appear in
this, Mrs. Pitman," he said apologetically, "and I think better along
my own lines. Not that I have anything against the police; they've
done some splendid work. But this case takes imagination, and the
police department deals with facts. We have no facts yet. What we
need, of course, is to have the man detained until we are sure of our
case."

He lifted his hat and turned away, and I went slowly up the steps to
the police station. Living, as I had, in a neighborhood where the
police, like the poor, are always with us, and where the visits of
the patrol wagon are one of those familiar sights that no amount
of repetition enabled any of us to treat with contempt, I was
uncomfortable until I remembered that my grandfather had been one of
the first mayors of the city, and that, if the patrol had been at my
house more than once, the entire neighborhood would testify that my
boarders were usually orderly.

At the door some one touched me on the arm. It was Mr. Holcombe again.

"I have been thinking it over," he said, "and I believe you'd better
not mention the piece of paper that you found behind the wash-stand.
They might say the whole thing is a hoax."

"Very well," I agreed, and went in.

The police sergeant in charge knew me at once, having stopped at my
house more than once in flood-time for a cup of hot coffee.

"Sit down, Mrs. Pitman," he said. "I suppose you are still making the
best coffee and doughnuts in the city of Allegheny? Well, what's the
trouble in your district? Want an injunction against the river for
trespass?"

"The river has brought me a good bit of trouble," I said. "I'm--I'm
worried, Mr. Sergeant. I think a woman from my house has been
murdered, but I don't know."

"Murdered," he said, and drew up his chair. "Tell me about it."

I told him everything, while he sat back with his eyes half closed,
and his fingers beating a tattoo on the arm of his chair.

When I finished he got up and went into an inner room. He came back in
a moment.

"I want you to come in and tell that to the chief," he said, and led
the way.

All told, I repeated my story three times that afternoon, to the
sergeant, to the chief of police, and the third time to both the
others and two detectives.

The second time the chief made notes of what I said.

"Know this man Ladley?" he asked the others. None of them did, but
they all knew of Jennie Brice, and some of them had seen her in the
theater.

"Get the theater, Tom," the chief said to one of the detectives.

Luckily, what he learned over the telephone from the theater
corroborated my story. Jennie Brice was not in the cast that week, but
should have reported that morning (Monday) to rehearse the next week's
piece. No message had been received from her, and a substitute had
been put in her place.

The chief hung up the receiver and turned to me. "You are sure about
the clock, Mrs. Pitman?" he asked. "It was there when they moved
up-stairs to the room?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are certain you will not find it on the parlor mantel when the
water goes down?"

"The mantels are uncovered now. It is not there."

"You think Ladley has gone for good?"

"Yes, sir."

"He'd be a fool to try to run away, unless--Graves, you'd better get
hold of the fellow, and keep him until either the woman is found or a
body. The river is falling. In a couple of days we will know if she is
around the premises anywhere."

Before I left, I described Jennie Brice for them carefully. Asked what
she probably wore, if she had gone away as her husband said, I had no
idea; she had a lot of clothes, and dressed a good bit. But I recalled
that I had seen, lying on the bed, the black and white dress with the
red collar, and they took that down, as well as the brown valise.

The chief rose and opened the door for me himself. "If she actually
left town at the time you mention," he said, "she ought not to be hard
to find. There are not many trains before seven in the morning, and
most of them are locals."

"And--and if she did not, if he--do you think she is in the
house--or--or--the cellar?"

"Not unless Ladley is more of a fool than I think he is," he said,
smiling. "Personally, I believe she has gone away, as he says she did.
But if she hasn't--He probably took the body with him when he said he
was getting medicine, and dropped it in the current somewhere. But we
must go slow with all this. There's no use shouting 'wolf' yet."

"But--the towel?"

"He may have cut himself, shaving. It _has_ been done."

"And the knife?"

He shrugged his shoulders good-naturedly.

"I've seen a perfectly good knife spoiled opening a bottle of
pickles."

"But the slippers? And the clock?"

"My good woman, enough shoes and slippers are forgotten in the bottoms
of cupboards year after year in flood-time, and are found floating
around the streets, to make all the old-clothesmen in town happy. I
have seen almost everything floating about, during one of these annual
floods."

"I dare say you never saw an onyx clock floating around," I replied a
little sharply. I had no sense of humor that day. He stopped smiling
at once, and stood tugging at his mustache.

"No," he admitted. "An onyx clock sinks, that's true. That's a very
nice little point, that onyx clock. He may be trying to sell it, or
perhaps--" He did not finish.

I went back immediately, only stopping at the market to get meat for
Mr. Reynolds' supper. It was after half past five and dusk was coming
on. I got a boat and was rowed directly home. Peter was not at the
foot of the steps. I paid the boatman and let him go, and turned to go
up the stairs. Some one was speaking in the hall above.

I have read somewhere that no two voices are exactly alike, just as no
two violins ever produce precisely the same sound. I think it is what
they call the timbre that is different. I have, for instance, never
heard a voice like Mr. Pitman's, although Mr. Harry Lauder's in a
phonograph resembles it. And voices have always done for me what odors
do for some people, revived forgotten scenes and old memories. But the
memory that the voice at the head of the stairs brought back was not
very old, although I had forgotten it. I seemed to hear again, all at
once, the lapping of the water Sunday morning as it began to come in
over the door-sill; the sound of Terry ripping up the parlor carpet,
and Mrs. Ladley calling me a she-devil in the next room, in reply to
this very voice.

But when I got to the top of the stairs, it was only Mr. Howell, who
had brought his visitor to the flood district, and on getting her
splashed with the muddy water, had taken her to my house for a towel
and a cake of soap.

I lighted the lamp in the hall, and Mr. Howell introduced the girl.
She was a pretty girl, slim and young, and she had taken her wetting
good-naturedly.

"I know we are intruders, Mrs. Pitman," she said, holding out her
hand. "Especially now, when you are in trouble."

"I have told Miss Harvey a little," Mr. Howell said, "and I promised
to show her Peter, but he is not here."

I think I had known it was my sister's child from the moment I lighted
the lamp. There was something of Alma in her, not Alma's hardness or
haughtiness, but Alma's dark blue eyes with black lashes, and Alma's
nose. Alma was always the beauty of the family. What with the day's
excitement, and seeing Alma's child like this, in my house, I felt
things going round and clutched at the stair-rail. Mr. Howell caught
me.

"Why, Mrs. Pitman!" he said. "What's the matter?"

I got myself in hand in a moment and smiled at the girl.

"Nothing at all," I said. "Indigestion, most likely. Too much tea the
last day or two, and not enough solid food. I've been too anxious to
eat."

Lida--for she was that to me at once, although I had never seen her
before--Lida was all sympathy and sweetness. She actually asked me to
go with her to a restaurant and have a real dinner. I could imagine
Alma, had she known! But I excused myself.

"I have to cook something for Mr. Reynolds," I said, "and I'm better
now, anyhow, thank you. Mr. Howell, may I speak to you for a moment?"

He followed me along the back hall, which was dusk.

"I have remembered something that I had forgotten, Mr. Howell," I
said. "On Sunday morning, the Ladleys had a visitor."

"Yes?"

"They had very few visitors."

"I see."

"I did not see him, but--I heard his voice." Mr. Howell did not move,
but I fancied he drew his breath in quickly. "It sounded--it was not
by any chance _you_?"

"I? A newspaper man, who goes to bed at three A.M. on Sunday morning,
up and about at ten!"

"I didn't say what time it was," I said sharply.

But at that moment Lida called from the front hall.

"I think I hear Peter," she said. "He is shut in somewhere, whining."

We went forward at once. She was right. Peter was scratching at the
door of Mr. Ladley's room, although I had left the door closed and
Peter in the hall. I let him out, and he crawled to me on three legs,
whimpering. Mr. Howell bent over him and felt the fourth.

"Poor little beast!" he said. "His leg is broken!"

He made a splint for the dog, and with Lida helping, they put him to
bed in a clothes-basket in my up-stairs kitchen. It was easy to see
how things lay with Mr. Howell. He was all eyes for her: he made
excuses to touch her hand or her arm--little caressing touches
that made her color heighten. And with it all, there was a sort of
hopelessness in his manner, as if he knew how far the girl was out of
his reach. Knowing Alma and her pride, I knew better than they how
hopeless it was.

I was not so sure about Lida. I wondered if she was in love with the
boy, or only in love with love. She was very young, as I had been. God
help her, if, like me, she sacrificed everything, to discover, too
late, that she was only in love with love!




CHAPTER V

Mr. Reynolds did not come home to dinner after all. The water had got
into the basement at the store, he telephoned, one of the flood-gates
in a sewer having leaked, and they were moving some of the departments
to an upper floor. I had expected to have him in the house that
evening, and now I was left alone again.

But, as it happened, I was not alone. Mr. Graves, one of the city
detectives, came at half past six, and went carefully over the
Ladleys' room. I showed him the towel and the slipper and the
broken knife, and where we had found the knife-blade. He was very
non-committal, and left in a half-hour, taking the articles with him
in a newspaper.

At seven the door-bell rang. I went down as far as I could on the
staircase, and I saw a boat outside the door, with the boatman and a
woman in it. I called to them to bring the boat back along the hall,
and I had a queer feeling that it might be Mrs. Ladley, and that I'd
been making a fool of myself all day for nothing. But it was not Mrs.
Ladley.

"Is this number forty-two?" asked the woman, as the boat came back.

"Yes."

"Does Mr. Ladley live here?"

"Yes. But he is not here now."

"Are you Mrs. Pittock?"

"Pitman, yes."

The boat bumped against the stairs, and the woman got out. She was as
tall as Mrs. Ladley, and when I saw her in the light from the upper
hall, I knew her instantly. It was Temple Hope, the leading woman from
the Liberty Theater.

"I would like to talk to you, Mrs. Pitman," she said. "Where can we
go?"

I led the way back to my room, and when she had followed me in, she
turned and shut the door.

"Now then," she said without any preliminary, "where is Jennie Brice?"

"I don't know, Miss Hope," I answered.

We looked at each other for a minute, and each of us saw what the
other suspected.

"He has killed her!" she exclaimed. "She was afraid he would do it,
and--he has."

"Killed her and thrown her into the river," I said. "That's what I
think, and he'll go free at that. It seems there isn't any murder when
there isn't any corpse."

"Nonsense! If he has done that, the river will give her up,
eventually."

"The river doesn't always give them up," I retorted. "Not in
flood-time, anyhow. Or when they are found it is months later, and you
can't prove anything."

She had only a little time, being due at the theater soon, but she sat
down and told me the story she told afterward on the stand:

She had known Jennie Brice for years, they having been together in the
chorus as long before as _Nadjy_.

"She was married then to a fellow on the vaudeville circuit," Miss
Hope said. "He left her about that time, and she took up with Ladley.
I don't think they were ever married."

"What!" I said, jumping to my feet, "and they came to a respectable
house like this! There's never been a breath of scandal about this
house, Miss Hope, and if this comes out I'm ruined."

"Well, perhaps they were married," she said. "Anyhow, they were always
quarreling. And when he wasn't playing, it was worse. She used to come
to my hotel, and cry her eyes out."

"I knew you were friends," I said. "Almost the last thing she said to
me was about the black and white dress of hers you were to borrow for
the piece this week."

"Black and white dress! I borrow one of Jennie Brice's dresses!"
exclaimed Miss Hope. "I should think not. I have plenty of my own."

That puzzled me; for she had said it, that was sure. And then I
remembered that I had not seen the dress in the room that day, and I
went in to look for it. It was gone. I came back and told Miss Hope.

"A black and white dress! Did it have a red collar?" she asked.

"Yes."

"Then I remember it. She wore a small black hat with a red quill with
that dress. You might look for the hat."

She followed me back to the room and stood in the doorway while I
searched. The hat was gone, too.

"Perhaps, after all, he's telling the truth," she said thoughtfully.
"Her fur coat isn't in the closet, is it?"

_It_ was gone. It is strange that, all day, I had never thought of
looking over her clothes and seeing what was missing. I hadn't known
all she had, of course, but I had seen her all winter in her fur
coat and admired it. It was a striped fur, brown and gray, and very
unusual. But with the coat missing, and a dress and hat gone, it began
to look as if I had been making a fool of myself, and stirring up a
tempest in a teacup. Miss Hope was as puzzled as I was.

"Anyhow, if he didn't kill her," she said, "it isn't because he did
not want to. Only last week she had hysterics in my dressing-room,
and said he had threatened to poison her. It was all Mr. Bronson, the
business manager, and I could do to quiet her."

She looked at her watch, and exclaimed that she was late, and would
have to hurry. I saw her down to her boat. The river had been falling
rapidly for the last hour or two, and I heard the boat scrape as it
went over the door-sill. I did not know whether to be glad that the
water was going down and I could live like a Christian again, or to be
sorry, for fear of what we might find in the mud that was always left.

Peter was lying where I had put him, on a folded blanket laid in a
clothes-basket. I went back to him, and sat down beside the basket.

"Peter!" I said. "Poor old Peter! Who did this to you? Who hurt you?"
He looked at me and whined, as if he wanted to tell me, if only he
could.

"Was it Mr. Ladley?" I asked, and the poor thing cowered close to his
bed and shivered. I wondered if it had been he, and, if it had, why he
had come back. Perhaps he had remembered the towel. Perhaps he would
come again and spend the night there. I was like Peter: I cowered and
shivered at the very thought.

At nine o'clock I heard a boat at the door. It had stuck there, and
its occupant was scolding furiously at the boatman. Soon after I heard
splashing, and I knew that whoever it was was wading back to the
stairs through the foot and a half or so of water still in the hall. I
ran back to my room and locked myself in, and then stood, armed with
the stove-lid-lifter, in case it should be Ladley and he should break
the door in.

The steps came up the stairs, and Peter barked furiously. It seemed to
me that this was to be my end, killed like a rat in a trap and thrown
out the window, to float, like my kitchen chair, into Mollie Maguire's
kitchen, or to be found lying in the ooze of the yard after the river
had gone down.

The steps hesitated at the top of the stairs, and turned back along
the hall. Peter redoubled his noise; he never barked for Mr. Reynolds
or the Ladleys. I stood still, hardly able to breathe. The door was
thin, and the lock loose: one good blow, and--

The door-knob turned, and I screamed. I recall that the light turned
black, and that is all I _do_ remember, until I came to, a half-hour
later, and saw Mr. Holcombe stooping over me. The door, with the lock
broken, was standing open. I tried to move, and then I saw that my
feet were propped up on the edge of Peter's basket.

"Better leave them up." Mr. Holcombe said. "It sends the blood back to
the head. Half the damfool people in the world stick a pillow under a
fainting woman's shoulders. How are you now?"

"All right," I said feebly. "I thought you were Mr. Ladley."

He helped me up, and I sat in a chair and tried to keep my lips from
shaking. And then I saw that Mr. Holcombe had brought a suit case with
him, and had set it inside the door.

"Ladley is safe, until he gets bail, anyhow," he said. "They picked
him up as he was boarding a Pennsylvania train bound east."

"For murder?" I asked.

"As a suspicious character," he replied grimly. "That does as well
as anything for a time." He sat down opposite me, and looked at me
intently.

"Mrs. Pitman," he said, "did you ever hear the story of the horse that
wandered out of a village and could not be found?"

I shook my head.

"Well, the best wit of the village failed to locate the horse. But one
day the village idiot walked into town, leading the missing animal by
the bridle. When they asked him how he had done it, he said: 'Well,
I just thought what I'd do if I was a horse, and then I went and did
it.'"

"I see," I said, humoring him.

"You _don't_ see. Now, what are we trying to do?"

"We're trying to find a body. Do you intend to become a corpse?"

He leaned over and tapped on the table between us. "We are trying to
prove a crime. I intend for the time to be the criminal."

He looked so curious, bent forward and glaring at me from under his
bushy eyebrows, with his shoes on his knee--for he had taken them off
to wade to the stairs--and his trousers rolled to his knees, that I
wondered if he was entirely sane. But Mr. Holcombe, eccentric as he
might be, was sane enough.

"Not _really_ a criminal!"

"As really as lies in me. Listen, Mrs. Pitman. I want to put myself
in Ladley's place for a day or two, live as he lived, do what he did,
even think as he thought, if I can. I am going to sleep in his room
to-night, with your permission."

I could not see any reason for objecting, although I thought it silly
and useless. I led the way to the front room, Mr. Holcombe following
with his shoes and suit case. I lighted a lamp, and he stood looking
around him.

"I see you have been here since we left this afternoon," he said.

"Twice," I replied. "First with Mr. Graves, and later--"

The words died on my tongue. Some one had been in the room since my
last visit there.

"He has been here!" I gasped. "I left the room in tolerable order.
Look at it!"

"When were you here last?"

"At seven-thirty, or thereabouts."

"Where were you between seven-thirty and eight-thirty?"

"In the kitchen with Peter." I told him then about the dog, and about
finding him shut in the room.

The wash-stand was pulled out. The sheets of Mr. Ladley's manuscript,
usually an orderly pile, were half on the floor. The bed coverings had
been jerked off and flung over the back of a chair.

Peter, imprisoned, _might_ have moved the wash-stand and upset the
manuscript--Peter had never put the bed-clothing over the chair, or
broken his own leg.

"Humph!" he said, and getting out his note-book, he made an exact
memorandum of what I had told him, and of the condition of the room.
That done, he turned to me.

"Mrs. Pitman," he said, "I'll thank you to call me Mr. Ladley for the
next day or so. I am an actor out of employment, forty-one years of
age, short, stout, and bald, married to a woman I would like to be
quit of, and I am writing myself a play in which the Shuberts intend
to star me, or in which I intend the Shuberts to star me."

"Very well, Mr. Ladley," I said, trying to enter into the spirit of
the thing, and, God knows, seeing no humor in it. "Then you'll like
your soda from the ice-box?"

"Soda? For what?"

"For your whisky and soda, before you go to bed, sir."

"Oh, certainly, yes. Bring the soda. And--just a moment, Mrs. Pitman:
Mr. Holcombe is a total abstainer, and has always been so. It is
Ladley, not Holcombe, who takes this abominable stuff."

I said I quite understood, but that Mr. Ladley could skip a night, if
he so wished. But the little gentleman would not hear to it, and when
I brought the soda, poured himself a double portion. He stood looking
at it, with his face screwed up, as if the very odor revolted him.

"The chances are," he said, "that Ladley--that I--having a nasty piece
of work to do during the night, would--will take a larger drink than
usual." He raised the glass, only to put it down. "Don't forget," he
said, "to put a large knife where you left the one last night. I'm
sorry the water has gone down, but I shall imagine it still at the
seventh step. Good night, Mrs. Pitman."

"Good night, Mr. Ladley," I said, smiling, "and remember, you are
three weeks in arrears with your board."

His eyes twinkled through his spectacles. "I shall imagine it paid,"
he said.

I went out, and I heard him close the door behind me. Then, through
the door, I heard a great sputtering and coughing, and I knew he had
got the whisky down somehow. I put the knife out, as he had asked me
to, and went to bed. I was ready to drop. Not even the knowledge that
an imaginary Mr. Ladley was about to commit an imaginary crime in the
house that night could keep me awake.

Mr. Reynolds came in at eleven o'clock. I was roused when he banged
his door. That was all I knew until morning. The sun on my face
wakened me. Peter, in his basket, lifted his head as I moved, and
thumped his tail against his pillow in greeting. I put on a wrapper,
and called Mr. Reynolds by knocking at his door. Then I went on to the
front room. The door was closed, and some one beyond was groaning. My
heart stood still, and then raced on. I opened the door and looked in.

Mr. Holcombe was on the bed, fully dressed. He had a wet towel tied
around his head, and his face looked swollen and puffy. He opened one
eye and looked at me.

"What a night!" he groaned.

"What happened! What did you find?"

He groaned again. "Find!" he said. "Nothing, except that there was
something wrong with that whisky. It poisoned me. I haven't been out
of the house!"

So for that day, at least, Mr. Ladley became Mr. Holcombe again,
and as such accepted ice in quantities, a mustard plaster over his
stomach, and considerable nursing. By evening he was better, but
although he clearly intended to stay on, he said nothing about
changing his identity again, and I was glad enough. The very name of
Ladley was horrible to me.

The river went down almost entirely that day, although there was still
considerable water in the cellars. It takes time to get rid of that.
The lower floors showed nothing suspicious. The papers were ruined, of
course, the doors warped and sprung, and the floors coated with mud
and debris. Terry came in the afternoon, and together we hung the
dining-room rug out to dry in the sun.

As I was coming in, I looked over at the Maguire yard. Molly Maguire
was there, and all her children around her, gaping. Molly was hanging
out to dry a sodden fur coat, that had once been striped, brown and
gray.

I went over after breakfast and claimed the coat as belonging to Mrs.
Ladley. But she refused to give it up. There is a sort of unwritten
law concerning the salvage of flood articles, and I had to leave the
coat, as I had my kitchen chair. But it was Mrs. Ladley's, beyond a
doubt.

I shuddered when I thought how it had probably got into the water.
And yet it was curious, too, for if she had had it on, how did it get
loose to go floating around Molly Maguire's yard? And if she had not
worn it, how did it get in the water?




CHAPTER VI

The newspapers were full of the Ladley case, with its curious solution
and many surprises. It was considered unique in many ways. Mr. Pitman
had always read all the murder trials, and used to talk about the
_corpus delicti_ and writs of _habeas corpus_--_corpus_ being the
legal way, I believe, of spelling corpse. But I came out of the Ladley
trial--for it came to trial ultimately--with only one point of law
that I was sure of: that was, that it is mighty hard to prove a man a
murderer unless you can show what he killed.

And that was the weakness in the Ladley case. There was a body, but it
could not be identified.

The police held Mr. Ladley for a day or two, and then, nothing
appearing, they let him go. Mr. Holcombe, who was still occupying the
second floor front, almost wept with rage and despair when he read the
news in the papers. He was still working on the case, in his curious
way, wandering along the wharves at night, and writing letters all
over the country to learn about Philip Ladley's previous life, and his
wife's. But he did not seem to get anywhere.

The newspapers had been full of the Jennie Brice disappearance. For
disappearance it proved to be. So far as could be learned, she had not
left the city that night, or since, and as she was a striking-looking
woman, very blond, as I have said, with a full voice and a languid
manner, she could hardly have taken refuge anywhere without being
discovered. The morning after her disappearance a young woman, tall
like Jennie Brice and fair, had been seen in the Union Station. But
as she was accompanied by a young man, who bought her magazines and
papers, and bade her an excited farewell, sending his love to various
members of a family, and promising to feed the canary, this was not
seriously considered. A sort of general alarm went over the country.
When she was younger she had been pretty well known at the Broadway
theaters in New York. One way or another, the Liberty Theater got
a lot of free advertising from the case, and I believe Miss Hope's
salary was raised.

The police communicated with Jennie Brice's people--she had a sister
in Olean, New York, but she had not heard from her. The sister
wrote--I heard later--that Jennie had been unhappy with Philip Ladley,
and afraid he would kill her. And Miss Hope told the same story.
But--there was no _corpus_, as the lawyers say, and finally the police
had to free Mr. Ladley.

Beyond making an attempt to get bail, and failing, he had done
nothing. Asked about his wife, he merely shrugged his shoulders
and said she had left him, and would turn up all right. He was
unconcerned: smoked cigarettes all day, ate and slept well, and looked
better since he had had nothing to drink. And two or three days after
the arrest, he sent for the manuscript of his play.

Mr. Howell came for it on the Thursday of that week.

I was on my knees scrubbing the parlor floor, when he rang the bell. I
let him in, and it seemed to me that he looked tired and pale.

"Well, Mrs. Pitman," he said, smiling, "what did you find in the
cellar when the water went down?"

"I'm glad to say that I didn't find what I feared, Mr. Howell."

"Not even the onyx clock?"

"Not even the clock," I replied. "And I feel as if I'd lost a friend.
A clock is a lot of company."

"Do you know what I think?" he said, looking at me closely. "I
think you put that clock away yourself, in the excitement, and have
forgotten all about it."

"Nonsense."

"Think hard." He was very much in earnest. "You knew the water was
rising and the Ladleys would have to be moved up to the second floor
front, where the clock stood. You went in there and looked around to
see if the room was ready, and you saw the clock. And knowing that the
Ladleys quarreled now and then, and were apt to throw things--"

"Nothing but a soap-dish, and that only once."

"--you took the clock to the attic and put it, say, in an old trunk."

"I did nothing of the sort. I went in, as you say, and I put up an old
splasher, because of the way he throws ink about. Then I wound the
clock, put the key under it, and went out."

"And the key is gone, too!" he said thoughtfully. "I wish I could find
that clock, Mrs. Pitman."

"So do I."

"Ladley went out Sunday afternoon about three, didn't he--and got back
at five?"

I turned and looked at him. "Yes, Mr. Howell," I said. "Perhaps _you_
know something about that."

"I?" He changed color. Twenty years of dunning boarders has made me
pretty sharp at reading faces, and he looked as uncomfortable as if he
owed me money. "I!" I knew then that I had been right about the voice.
It had been his.

"You!" I retorted. "You were here Sunday morning and spent some time
with the Ladleys. I am the old she-devil. I notice you didn't tell
your friend, Mr. Holcombe, about having been here on Sunday."

He was quick to recover. "I'll tell you all about it, Mrs. Pitman,"
he said smilingly. "You see, all my life, I have wished for an onyx
clock. It has been my ambition, my _Great Desire_. Leaving the house
that Sunday morning, and hearing the ticking of the clock up-stairs, I
recognized that it was an _onyx_ clock, clambered from my boat through
an upper window, and so reached it. The clock showed fight, but after
stunning it with a chair--"

"Exactly!" I said. "Then the thing Mrs. Ladley said she would not do
was probably to wind the clock?"

He dropped his bantering manner at once. "Mrs. Pitman," he said, "I
don't know what you heard or did not hear. But I want you to give me
a little time before you tell anybody that I was here that Sunday
morning. And, in return, I'll find your clock."

I hesitated, but however put out he was, he didn't look like a
criminal. Besides, he was a friend of my niece's, and blood is thicker
even than flood-water.

"There was nothing wrong about my being here," he went on, "but--I
don't want it known. Don't spoil a good story, Mrs. Pitman."

I did not quite understand that, although those who followed the trial
carefully may do so. Poor Mr. Howell! I am sure he believed that it
was only a good story. He got the description of my onyx clock and
wrote it down, and I gave him the manuscript for Mr. Ladley. That was
the last I saw of him for some time.

That Thursday proved to be an exciting day. For late in the afternoon
Terry, digging the mud out of the cellar, came across my missing gray
false front near the coal vault, and brought it up, grinning. And just
before six, Mr. Graves, the detective, rang the bell and then let
himself in. I found him in the lower hall, looking around.

"Well, Mrs. Pitman," he said, "has our friend come back yet?"

"She was no friend of mine."

"Not _she_. Ladley. He'll be out this evening, and he'll probably be
around for his clothes."

I felt my knees waver, as they always did when he was spoken of.

"He may want to stay here," said Mr. Graves. "In fact, I think that's
just what he _will_ want."

"Not here," I protested. "The very thought of him makes me quake."

"If he comes here, better take him in. I want to know where he is."

I tried to say that I wouldn't have him, but the old habit of the ward
asserted itself. From taking a bottle of beer or a slice of pie,
to telling one where one might or might not live, the police were
autocrats in that neighborhood. And, respectable woman that I am, my
neighbors' fears of the front office have infected me.

"All right, Mr. Graves," I said.

He pushed the parlor door open and looked in, whistling. "This is the
place, isn't it?"

"Yes. But it was up-stairs that he--"

"I see. Tall woman, Mrs. Ladley?"

"Tall and blond. Very airy in her manner."

He nodded and still stood looking in and whistling. "Never heard her
speak of a town named Horner, did you?"

"Horner? No."

"I see." He turned and wandered out again into the hall, still
whistling. At the door, however, he stopped and turned. "Look anything
like this?" he asked, and held out one of his hands, with a small
kodak picture on the palm.

It was a snap-shot of a children's frolic in a village street, with
some onlookers in the background. Around one of the heads had been
drawn a circle in pencil. I took it to the gas-jet and looked at it
closely. It was a tall woman with a hat on, not unlike Jennie Brice.
She was looking over the crowd, and I could see only her face, and
that in shadow. I shook my head.

"I thought not," he said. "We have a lot of stage pictures of her, but
what with false hair and their being retouched beyond recognition,
they don't amount to much." He started out, and stopped on the
door-step to light a cigar.

"Take him on if he comes," he said. "And keep your eyes open. Feed him
well, and he won't kill you!"

I had plenty to think of when I was cooking Mr. Reynolds' supper: the
chance that I might have Mr. Ladley again, and the woman at Horner.
For it had come to me like a flash, as Mr. Graves left, that the
"Horn--" on the paper slip might have been "Horner."




CHAPTER VII

After all, there was nothing sensational about Mr. Ladley's return. He
came at eight o'clock that night, fresh-shaved and with his hair cut,
and, although he had a latch-key, he rang the door-bell. I knew his
ring, and I thought it no harm to carry an old razor of Mr. Pitman's
with the blade open and folded back on the handle, the way the colored
people use them, in my left hand.

But I saw at once that he meant no mischief.

"Good evening," he said, and put out his hand. I jumped back, until I
saw there was nothing in it and that he only meant to shake hands. I
didn't do it; I might have to take him in, and make his bed, and cook
his meals, but I did not have to shake hands with him.

"You, too!" he said, looking at me with what I suppose he meant to be
a reproachful look. But he could no more put an expression of that
sort in his eyes than a fish could. "I suppose, then, there is no use
asking if I may have my old room? The front room. I won't need two."

I didn't want him, and he must have seen it. But I took him. "You may
have it, as far as I'm concerned," I said. "But you'll have to let the
paper-hanger in to-morrow."

"Assuredly." He came into the hall and stood looking around him, and I
fancied he drew a breath of relief. "It isn't much yet," he said, "but
it's better to look at than six feet of muddy water."

"Or than stone walls," I said.

He looked at me and smiled. "Or than stone walls," he repeated,
bowing, and went into his room.

So I had him again, and if I gave him only the dull knives, and locked
up the bread-knife the moment I had finished with it, who can blame
me? I took all the precaution I could think of: had Terry put an extra
bolt on every door, and hid the rat poison and the carbolic acid in
the cellar.

Peter would not go near him. He hobbled around on his three legs, with
the splint beating a sort of tattoo on the floor, but he stayed back
in the kitchen with me, or in the yard.

It was Sunday night or early Monday morning that Jennie Brice
disappeared. On Thursday evening, her husband came back. On Friday the
body of a woman was washed ashore at Beaver, but turned out to be that
of a stewardess who had fallen overboard from one of the Cincinnati
packets. Mr. Ladley himself showed me the article in the morning
paper, when I took in his breakfast.

"Public hysteria has killed a man before this," he said, when I had
read it. "Suppose that woman had been mangled, or the screw of the
steamer had cut her head off! How many people do you suppose would
have been willing to swear that it was my--was Mrs. Ladley?"

"Even without a head, I should know Mrs. Ladley," I retorted.

He shrugged his shoulders. "Let's trust she's still alive, for my
sake," he said. "But I'm glad, anyhow, that this woman had a head.
You'll allow me to be glad, won't you?"

"You can be anything you want, as far as I'm concerned," I snapped,
and went out.

Mr. Holcombe still retained the second-story front room. I think,
although he said nothing more about it, that he was still "playing
horse." He wrote a good bit at the wash-stand, and, from the loose
sheets of manuscript he left, I believe actually tried to begin a
play. But mostly he wandered along the water-front, or stood on one
or another of the bridges, looking at the water and thinking. It is
certain that he tried to keep in the part by smoking cigarettes, but
he hated them, and usually ended by throwing the cigarette away and
lighting an old pipe he carried.

On that Thursday evening he came home and sat down to supper with
Mr. Reynolds. He ate little and seemed much excited. The talk ran on
crime, as it always did when he was around, and Mr. Holcombe quoted
Spencer a great deal--Herbert Spencer. Mr. Reynolds was impressed, not
knowing much beyond silks and the National League.

"Spencer," Mr. Holcombe would say--"Spencer shows that every
occurrence is the inevitable result of what has gone before, and
carries in its train an equally inevitable series of results. Try to
interrupt this chain in the smallest degree, and what follows? Chaos,
my dear sir, chaos."

"We see that at the store," Mr. Reynolds would say. "Accustom a lot of
women to a silk sale on Fridays and then make it toothbrushes. That's
chaos, all right."

Well, Mr. Holcombe came in that night about ten o'clock, and I told
him Ladley was back. He was almost wild with excitement; wanted to
have the back parlor, so he could watch him through the keyhole, and
was terribly upset when I told him there was no keyhole, that the
door fastened with a thumb bolt. On learning that the room was to
be papered the next morning, he grew calmer, however, and got the
paper-hanger's address from me. He went out just after that.

Friday, as I say, was very quiet. Mr. Ladley moved to the back parlor
to let the paper-hanger in the front room, smoked and fussed with
his papers all day, and Mr. Holcombe stayed in his room, which was
unusual. In the afternoon Molly Maguire put on the striped fur coat
and went out, going slowly past the house so that I would be sure to
see her. Beyond banging the window down, I gave her no satisfaction.

At four o'clock Mr. Holcombe came to my kitchen, rubbing his hands
together. He had a pasteboard tube in his hand about a foot long, with
an arrangement of small mirrors in it. He said it was modeled after
the something or other that is used on a submarine, and that he and
the paper-hanger had fixed a place for it between his floor and the
ceiling of Mr. Ladley's room, so that the chandelier would hide it
from below. He thought he could watch Mr. Ladley through it; and as it
turned out, he could.

"I want to find his weak moment," he said excitedly. "I want to know
what he does when the door is closed and he can take off his mask. And
I want to know if he sleeps with a light."

"If he does," I replied, "I hope you'll let me know, Mr. Holcombe. The
gas bills are a horror to me as it is. I think he kept it on all last
night. I turned off all the other lights and went to the cellar. The
meter was going around."

"Fine!" he said. "Every murderer fears the dark. And our friend of the
parlor bedroom is a murderer, Mrs. Pitman. Whether he hangs or not,
he's a murderer."

The mirror affair, which Mr. Holcombe called a periscope, was put in
that day and worked amazingly well. I went with him to try it out, and
I distinctly saw the paper-hanger take a cigarette from Mr. Ladley's
case and put it in his pocket. Just after that, Mr. Ladley sauntered
into the room and looked at the new paper. I could both see and hear
him. It was rather weird.

"God, what a wall-paper!" he said.




CHAPTER VIII

That was Friday afternoon. All that evening, and most of Saturday and
Sunday, Mr. Holcombe sat on the floor, with his eye to the reflecting
mirror and his note-book beside him. I have it before me.

On the first page is the "dog meat--two dollars" entry. On the next,
the description of what occurred on Sunday night, March fourth, and
Monday morning, the fifth. Following that came a sketch, made with a
carbon sheet, of the torn paper found behind the wash-stand:

And then came the entries for Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Friday
evening:

6:30--Eating hearty supper.

7:00--Lights cigarette and paces floor. Notice that when Mrs. P.
knocks, he goes to desk and pretends to be writing.

8:00--Is examining book. Looks like a railway guide.

8:30--It is a steamship guide.

8:45--Tailor's boy brings box. Gives boy fifty cents. Query. Where
does he get money, now that J.B. is gone?

9:00--Tries on new suit, brown.

9:30--Has been spending a quarter of an hour on his knees looking
behind furniture and examining base-board.

10:00--He has the key to the onyx clock. Has hidden it twice, once up
the chimney flue, once behind base-board.

10:15--He has just thrown key or similar small article outside window
into yard.

11:00--Has gone to bed. Light burning. Shall sleep here on floor.

11:30--He can not sleep. Is up walking the floor and smoking.

2:00 A.M.--Saturday. Disturbance below. He had had nightmare and was
calling "Jennie!" He got up, took a drink, and is now reading.

8:00 A.M.--Must have slept. He is shaving.

12:00 M.--Nothing this morning. He wrote for four hours, sometimes
reading aloud what he had written.

2:00 P.M.--He has a visitor, a man. Can not hear all--word now and
then. "Llewellyn is the very man." "Devil of a risk--" "We'll see you
through." "Lost the slip--" "Didn't go to the hotel. She went to a
private house." "Eliza Shaeffer."

Who went to a private house? Jennie Brice?

2:30--Can not hear. Are whispering. The visitor has given Ladley roll
of bills.

4:00--Followed the visitor, a tall man with a pointed beard. He went
to the Liberty Theater. Found it was Bronson, business manager there.
Who is Llewellyn, and who is Eliza Shaeffer?

4:15--Had Mrs. P. bring telephone book: six Llewellyns in the book; no
Eliza Shaeffer. Ladley appears more cheerful since Bronson's visit. He
has bought all the evening papers and is searching for something. Has
not found it.

7:00--Ate well. Have asked Mrs. P. to take my place here, while I
interview the six Llewellyns.

11:00--Mrs. P. reports a quiet evening. He read and smoked. Has gone
to bed. Light burning. Saw five Llewellyns. None of them knew Bronson
or Ladley. Sixth--a lawyer--out at revival meeting. Went to the church
and walked home with him. He knows something. Acknowledged he knew
Bronson. Had met Ladley. Did not believe Mrs. Ladley dead. Regretted
I had not been to the meeting. Good sermon. Asked me for a dollar for
missions.

9:00 A.M.--Sunday. Ladley in bad shape. Apparently been drinking all
night. Can not eat. Sent out early for papers, and has searched them
all. Found entry on second page, stared at it, then flung the paper
away. Have sent out for same paper.

10:00 A.M.--Paper says: "Body of woman washed ashore yesterday at
Sewickley. Much mutilated by flood debris." Ladley in bed, staring at
ceiling. Wonder if he sees tube? He is ghastly.

That is the last entry in the note-book for that day. Mr. Holcombe
called me in great excitement shortly after ten and showed me the
item. Neither of us doubted for a moment that it was Jennie Brice who
had been found. He started for Sewickley that same afternoon, and he
probably communicated with the police before he left. For once or
twice I saw Mr. Graves, the detective, sauntering past the house.

Mr. Ladley ate no dinner. He went out at four, and I had Mr. Reynolds
follow him. But they were both back in a half-hour. Mr. Reynolds
reported that Mr. Ladley had bought some headache tablets and some
bromide powders to make him sleep.

Mr. Holcombe came back that evening. He thought the body was that of
Jennie Brice, but the head was gone. He was much depressed, and did
not immediately go back to the periscope. I asked if the head had been
cut off or taken off by a steamer; he was afraid the latter, as a hand
was gone, too.

It was about eleven o'clock that night that the door-bell rang. It was
Mr. Graves, with a small man behind him. I knew the man; he lived in a
shanty-boat not far from my house--a curious affair with shelves
full of dishes and tinware. In the spring he would be towed up
the Monongahela a hundred miles or so and float down, tying up at
different landings and selling his wares. Timothy Senft was his name.
We called him Tim.

Mr. Graves motioned me to be quiet. Both of us knew that behind the
parlor door Ladley was probably listening.

"Sorry to get you up, Mrs. Pitman," said Mr. Graves, "but this man
says he has bought beer here to-day. That won't do, Mrs. Pitman."

"Beer! I haven't such a thing in the house. Come in and look," I
snapped. And the two of them went back to the kitchen.

"Now," said Mr. Graves, when I had shut the door, "where's the
dog's-meat man?"

"Up-stairs."

"Bring him quietly."

I called Mr. Holcombe, and he came eagerly, note-book and all. "Ah!"
he said, when he saw Tim. "So you've turned up!"

"Yes, sir."

"It seems, Mr. Dog's--Mr. Holcombe," said Mr. Graves, "that you are
right, partly, anyhow. Tim here _did_ help a man with a boat that
night--"

"Threw him a rope, sir," Tim broke in. "He'd got out in the current,
and what with the ice, and his not knowing much about a boat, he'd
have kept on to New Orleans if I hadn't caught him--or Kingdom Come."

"Exactly. And what time did you say this was?"

"Between three and four last Sunday night--or Monday morning. He said
he couldn't sleep and went out in a boat, meaning to keep in close to
shore. But he got drawn out in the current."

"Where did you see him first?"

"By the Ninth Street bridge."

"Did you hail him?"

"He saw my light and hailed me. I was making fast to a coal barge
after one of my ropes had busted."

"You threw the line to him there?"

"No, sir. He tried to work in to shore. I ran along River Avenue to
below the Sixth Street bridge. He got pretty close in there and I
threw him a rope. He was about done up."

"Would you know him again?"

"Yes, sir. He gave me five dollars, and said to say nothing about it.
He didn't want anybody to know he had been such a fool."

They took him quietly up stairs then and let him look through the
periscope. _He identified Mr. Ladley absolutely_.

When Tim and Mr. Graves had gone, Mr. Holcombe and I were left alone
in the kitchen. Mr. Holcombe leaned over and patted Peter as he lay in
his basket.

"We've got him, old boy," he said. "The chain is just about complete.
He'll never kick you again."

But Mr. Holcombe was wrong, not about kicking Peter,--although I don't
believe Mr. Ladley ever did that again,--but in thinking we had him.

I washed that next morning, Monday, but all the time I was rubbing and
starching and hanging out, my mind was with Jennie Brice. The sight of
Molly Maguire, next door, at the window, rubbing and brushing at the
fur coat, only made things worse.

At noon when the Maguire youngsters came home from school, I bribed
Tommy, the youngest, into the kitchen, with the promise of a doughnut.

"I see your mother has a new fur coat," I said, with the plate of
doughnuts just beyond his reach.

"Yes'm."

"She didn't buy it?"

"She didn't buy it. Say, Mrs. Pitman, gimme that doughnut."

"Oh, so the coat washed in!"

"No'm. Pap found it, down by the Point, on a cake of ice. He thought
it was a dog, and rowed out for it."

Well, I hadn't wanted the coat, as far as that goes; I'd managed
well enough without furs for twenty years or more. But it was a
satisfaction to know that it had not floated into Mrs. Maguire's
kitchen and spread itself at her feet, as one may say. However, that
was not the question, after all. The real issue was that if it was
Jennie Brice's coat, and was found across the river on a cake of ice,
then one of two things was certain: either Jennie Brice's body wrapped
in the coat had been thrown into the water, out in the current, or she
herself, hoping to incriminate her husband, had flung her coat into
the river.

I told Mr. Holcombe, and he interviewed Joe Maguire that afternoon.
The upshot of it was that Tommy had been correctly informed. Joe had
witnesses who had lined up to see him rescue a dog, and had beheld his
return in triumph with a wet and soggy fur coat. At three o'clock
Mrs. Maguire, instructed by Mr. Graves, brought the coat to me for
identification, turning it about for my inspection, but refusing to
take her hands off it.

"If her husband says to me that he wants it back, well and good," she
said, "but I don't give it up to nobody but him. Some folks I know of
would be glad enough to have it."

I was certain it was Jennie Brice's coat, but the maker's name had
been ripped out. With Molly holding one arm and I the other, we took
it to Mr. Ladley's door and knocked. He opened it, grumbling.

"I have asked you not to interrupt me," he said, with his pen in his
hand. His eyes fell on the coat. "What's that?" he asked, changing
color.

"I think it's Mrs. Ladley's fur coat," I said.

He stood there looking at it and thinking. Then: "It can't be hers,"
he said. "She wore hers when she went away."

"Perhaps she dropped it in the water."

He looked at me and smiled. "And why would she do that?" he asked
mockingly. "Was it out of fashion?"

"That's Mrs. Ladley's coat," I persisted, but Molly Maguire jerked it
from me and started away. He stood there looking at me and smiling in
his nasty way.

"This excitement is telling on you, Mrs. Pitman," he said coolly.
"You're too emotional for detective work." Then he went in and shut
the door.

When I went down-stairs, Molly Maguire was waiting in the kitchen, and
had the audacity to ask me if I thought the coat needed a new lining!

It was on Monday evening that the strangest event in years happened to
me. I went to my sister's house! And the fact that I was admitted at a
side entrance made it even stranger. It happened in this way:

Supper was over, and I was cleaning up, when an automobile came to the
door. It was Alma's car. The chauffeur gave me a note:

    "DEAR MRS PITMAN--I am not at all well, and very anxious. Will
    you come to see me at once? My mother is out to dinner, and I am
    alone. The car will bring you. Cordially,
    "LIDA HARVEY."

I put on my best dress at once and got into the limousine. Half the
neighborhood was out watching. I leaned back in the upholstered seat,
fairly quivering with excitement. This was Alma's car; that was Alma's
card-case; the little clock had her monogram on it. Even the flowers
in the flower holder, yellow tulips, reminded me of Alma--a trifle
showy, but good to look at! And I was going to her house!

I was not taken to the main entrance, but to a side door. The queer
dream-like feeling was still there. In this back hall, relegated from
the more conspicuous part of the house, there were even pieces of
furniture from the old home, and my father's picture, in an oval gilt
frame, hung over my head. I had not seen a picture of him for twenty
years. I went over and touched it gently.

"Father, father!" I said.

Under it was the tall hall chair that I had climbed over as a child,
and had stood on many times, to see myself in the mirror above. The
chair was newly finished and looked the better for its age. I glanced
in the old glass. The chair had stood time better than I. I was a
middle-aged woman, lined with poverty and care, shabby, prematurely
gray, a little hard. I had thought my father an old man when that
picture was taken, and now I was even older. "Father!" I whispered
again, and fell to crying in the dimly lighted hall.

Lida sent for me at once. I had only time to dry my eyes and
straighten my hat. Had I met Alma on the stairs, I would have passed
her without a word. She would not have known me. But I saw no one.

Lida was in bed. She was lying there with a rose-shaded lamp beside
her, and a great bowl of spring flowers on a little stand at her
elbow. She sat up when I went in, and had a maid place a chair for me
beside the bed. She looked very childish, with her hair in a braid on
the pillow, and her slim young arms and throat bare.

"I'm so glad you came!" she said, and would not be satisfied until the
light was just right for my eyes, and my coat unfastened and thrown
open.

"I'm not really ill," she informed me. "I'm--I'm just tired and
nervous, and--and unhappy, Mrs. Pitman."

"I am sorry," I said. I wanted to lean over and pat her hand, to draw
the covers around her and mother her a little,--I had had no one to
mother for so long,--but I could not. She would have thought it queer
and presumptuous--or no, not that. She was too sweet to have thought
that.

"Mrs. Pitman," she said suddenly, "_who was_ this Jennie Brice?"

"She was an actress. She and her husband lived at my house."

"Was she--was she beautiful?"

"Well," I said slowly, "I never thought of that. She was handsome, in
a large way."

"Was she young?"

"Yes. Twenty-eight or so."

"That isn't very young," she said, looking relieved. "But I don't
think men like very young women. Do you?"

"I know one who does," I said, smiling. But she sat up in bed suddenly
and looked at me with her clear childish eyes.

"I don't want him to like me!" she flashed. "I--I want him to hate
me."

"Tut, tut! You want nothing of the sort."

"Mrs. Pitman," she said, "I sent for you because I'm nearly crazy. Mr.
Howell was a friend of that woman. He has acted like a maniac since
she disappeared. He doesn't come to see me, he has given up his work
on the paper, and I saw him to-day on the street--he looks like a
ghost."

That put me to thinking.

"He might have been a friend," I admitted. "Although, as far as I
know, he was never at the house but once, and then he saw both of
them."

"When was that?"

"Sunday morning, the day before she disappeared. They were arguing
something."

She was looking at me attentively. "You know more than you are telling
me, Mrs. Pitman," she said. "You--do you think Jennie Brice is dead,
and that Mr. Howell knows--who did it?"

"I think she is dead, and I think possibly Mr. Howell suspects who did
it. He does not _know_, or he would have told the police."

"You do not think he was--was in love with Jennie Brice, do you?"

"I'm certain of that," I said. "He is very much in love with a foolish
girl, who ought to have more faith in him than she has."

[Illustration: She sat up in bed suddenly.]

She colored a little, and smiled at that, but the next moment she was
sitting forward, tense and questioning again.

"If that is true, Mrs. Pitman," she said, "who was the veiled woman
he met that Monday morning at daylight, and took across the bridge to
Pittsburgh? I believe it was Jennie Brice. If it was not, who was it?"

"I don't believe he took any woman across the bridge at that hour. Who
says he did?"

"Uncle Jim saw him. He had been playing cards all night at one of the
clubs, and was walking home. He says he met Mr. Howell face to face,
and spoke to him. The woman was tall and veiled. Uncle Jim sent for
him, a day or two later, and he refused to explain. Then they forbade
him the house. Mama objected to him, anyhow, and he only came on
sufferance. He is a college man of good family, but without any money
at all save what he earns.. And now--"

I had had some young newspaper men with me, and I knew what they got.
They were nice boys, but they made fifteen dollars a week. I'm
afraid I smiled a little as I looked around the room, with its gray
grass-cloth walls, its toilet-table spread with ivory and gold, and
the maid in attendance in her black dress and white apron, collar and
cuffs. Even the little nightgown Lida was wearing would have taken a
week's salary or more. She saw my smile.

"It was to be his chance," she said. "If he made good, he was to have
something better. My Uncle Jim owns the paper, and he promised me to
help him. But--"

So Jim was running a newspaper! That was a curious career for Jim to
choose. Jim, who was twice expelled from school, and who could never
write a letter without a dictionary beside him! I had a pang when I
heard his name again, after all the years. For I had written to Jim
from Oklahoma, after Mr. Pitman died, asking for money to bury him,
and had never even had a reply.

"And you haven't seen him since?"

"Once. I--didn't hear from him, and I called him up. We--we met in the
park. He said everything was all right, but he couldn't tell me just
then. The next day he resigned from the paper and went away. Mrs.
Pitman, it's driving me crazy! For they have found a body, and they
think it is hers. If it is, and he was with her--"

"Don't be a foolish girl," I protested. "If he was with Jennie Brice,
she is still living, and if he was _not_ with Jennie Brice--"

"If it was _not_ Jennie Brice, then I have a right to know who it
was," she declared. "He was not like himself when I met him. He said
such queer things: he talked about an onyx clock, and said he had been
made a fool of, and that no matter what came out, I was always to
remember that he had done what he did for the best, and that--that he
cared for me more than for anything in this world or the next."

"That wasn't so foolish!" I couldn't help it; I leaned over and
drew her nightgown up over her bare white shoulder. "You won't help
anything or anybody by taking cold, my dear," I said. "Call your maid
and have her put a dressing-gown around you."

I left soon after. There was little I could do. But I comforted her as
best I could, and said good night. My heart was heavy as I went down
the stairs. For, twist things as I might, it was clear that in some
way the Howell boy was mixed up in the Brice case. Poor little
troubled Lida! Poor distracted boy!

I had a curious experience down-stairs. I had reached the foot of the
staircase and was turning to go back and along the hall to the side
entrance, when I came face to face with Isaac, the old colored man
who had driven the family carriage when I was a child, and whom I had
seen, at intervals since I came back, pottering around Alma's house.
The old man was bent and feeble; he came slowly down the hall, with
a bunch of keys in his hand. I had seen him do the same thing many
times.

He stopped when he saw me, and I shrank back from the light, but he
had seen me. "Miss Bess!" he said. "Foh Gawd's sake, Miss Bess!"

"You are making a mistake, my friend," I said, quivering. "I am not
'Miss Bess'!"

He came close to me and stared into my face. And from that he looked
at my cloth gloves, at my coat, and he shook his white head. "I sure
thought you was Miss Bess," he said, and made no further effort to
detain me. He led the way back to the door where the machine waited,
his head shaking with the palsy of age, muttering as he went. He
opened the door with his best manner, and stood aside.

"Good night, ma'am," he quavered.

I had tears in my eyes. I tried to keep them back. "Good night," I
said. "Good night, _Ikkie_."

It had slipped out, my baby name for old Isaac!

"Miss Bess!" he cried. "Oh, praise Gawd, it's Miss Bess again!"

He caught my arm and pulled me back into the hall, and there he held
me, crying over me, muttering praises for my return, begging me to
come back, recalling little tender things out of the past that almost
killed me to hear again.

But I had made my bed and must lie in it. I forced him to swear
silence about my visit; I made him promise not to reveal my identity
to Lida; and I told him--Heaven forgive me!--that I was well and
prosperous and happy.

Dear old Isaac! I would not let him come to see me, but the next
day there came a basket, with six bottles of wine, and an old
daguerreotype of my mother, that had been his treasure. Nor was that
basket the last.




CHAPTER IX

The coroner held an inquest over the headless body the next day,
Tuesday. Mr. Graves telephoned me in the morning, and I went to the
morgue with him.

I do not like the morgue, although some of my neighbors pay it weekly
visits. It is by way of excursion, like nickelodeons or watching the
circus put up its tents. I have heard them threaten the children that
if they misbehaved they would not be taken to the morgue that week!

I failed to identify the body. How could I? It had been a tall woman,
probably five feet eight, and I thought the nails looked like those of
Jennie Brice. The thumb-nail of one was broken short off. I told
Mr. Graves about her speaking of a broken nail, but he shrugged his
shoulders and said nothing.

There was a curious scar over the heart, and he was making a sketch
of it. It reached from the center of the chest for about six inches
across the left breast, a narrow thin line that one could hardly see.
It was shaped like this:

I felt sure that Jennie Brice had had no such scar, and Mr. Graves
thought as I did. Temple Hope, called to the inquest, said she had
never heard of one, and Mr. Ladley himself, at the inquest, swore that
his wife had had nothing of the sort. I was watching him, and I
did not think he was lying. And yet--the hand was very like Jennie
Brice's. It was all bewildering.

Mr. Ladley's testimoney at the inquest was disappointing. He was cool
and collected: said he had no reason to believe that his wife was
dead, and less reason to think she had been drowned; she had left him
in a rage, and if she found out that by hiding she was putting him in
an unpleasant position, she would probably hide indefinitely.

To the disappointment of everybody, the identity of the woman remained
a mystery. No one with such a scar was missing. A small woman of
my own age, a Mrs. Murray, whose daughter, a stenographer, had
disappeared, attended the inquest. But her daughter had had no such
scar, and had worn her nails short, because of using the typewriter.
Alice Murray was the missing girl's name. Her mother sat beside me,
and cried most of the time.

One thing was brought out at the inquest: the body had been thrown
into the river _after_ death. There was no water in the lungs. The
verdict was "death by the hands of some person or persons unknown."

Mr. Holcombe was not satisfied. In some way or other he had got
permission to attend the autopsy, and had brought away a tracing of
the scar. All the way home in the street-car he stared at the drawing,
holding first one eye shut and then the other. But, like the coroner,
he got nowhere. He folded the paper and put it in his note-book.

"None the less, Mrs. Pitman," he said, "that is the body of Jennie
Brice; her husband killed her, probably by strangling her; he took the
body out in the boat and dropped it into the swollen river above the
Ninth Street bridge."

"Why do you think he strangled her?"

"There was no mark on the body, and no poison was found."

"Then if he strangled her, where did the blood come from?"

"I didn't limit myself to strangulation," he said irritably. "He may
have cut her throat."

"Or brained her with my onyx clock," I added with a sigh. For I missed
the clock more and more.

He went down in his pockets and brought up a key. "I'd forgotten
this," he said. "It shows you were right--that the clock was there
when the Ladleys took the room. I found this in the yard this
morning."

It was when I got home from the inquest that I found old Isaac's
basket waiting. I am not a crying woman, but I could hardly see my
mother's picture for tears.--Well, after all, that is not the Brice
story. I am not writing the sordid tragedy of my life.

That was on Tuesday. Jennie Brice had been missing nine days. In all
that time, although she was cast for the piece at the theater that
week, no one there had heard from her. Her relatives had had no word.
She had gone away, if she had gone, on a cold March night, in a
striped black and white dress with a red collar, and a red and black
hat, without her fur coat, which she had worn all winter. She had gone
very early in the morning, or during the night. How had she gone? Mr.
Ladley said he had rowed her to Federal Street at half after six and
had brought the boat back. After they had quarreled violently all
night, and when she was leaving him, wouldn't he have allowed her to
take herself away? Besides, the police had found no trace of her on
an early train. And then at daylight, between five and six, my own
brother had seen a woman with Mr. Howell, a woman who might have been
Jennie Brice. But if it was, why did not Mr. Howell say so?

Mr. Ladley claimed she was hiding, in revenge. But Jennie Brice was
not that sort of woman; there was something big about her, something
that is found often in large women--a lack of spite. She was not petty
or malicious. Her faults, like her virtues, were for all to see.

In spite of the failure to identify the body, Mr. Ladley was arrested
that night, Tuesday, and this time it was for murder. I know now that
the police were taking long chances. They had no strong motive for the
crime. As Mr. Holcombe said, they had provocation, but not motive,
which is different. They had opportunity, and they had a lot of
straggling links of clues, which in the total made a fair chain of
circumstantial evidence. But that was all.

That is the way the case stood on Tuesday night, March the thirteenth.

Mr. Ladley was taken away at nine o'clock. He was perfectly cool,
asked me to help him pack a suit case, and whistled while it was
being done. He requested to be allowed to walk to the jail, and went
quietly, with a detective on one side and I think a sheriff's officer
on the other.

Just before he left, he asked for a word or two with me, and when he
paid his bill up to date, and gave me an extra dollar for taking care
of Peter, I was almost overcome. He took the manuscript of his play
with him, and I remember his asking if he could have any typing done
in the jail. I had never seen a man arrested for murder before, but I
think he was probably the coolest suspect the officers had ever seen.
They hardly knew what to make of it.

Mr. Reynolds and I had a cup of tea after all the excitement, and were
sitting at the dining-room table drinking it, when the bell rang. It
was Mr. Howell! He half staggered into the hall when I opened the
door, and was for going into the parlor bedroom without a word.

"Mr. Ladley's gone, if you want him," I said. I thought his face
cleared.

"Gone!" he said. "Where?"

"To jail."

He did not reply at once. He stood there, tapping the palm of one
hand with the forefinger of the other. He was dirty and unshaven. His
clothes looked as if he had been sleeping in them.

"So they've got him!" he muttered finally, and turning, was about to
go out the front door without another word, but I caught his arm.

"You're sick, Mr. Howell," I said. "You'd better not go out just yet."

"Oh, I'm all right." He took his handkerchief out and wiped his face.
I saw that his hands were shaking.

"Come back and have a cup of tea, and a slice of home-made bread."

He hesitated and looked at his watch. "I'll do it, Mrs. Pitman," he
said. "I suppose I'd better throw a little fuel into this engine of
mine. It's been going hard for several days."

He ate like a wolf. I cut half a loaf into slices for him, and he
drank the rest of the tea. Mr. Reynolds creaked up to bed and left him
still eating, and me still cutting and spreading. Now that I had a
chance to see him, I was shocked. The rims of his eyes were red, his
collar was black, and his hair hung over his forehead. But when he
finally sat back and looked at me, his color was better.

"So they've canned him!" he said.

"Time enough, too," said I.

He leaned forward and put both his elbows on the table. "Mrs. Pitman,"
he said earnestly, "I don't like him any more than you do. But he
never killed that woman."

"Somebody killed her."

"How do you know? How do you know she is dead?"

Well, I didn't, of course--I only felt it.

"The police haven't even proved a crime. They can't hold a man for a
supposititious murder."

"Perhaps they can't but they're doing it," I retorted. "If the woman's
alive, she won't let him hang."

"I'm not so sure of that," he said heavily, and got up. He looked in
the little mirror over the sideboard, and brushed back his hair. "I
look bad enough," he said, "but I feel worse. Well, you've saved my
life, Mrs. Pitman. Thank you."

"How is my--how is Miss Harvey?" I asked, as we started out. He turned
and smiled at me in his boyish way.

"The best ever!" he said. "I haven't seen her for days, and it seems
like centuries. She--she is the only girl in the world for me, Mrs.
Pitman, although I--" He stopped and drew a long breath. "She is
beautiful, isn't she?"

"Very beautiful," I answered. "Her mother was always--"

"Her mother!" He looked at me curiously.

"I knew her mother years ago," I said, putting the best face on my
mistake that I could.

"Then I'll remember you to her, if she ever allows me to see her
again. Just now I'm _persona non grata_."

"If you'll do the kindly thing, Mr. Howell," I said, "you'll _forget_
me to her."

He looked into my eyes and then thrust out his hand.

"All right," he said. "I'll not ask any questions. I guess there are
some curious stories hidden in these old houses."

Peter hobbled to the front door with him. He had not gone so far as
the parlor once while Mr. Ladley was in the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had had a sale of spring flowers at the store that day, and Mr.
Reynolds had brought me a pot of white tulips. That night I hung my
mother's picture over the mantel in the dining-room, and put the
tulips beneath it. It gave me a feeling of comfort; I had never seen
my mother's grave, or put flowers on it.




CHAPTER X

I have said before that I do not know anything about the law. I
believe that the Ladley case was unusual, in several ways. Mr. Ladley
had once been well known in New York among the people who frequent the
theaters, and Jennie Brice was even better known. A good many lawyers,
I believe, said that the police had not a leg to stand on, and I know
the case was watched with much interest by the legal profession.
People wrote letters to the newspapers, protesting against Mr. Ladley
being held. And I believe that the district attorney, in taking him
before the grand jury, hardly hoped to make a case.

But he did, to his own surprise, I fancy, and the trial was set for
May. But in the meantime, many curious things happened.

In the first place, the week following Mr. Ladley's arrest my house
was filled up with eight or ten members of a company from the Gaiety
Theater, very cheerful and jolly, and well behaved. Three men, I
think, and the rest girls. One of the men was named Bellows, John
Bellows, and it turned out that he had known Jennie Brice very well.

From the moment he learned that, Mr. Holcombe hardly left him. He
walked to the theater with him and waited to walk home again. He took
him out to restaurants and for long street-car rides in the mornings,
and on the last night of their stay, Saturday, they got gloriously
drunk together--Mr. Holcombe, no doubt, in his character of
Ladley--and came reeling in at three in the morning, singing. Mr.
Holcombe was very sick the next day, but by Monday he was all right,
and he called me into the room.

"We've got him, Mrs. Pitman," he said, looking mottled but cheerful.
"As sure as God made little fishes, we've got him." That was all he
would say, however. It seemed he was going to New York, and might be
gone for a month. "I've no family," he said, "and enough money to keep
me. If I find my relaxation in hunting down criminals, it's a harmless
and cheap amusement, and--it's my own business."

He went away that night, and I must admit I missed him. I rented the
parlor bedroom the next day to a school-teacher, and I found the
periscope affair very handy. I could see just how much gas she used;
and although the notice on each door forbids cooking and washing in
rooms, I found she was doing both: making coffee and boiling an egg
in the morning, and rubbing out stockings and handkerchiefs in her
wash-bowl. I'd much rather have men as boarders than women. The women
are always lighting alcohol lamps on the bureau, and wanting the bed
turned into a cozy corner so they can see their gentlemen friends in
their rooms.

Well, with Mr. Holcombe gone, and Mr. Reynolds busy all day and half
the night getting out the summer silks and preparing for remnant day,
and with Mr. Ladley in jail and Lida out of the city--for I saw in
the papers that she was not well, and her mother had taken her to
Bermuda--I had a good bit of time on my hands. And so I got in the
habit of thinking things over, and trying to draw conclusions, as I
had seen Mr. Holcombe do. I would sit down and write things out as
they had happened, and study them over, and especially I worried over
how we could have found a slip of paper in Mr. Ladley's room with a
list, almost exact, of the things we had discovered there. I used to
read it over, "rope, knife, shoe, towel, Horn--" and get more and more
bewildered. "Horn"--might have been a town, or it might not have been.
There _was_ such a town, according to Mr. Graves, but apparently he
had made nothing of it. _Was_ it a town that was meant?

The dictionary gave only a few words beginning with "horn"--hornet,
hornblende, hornpipe, and horny--none of which was of any assistance.
And then one morning I happened to see in the personal column of one
of the newspapers that a woman named Eliza Shaeffer, of Horner, had
day-old Buff Orpington and Plymouth Rock chicks for sale, and it
started me to puzzling again. Perhaps it had been Horner, and possibly
this very Eliza Shaeffer--

I suppose my lack of experience was in my favor, for, after all, Eliza
Shaeffer is a common enough name, and the "Horn" might have stood for
"hornswoggle," for all I knew. The story of the man who thought of
what he would do if he were a horse, came back to me, and for an hour
or so I tried to think I was Jennie Brice, trying to get away and hide
from my rascal of a husband. But I made no headway. I would never have
gone to Horner, or to any small town, if I had wanted to hide. I
think I should have gone around the corner and taken a room in my own
neighborhood, or have lost myself in some large city.

It was that same day that, since I did not go to Horner, Horner came
to me. The bell rang about three o'clock, and I answered it myself.
For, with times hard and only two or three roomers all winter, I had
not had a servant, except Terry to do odd jobs, for some months.

There stood a fresh-faced young girl, with a covered basket in her
hand.

"Are you Mrs. Pitman?" she asked.

"I don't need anything to-day," I said, trying to shut the door. And
at that minute something in the basket cheeped. Young women selling
poultry are not common in our neighborhood. "What have you there?" I
asked more agreeably.

"Chicks, day-old chicks, but I'm not trying to sell you any. I--may I
come in?"

It was dawning on me then that perhaps this was Eliza Shaeffer. I led
her back to the dining-room, with Peter sniffing at the basket.

"My name is Shaeffer," she said. "I've seen your name in the papers,
and I believe I know something about Jennie Brice."

Eliza Shaeffer's story was curious. She said that she was postmistress
at Horner, and lived with her mother on a farm a mile out of the town,
driving in and out each day in a buggy.

On Monday afternoon, March the fifth, a woman had alighted at the
station from a train, and had taken luncheon at the hotel. She
told the clerk she was on the road, selling corsets, and was much
disappointed to find no store of any size in the town. The woman, who
had registered as Mrs. Jane Bellows, said she was tired and would like
to rest for a day or two on a farm. She was told to see Eliza Shaeffer
at the post-office, and, as a result, drove out with her to the farm
after the last mail came in that evening.

Asked to describe her--she was over medium height, light-haired, quick
in her movements, and wore a black and white striped dress with a red
collar, and a hat to match. She carried a small brown valise that Miss
Shaeffer presumed contained her samples.

Mrs. Shaeffer had made her welcome, although they did not usually take
boarders until June. She had not eaten much supper, and that night she
had asked for pen and ink, and had written a letter. The letter was
not mailed until Wednesday. All of Tuesday Mrs. Bellows had spent in
her room, and Mrs. Shaeffer had driven to the village in the afternoon
with word that she had been crying all day, and bought some headache
medicine for her.

On Wednesday morning, however, she had appeared at breakfast, eaten
heartily, and had asked Miss Shaeffer to take her letter to the
post-office. It was addressed to Mr. Ellis Howell, in care of a
Pittsburgh newspaper!

That night when Miss Eliza went home, about half past eight, the woman
was gone. She had paid for her room and had been driven as far as
Thornville, where all trace of her had been lost. On account of the
disappearance of Jennie Brice being published shortly after that, she
and her mother had driven to Thornville, but the station agent there
was surly as well as stupid. They had learned nothing about the woman.

Since that time, three men had made inquiries about the woman in
question. One had a pointed Vandyke beard; the second, from the
description, I fancied must have been Mr. Graves. The third without
doubt was Mr. Howell. Eliza Shaeffer said that this last man had
seemed half frantic. I brought her a photograph of Jennie Brice as
"Topsy" and another one as "Juliet". She said there was a resemblance,
but that it ended there. But of course, as Mr. Graves had said, by the
time an actress gets her photograph retouched to suit her, it doesn't
particularly resemble her. And unless I had known Jennie Brice myself,
I should hardly have recognized the pictures.

Well, in spite of all that, there seemed no doubt that Jennie Brice
had been living three days after her disappearance, and that would
clear Mr. Ladley. But what had Mr. Howell to do with it all? Why had
he not told the police of the letter from Horner? Or about the woman
on the bridge? Why had Mr. Bronson, who was likely the man with the
pointed beard, said nothing about having traced Jennie Brice to
Horner?

I did as I thought Mr. Holcombe would have wished me to do. I wrote
down on a clean sheet of note-paper all that Eliza Shaeffer said: the
description of the black and white dress, the woman's height, and the
rest, and then I took her to the court-house, chicks and all, and she
told her story there to one of the assistant district attorneys.

The young man was interested, but not convinced. He had her story
taken down, and she signed it. He was smiling as he bowed us out. I
turned in the doorway.

"This will free Mr. Ladley, I suppose?" I asked.

"Not just yet," he said pleasantly. "This makes just eleven places
where Jennie Brice spent the first three days after her death."

"But I can positively identify the dress."

"My good woman, that dress has been described, to the last stilted
arch and Colonial volute, in every newspaper in the United States!"

That evening the newspapers announced that during a conference at the
jail between Mr. Ladley and James Bronson, business manager at the
Liberty Theater, Mr. Ladley had attacked Mr. Bronson with a chair, and
almost brained him.




CHAPTER XI

Eliza Shaeffer went back to Horner, after delivering her chicks
somewhere in the city. Things went on as before. The trial was set for
May. The district attorney's office had all the things we had found in
the house that Monday afternoon--the stained towel, the broken knife
and its blade, the slipper that had been floating in the parlor,
and the rope that had fastened my boat to the staircase.
Somewhere--wherever they keep such things--was the headless body of
a woman with a hand missing, and with a curious scar across the left
breast. The slip of paper, however, which I had found behind the
base-board, was still in Mr. Holcombe's possession, nor had he
mentioned it to the police.

Mr. Holcombe had not come back. He wrote me twice asking me to hold
his room, once from New York and once from Chicago. To the second
letter he added a postscript:

    "Have not found what I wanted, but am getting warm. If any news,
    address me at Des Moines, Iowa, General Delivery.    H."

It was nearly the end of April when I saw Lida again. I had seen by
the newspapers that she and her mother were coming home. I wondered if
she had heard from Mr. Howell, for I had not, and I wondered, too, if
she would send for me again.

But she came herself, on foot, late one afternoon, and the
school-teacher being out, I took her into the parlor bedroom. She
looked thinner than before, and rather white. My heart ached for her.

"I have been away," she explained. "I thought you might wonder why
you did not hear from me. But, you see, my mother--" she stopped
and flushed. "I would have written you from Bermuda, but--my mother
watched my correspondence, so I could not."

No. I knew she could not. Alma had once found a letter of mine to Mr.
Pitman. Very little escaped Alma.

"I wondered if you have heard anything?" she asked.

"I have heard nothing. Mr. Howell was here once, just after I saw you.
I do not believe he is in the city.

"Perhaps not, although--Mrs. Pitman, I believe he is in the city,
hiding!"

"Hiding! Why?"

"I don't know. But last night I thought I saw him below my window. I
opened the window, so if it were he, he could make some sign. But he
moved on without a word. Later, whoever it was came back. I put out my
light and watched. Some one stood there, in the shadow, until after
two this morning. Part of the time he was looking up."

"Don't you think, had it been he, he would have spoken when he saw
you?"

She shook her head. "He is in trouble," she said. "He has not heard
from me, and he--thinks I don't care any more. Just look at me, Mrs.
Pitman! Do I look as if I don't care?"

She looked half killed, poor lamb.

"He may be out of town, searching for a better position," I tried to
comfort her. "He wants to have something to offer more than himself."

"I only want him," she said, looking at me frankly. "I don't know why
I tell you all this, but you are so kind, and I _must_ talk to some
one."

She sat there, in the cozy corner the school-teacher had made with a
portiere and some cushions, and I saw she was about ready to break
down and cry. I went over to her and took her hand, for she was my own
niece, although she didn't suspect it, and I had never had a child of
my own.

But after all, I could not help her much. I could only assure her that
he would come back and explain everything, and that he was all right,
and that the last time I had seen him he had spoken of her, and had
said she was "the best ever." My heart fairly yearned over the girl,
and I think she felt it. For she kissed me, shyly, when she was
leaving.

With the newspaper files before me, it is not hard to give the details
of that sensational trial. It commenced on Monday, the seventh of May,
but it was late Wednesday when the jury was finally selected. I was at
the court-house early on Thursday, and so was Mr. Reynolds.

The district attorney made a short speech. "We propose, gentlemen, to
prove that the prisoner, Philip Ladley, murdered his wife," he said
in part. "We will show first that a crime was committed; then we will
show a motive for this crime, and, finally, we expect to show that the
body washed ashore at Sewickley is the body of the murdered woman, and
thus establish beyond doubt the prisoner's guilt."

Mr. Ladley listened with attention. He wore the brown suit, and looked
well and cheerful. He was much more like a spectator than a prisoner,
and he was not so nervous as I was.

Of that first day I do not recall much. I was called early in the day.
The district attorney questioned me.

"Your name?"

"Elizabeth Marie Pitman."

"Your occupation?"

"I keep a boarding-house at 42 Union Street."

"You know the prisoner?"

"Yes. He was a boarder in my house."

"For how long?"

"From December first. He and his wife came at that time."

"Was his wife the actress, Jennie Brice?"

"Yes, sir."

"Were they living together at your house the night of March fourth?"

"Yes, sir."

"In what part of the house?"

"They rented the double parlors down-stairs, but on account of the
flood I moved them up-stairs to the second floor front."

"That was on Sunday? You moved them on Sunday?"

"Yes, sir."

"At what time did you retire that night?"

"Not at all. The water was very high. I lay down, dressed, at one
o'clock, and dropped into a doze."

"How long did you sleep?"

"An hour or so. Mr. Reynolds, a boarder, roused me to say he had heard
some one rowing a boat in the lower hall."

"Do you keep a boat around during flood times?"

"Yes, sir."

"What did you do when Mr. Reynolds roused you?"

"I went to the top of the stairs. My boat was gone."

"Was the boat secured?"

"Yes, sir. Anyhow, there was no current in the hall."

"What did you do then?"

"I waited a time and went back to my room."

"What examination of the house did you make--if any?"

"Mr. Reynolds looked around."

"What did he find?"

"He found Peter, the Ladleys' dog, shut in a room on the third floor."

"Was there anything unusual about that?"

"I had never known it to happen before."

"State what happened later."

"I did not go to sleep again. At a quarter after four, I heard the
boat come back. I took a candle and went to the stairs. It was Mr.
Ladley. He said he had been out getting medicine for his wife."

"Did you see him tie up the boat?"

"Yes."

"Did you observe any stains on the rope?"

"I did not notice any."

"What was the prisoner's manner at that time?"

"I thought he was surly."

"Now, Mrs. Pitman, tell us about the following morning."

"I saw Mr. Ladley at a quarter before seven. He said to bring
breakfast for one. His wife had gone away. I asked if she was not ill,
and he said no; that she had gone away early; that he had rowed her to
Federal Street, and that she would be back Saturday. It was shortly
after that that the dog Peter brought in one of Mrs. Ladley's
slippers, water-soaked."

"You recognized the slipper?"

"Positively. I had seen it often."

"What did you do with it?"

"I took it to Mr. Ladley."

"What did he say?"

"He said at first that it was not hers. Then he said if it was, she
would never wear it again--and then added--because it was ruined."

"Did he offer any statement as to where his wife was?"

"No, sir. Not at that time. Before, he had said she had gone away for
a few days."

"Tell the jury about the broken knife."

"The dog found it floating in the parlor, with the blade broken."

"You had not left it down-stairs?"

"No, sir. I had used it up-stairs, the night before, and left it on a
mantel of the room I was using as a temporary kitchen."

"Was the door of this room locked?"

"No. It was standing open."

"Were you not asleep in this room?"

"Yes."

"You heard no one come in?"

"No one--until Mr. Reynolds roused me."

"Where did you find the blade?"

"Behind the bed in Mr. Ladley's room."

"What else did you find in the room?"

"A blood-stained towel behind the wash-stand. Also, my onyx clock was
missing."

"Where was the clock when the Ladleys were moved up into this room?"

"On the mantel. I wound it just before they came up-stairs."

"When you saw Mrs. Ladley on Sunday, did she say she was going away?"

"No, sir."

"Did you see any preparation for a journey?"

"The black and white dress was laid out on the bed, and a small bag.
She said she was taking the dress to the theater to lend to Miss
Hope."

"Is that all she said?"

"No. She said she'd been wishing her husband would drown; that he was
a fiend."

I could see that my testimony had made an impression.




CHAPTER XII

The slipper, the rope, the towel, and the knife and blade were
produced in court, and I identified them all. They made a noticeable
impression on the jury. Then Mr. Llewellyn, the lawyer for the
defense, cross-examined me.

"Is it not true, Mrs. Pitman," he said, "that many articles,
particularly shoes and slippers, are found floating around during a
flood?"

"Yes," I admitted.

"Now, you say the dog found this slipper floating in the hall and
brought it to you. Are you sure this slipper belonged to Jennie
Brice?"

"She wore it. I presume it belonged to her."

"Ahem. Now, Mrs. Pitman, after the Ladleys had been moved to the
upper floor, did you search their bedroom and the connecting room
down-stairs?"

"No, sir."

"Ah. Then, how do you know that this slipper was not left on the floor
or in a closet?"

"It is possible, but not likely. Anyhow, it was not the slipper alone.
It was the other things _and_ the slipper. It was--"

"Exactly. Now, Mrs. Pitman, this knife. Can you identify it
positively?"

"I can."

"But isn't it true that this is a very common sort of knife? One that
nearly every housewife has in her possession?"

"Yes, sir. But that knife handle has three notches in it. I put the
notches there myself."

"Before this presumed crime?"

"Yes, sir."

"For what purpose?"

"My neighbors were constantly borrowing things. It was a means of
identification."

"Then this knife is yours?"

"Yes."

"Tell again where you left it the night before it was found floating
down-stairs."

"On a shelf over the stove."

"Could the dog have reached it there?"

"Not without standing on a hot stove."

"Is it not possible that Mr. Ladley, unable to untie the boat,
borrowed your knife to cut the boat's painter?"

"No painter was cut that I heard about The paper-hanger--"

"No, no. The boat's painter--the rope."

"Oh! Well, he might have. He never said."

"Now then, this towel, Mrs. Pitman. Did not the prisoner, on the
following day, tell you that he had cut his wrist in freeing the boat,
and ask you for some court-plaster?"

"He did not," I said firmly.

"You have not seen a scar on his wrist?"

"No." I glanced at Mr. Ladley: he was smiling, as if amused. It made
me angry. "And what's more," I flashed, "if he has a cut on his wrist,
he put it there himself, to account for the towel."

I was sorry the next moment that I had said it, but it was too late.
The counsel for the defense moved to exclude the answer and I received
a caution that I deserved. Then:

"You saw Mr. Ladley when he brought your boat back?"

"Yes."

"What time was that?"

"A quarter after four Monday morning."

"Did he come in quietly, like a man trying to avoid attention?"

"Not particularly. It would have been of no use. The dog was barking."

"What did he say?"

"That he had been out for medicine. That his wife was sick."

"Do you know a pharmacist named Alexander--Jonathan Alexander?"

"There is such a one, but I don't know him."

I was excused, and Mr. Reynolds was called. He had heard no quarreling
that Sunday night; had even heard Mrs. Ladley laughing. This was
about nine o'clock. Yes, they had fought in the afternoon. He had not
overheard any words, but their voices were quarrelsome, and once he
heard a chair or some article of furniture overthrown. Was awakened
about two by footsteps on the stairs, followed by the sound of oars
in the lower hall. He told his story plainly and simply. Under
cross-examination admitted that he was fond of detective stories and
had tried to write one himself; that he had said at the store that
he would like to see that "conceited ass" swing, referring to the
prisoner; that he had sent flowers to Jennie Brice at the theater, and
had made a few advances to her, without success.

My head was going round. I don't know yet how the police learned it
all, but by the time poor Mr. Reynolds left the stand, half the people
there believed that he had been in love with Jennie Brice, that she
had spurned his advances, and that there was more to the story than
any of them had suspected.

Miss Hope's story held without any alteration under the
cross-examination. She was perfectly at ease, looked handsome and well
dressed, and could not be shaken. She told how Jennie Brice had been
in fear of her life, and had asked her, only the week before she
disappeared, to allow her to go home with her--Miss Hope. She told
of the attack of hysteria in her dressing-room, and that the missing
woman had said that her husband would kill her some day. There was
much wrangling over her testimony, and I believe at least a part of it
was not allowed to go to the jury. But I am not a lawyer, and I repeat
what I recall.

"Did she say that he had attacked her?"

"Yes, more than once. She was a large woman, fairly muscular, and had
always held her own."

"Did she say that these attacks came when he had been drinking?"

"I believe he was worse then."

"Did she give any reason for her husband's attitude to her?"

"She said he wanted to marry another woman."

There was a small sensation at this. If proved, it established a
motive.

"Did she know who the other woman was?"

"I believe not. She was away most of the day, and he put in his time
as he liked."

"Did Miss Brice ever mention the nature of the threats he made against
her?"

"No, I think not."

"Have you examined the body washed ashore at Sewickley?"

"Yes--" in a low voice.

"Is it the body of Jennie Brice?"

"I can not say."

"Does the remaining hand look like the hand of Jennie Brice?"

"Very much. The nails are filed to points, as she wore hers."

"Did you ever know of Jennie Brice having a scar on her breast?"

"No, but that would be easily concealed."

"Just what do you mean?"

"Many actresses conceal defects. She could have worn flesh-colored
plaster and covered it with powder. Also, such a scar would not
necessarily be seen."

"Explain that."

"Most of Jennie Brice's decollete gowns were cut to a point. This
would conceal such a scar."

Miss Hope was excused, and Jennie Brice's sister from Olean was
called. She was a smaller woman than Jennie Brice had been, very
lady-like in her manner. She said she was married and living in Olean;
she had not seen her sister for several years, but had heard from her
often. The witness had discouraged the marriage to the prisoner.

"Why?"

"She had had bad luck before."

"She had been married before?"

"Yes, to a man named John Bellows. They were in vaudeville together,
on the Keith Circuit. They were known as The Pair of Bellows."

I sat up at this for John Bellows had boarded at my house.

"Mr. Bellows is dead?"

"I think not. She divorced him."

"Did you know of any scar on your sister's body?"

"I never heard of one."

"Have you seen the body found at Sewickley?"

"Yes"--faintly.

"Can you identify it?"

"No, sir."

A flurry was caused during the afternoon by Timothy Senft. He
testified to what I already knew--that between three and four on
Monday morning, during the height of the flood, he had seen from his
shanty-boat a small skiff caught in the current near the Ninth Street
bridge. He had shouted encouragingly to the man in the boat, running
out a way on the ice to make him hear. He had told him to row with the
current, and to try to steer in toward shore. He had followed close to
the river bank in his own boat. Below Sixth Street the other boat was
within rope-throwing distance. He had pulled it in, and had towed it
well back out of the current. The man in the boat was the prisoner.
Asked if the prisoner gave any explanation--yes, he said he couldn't
sleep, and had thought to tire himself rowing. Had been caught in the
current before he knew it. Saw nothing suspicious in or about the
boat. As they passed the police patrol boat, prisoner had called to
ask if there was much distress, and expressed regret when told there
was.

Tim was excused. He had made a profound impression. I would not have
given a dollar for Mr. Ladley's chance with the jury, at that time.




CHAPTER XIII

The prosecution produced many witnesses during the next two days:
Shanty-boat Tim's story withstood the most vigorous cross-examination.
After him, Mr. Bronson from the theater corroborated Miss Hope's story
of Jennie Brice's attack of hysteria in the dressing-room, and told of
taking her home that night.

He was a poor witness, nervous and halting. He weighed each word
before he said it, and he made a general unfavorable impression. I
thought he was holding something back. In view of what Mr. Pitman
would have called the denouement, his attitude is easily explained.
But I was puzzled then.

So far, the prosecution had touched but lightly on the possible motive
for a crime--the woman. But on the third day, to my surprise, a Mrs.
Agnes Murray was called. It was the Mrs. Murray I had seen at the
morgue.

I have lost the clipping of that day's trial, but I remember her
testimony perfectly.

She was a widow, living above a small millinery shop on Federal
Street, Allegheny. She had one daughter, Alice, who did stenography
and typing as a means of livelihood. She had no office, and worked at
home. Many of the small stores in the neighborhood employed her to
send out their bills. There was a card at the street entrance beside
the shop, and now and then strangers brought her work.

Early in December the prisoner had brought her the manuscript of a
play to type, and from that time on he came frequently, sometimes
every day, bringing a few sheets of manuscript at a time. Sometimes he
came without any manuscript, and would sit and talk while he smoked a
cigarette. They had thought him unmarried.

On Wednesday, February twenty-eighth, Alice Murray had disappeared.
She had taken some of her clothing--not all, and had left a note. The
witness read the note aloud in a trembling voice:

    "DEAR MOTHER: When you get this I shall be married to Mr. Ladley.
    Don't worry. Will write again from N.Y. Lovingly,

    "ALICE."

From that time until a week before, she had not heard from her
daughter. Then she had a card, mailed from Madison Square Station, New
York City. The card merely said:

    "Am well and working. ALICE."

The defense was visibly shaken. They had not expected this, and I
thought even Mr. Ladley, whose calm had continued unbroken, paled.

So far, all had gone well for the prosecution. They had proved a
crime, as nearly as circumstantial evidence could prove a crime, and
they had established a motive. But in the identification of the
body, so far they had failed. The prosecution "rested," as they say,
although they didn't rest much, on the afternoon of the third day.

The defense called, first of all, Eliza Shaeffer. She told of a woman
answering the general description of Jennie Brice having spent two
days at the Shaeffer farm at Horner. Being shown photographs of
Jennie Brice, she said she thought it was the same woman, but was
not certain. She told further of the woman leaving unexpectedly on
Wednesday of that week from Thornville. On cross-examination, being
shown the small photograph which Mr. Graves had shown me, she
identified the woman in the group as being the woman in question.
As the face was in shadow, knew it more by the dress and hat: she
described the black and white dress and the hat with red trimming.

The defense then called me. I had to admit that the dress and hat as
described were almost certainly the ones I had seen on the bed in
Jennie Brice's room the day before she disappeared. I could not say
definitely whether the woman in the photograph was Jennie Brice or
not; under a magnifying-glass thought it might be.

Defense called Jonathan Alexander, a druggist who testified that on
the night in question he had been roused at half past three by the
prisoner, who had said his wife was ill, and had purchased a bottle of
a proprietary remedy from him. His identification was absolute.

The defense called Jennie Brice's sister, and endeavored to prove
that Jennie Brice had had no such scar. It was shown that she was on
intimate terms with her family and would hardly have concealed an
operation of any gravity from them.

The defense scored that day. They had shown that the prisoner had told
the truth when he said he had gone to a pharmacy for medicine that
night for his wife; and they had shown that a woman, answering the
description of Jennie Brice, spent two days in a town called Horner,
and had gone from there on Wednesday after the crime. And they had
shown that this woman was attired as Jennie Brice had been.

That was the way things stood on the afternoon of the fourth day, when
court adjourned.

Mr. Reynolds was at home when I got there. He had been very much
subdued since the developments of that first day of the trial, sat
mostly in his own room, and had twice brought me a bunch of jonquils
as a peace-offering. He had the kettle boiling when I got home.

"You have had a number of visitors," he said. "Our young friend Howell
has been here, and Mr. Holcombe has arrived and has a man in his
room."

Mr. Holcombe came down a moment after, with his face beaming.

"I think we've got him, Mrs. Pitman," he said. "The jury won't even go
out of the box."

But further than that he would not explain. He said he had a witness
locked in his room, and he'd be glad of supper for him, as they'd both
come a long ways. And he went out and bought some oysters and a bottle
or two of beer. But as far as I know, he kept him locked up all that
night in the second-story front room. I don't think the man knew he
was a prisoner. I went in to turn down the bed, and he was sitting
by the window, reading the evening paper's account of the trial--an
elderly gentleman, rather professional-looking.

Mr. Holcombe slept on the upper landing of the hall that night, rolled
in a blanket--not that I think his witness even thought of escaping,
but the little man was taking no chances.

At eight o'clock that night the bell rang. It was Mr. Howell. I
admitted him myself, and he followed me back to the dining-room. I had
not seen him for several weeks, and the change in him startled me. He
was dressed carefully, but his eyes were sunken in his head, and he
looked as if he had not slept for days.

Mr. Reynolds had gone up-stairs, not finding me socially inclined.

"You haven't been sick, Mr. Howell, have you?" I asked.

"Oh, no, I'm well enough, I've been traveling about. Those infernal
sleeping-cars--"

His voice trailed off, and I saw him looking at my mother's picture,
with the jonquils beneath.

"That's curious!" he said, going closer. "It--it looks almost like
Lida Harvey."

"My mother," I said simply.

"Have you seen her lately?"

"My mother?" I asked, startled.

"No, Lida."

"I saw her a few days ago."

"Here?"

"Yes. She came here, Mr. Howell, two weeks ago. She looks badly--as if
she is worrying."

"Not--about me?" he asked eagerly.

"Yes, about you. What possessed you to go away as you did? When
my--bro--when her uncle accused you of something, you ran away,
instead of facing things like a man."

"I was trying to find the one person who could clear me, Mrs. Pitman."
He sat back, with his eyes closed; he looked ill enough to be in bed.

"And you succeeded?"

"No."

I thought perhaps he had not been eating and I offered him food, as
I had once before. But he refused it, with the ghost of his boyish
smile.

"I'm hungry, but it's not food I want. I want to see _her_," he said.

I sat down across from him and tried to mend a table-cloth, but I
could not sew. I kept seeing those two young things, each sick for
a sight of the other, and, from wishing they could have a minute
together, I got to planning it for them.

"Perhaps," I said finally, "if you want it very much--"

"Very much!"

"And if you will sit quiet, and stop tapping your fingers together
until you drive me crazy, I might contrive it for you. For five
minutes," I said. "Not a second longer."

He came right over and put his arms around me.

"Who are you, anyhow?" he said. "You who turn to the world the frozen
mask of a Union Street boarding-house landlady, who are a gentlewoman
by every instinct and training, and a girl at heart? Who are you?"

"I'll tell you what I am," I said. "I'm a romantic old fool, and you'd
better let me do this quickly, before I change my mind."

He freed me at that, but he followed to the telephone, and stood by
while I got Lida. He was in a perfect frenzy of anxiety, turning red
and white by turns, and in the middle of the conversation taking the
receiver bodily from me and holding it to his own ear.

She said she thought she could get away; she spoke guardedly, as if
Alma were near, but I gathered that she would come as soon as she
could, and, from the way her voice broke, I knew she was as excited as
the boy beside me.

She came, heavily coated and veiled, at a quarter after ten that
night, and I took her back to the dining-room, where he was waiting.
He did not make a move toward her, but stood there with his very lips
white, looking at her. And, at first, she did not make a move either,
but stood and gazed at him, thin and white, a wreck of himself. Then:

"Ell!" she cried, and ran around the table to him, as he held out his
arms.

The school-teacher was out. I went into the parlor bedroom and sat in
the cozy corner in the dark. I had done a wrong thing, and I was glad
of it. And sitting there in the darkness, I went over my own life
again. After all, it had been my own life; I had lived it; no one else
had shaped it for me. And if it was cheerless and colorless now, it
had had its big moments. Life is measured by big moments.

If I let the two children in the dining-room have fifteen big moments,
instead of five, who can blame me?




CHAPTER XIV

The next day was the sensational one of the trial. We went through
every phase of conviction: Jennie Brice was living. Jennie Brice was
dead. The body found at Sewickley could not be Jennie Brice's. The
body found at Sewickley _was_ Jennie Brice's. And so it went on.

The defense did an unexpected thing in putting Mr. Ladley on the
stand. That day, for the first time, he showed the wear and tear of
the ordeal. He had no flower in his button-hole, and the rims of his
eyes were red. But he was quite cool. His stage training had taught
him not only to endure the eyes of the crowd, but to find in its gaze
a sort of stimulant. He made a good witness, I must admit.

He replied to the usual questions easily. After five minutes or so Mr.
Llewellyn got down to work.

"Mr. Ladley, you have said that your wife was ill the night of March
fourth?"

"Yes."

"What was the nature of her illness?"

"She had a functional heart trouble, not serious."

"Will you tell us fully the events of that night?"

"I had been asleep when my wife wakened me. She asked for a medicine
she used in these attacks. I got up and found the bottle, but it was
empty. As she was nervous and frightened, I agreed to try to get some
at a drug store. I went down-stairs, took Mrs. Pitman's boat, and went
to several stores before I could awaken a pharmacist."

"You cut the boat loose?"

"Yes. It was tied in a woman's knot, or series of knots. I could not
untie it, and I was in a hurry."

"How did you cut it?"

"With my pocket-knife."

"You did not use Mrs. Pitman's bread-knife?"

"I did not."

"And in cutting it, you cut your wrist, did you?"

"Yes. The knife slipped. I have the scar still."

"What did you do then?"

"I went back to the room, and stanched the blood with a towel."

"From whom did you get the medicine?"

"From Alexander's Pharmacy."

"At what time?"

"I am not certain. About three o'clock, probably."

"You went directly back home?"

Mr. Ladley hesitated. "No," he said finally. "My wife had had these
attacks, but they were not serious. I was curious to see how the
river-front looked and rowed out too far. I was caught in the current
and nearly carried away."

"You came home after that?"

"Yes, at once. Mrs. Ladley was better and had dropped asleep. She
wakened as I came in. She was disagreeable about the length of time I
had been gone, and would not let me explain. We--quarreled, and she
said she was going to leave me. I said that as she had threatened this
before and had never done it, I would see that she really started. At
daylight I rowed her to Federal Street."

"What had she with her?"

"A small brown valise."

"How was she dressed?"

"In a black and white dress and hat, with a long black coat."

"What was the last you saw of her?"

"She was going across the Sixth Street bridge."

"Alone?"

"No. She went with a young man we knew."

There was a stir in the court room at this.

"Who was the young man?"

"A Mr. Howell, a reporter on a newspaper here."

"Have you seen Mr. Howell since your arrest?"

"No, sir. He has been out of the city."

I was so excited by this time that I could hardly hear. I missed some
of the cross-examination. The district attorney pulled Mr. Ladley's
testimony to pieces.

"You cut the boat's painter with your pocket-knife?"

"I did."

"Then how do you account for Mrs. Pitman's broken knife, with the
blade in your room?"

"I have no theory about it. She may have broken it herself. She had
used it the day before to lift tacks out of a carpet."

That was true; I had.

"That early Monday morning was cold, was it not?"

"Yes. Very."

"Why did your wife leave without her fur coat?"

"I did not know she had until we had left the house. Then I did not
ask her. She would not speak to me."

"I see. But is it not true that, upon a wet fur coat being shown you
as your wife's, you said it could not be hers, as she had taken hers
with her?"

"I do not recall such a statement."

"You recall a coat being shown you?"

"Yes. Mrs. Pitman brought a coat to my door, but I was working on a
play I am writing, and I do not remember what I said. The coat was
ruined. I did not want it. I probably said the first thing I thought
of to get rid of the woman."

I got up at that. I'd held my peace about the bread-knife, but this
was too much. However, the moment I started to speak, somebody pushed
me back into my chair and told me to be quiet.

"Now, you say you were in such a hurry to get this medicine for your
wife that you cut the rope, thus cutting your wrist."

"Yes. I have the scar still."

"You could not wait to untie the boat, and yet you went along the
river-front to see how high the water was?"

"Her alarm had excited me. But when I got out, and remembered that
the doctors had told us she would never die in an attack, I grew more
composed."

"You got the medicine first, you say?"

"Yes."

"Mr. Alexander has testified that you got the medicine at
three-thirty. It has been shown that you left the house at two, and
got back about four. Does not this show that with all your alarm you
went to the river-front first?"

"I was gone from two to four," he replied calmly. "Mr. Alexander must
be wrong about the time I wakened him. I got the medicine first."

"When your wife left you at the bridge, did she say where she was
going?"

"No."

"You claim that this woman at Horner was your wife?"

"I think it likely."

"Was there an onyx clock in the second-story room when you moved into
it?"

"I do not recall the clock."

"Your wife did not take an onyx clock away with her?"

Mr. Ladley smiled. "No."

The defense called Mr. Howell next. He looked rested, and the happier
for having seen Lida, but he was still pale and showed the strain of
some hidden anxiety. What that anxiety was, the next two days were to
tell us all.

"Mr. Howell," Mr. Llewellyn asked, "you know the prisoner?"

"Slightly."

"State when you met him."

"On Sunday morning, March the fourth. I went to see him."

"Will you tell us the nature of that visit?"

"My paper had heard he was writing a play for himself. I was to get an
interview, with photographs, if possible."

"You saw his wife at that time?"

"Yes."

"When did you see her again?"

"The following morning, at six o'clock, or a little later. I walked
across the Sixth Street bridge with her, and put her on a train for
Horner, Pennsylvania."

"You are positive it was Jennie Brice?"

"Yes. I watched her get out of the boat, while her husband steadied
it."

"If you knew this, why did you not come forward sooner?"

"I have been out of the city."

"But you knew the prisoner had been arrested, and that this testimony
of yours would be invaluable to him."

"Yes. But I thought it necessary to produce Jennie Brice herself. My
unsupported word--"

"You have been searching for Jennie Brice?"

"Yes. Since March the eighth."

"How was she dressed when you saw her last?"

"She wore a red and black hat and a black coat. She carried a small
brown valise."

"Thank you."

The cross-examination did not shake his testimony. But it brought out
some curious things. Mr. Howell refused to say how he happened to be
at the end of the Sixth Street bridge at that hour, or why he had
thought it necessary, on meeting a woman he claimed to have known only
twenty-four hours, to go with her to the railway station and put her
on a train.

The jury was visibly impressed and much shaken. For Mr. Howell carried
conviction in every word he said; he looked the district attorney
in the eye, and once when our glances crossed he even smiled at me
faintly. But I saw why he had tried to find Jennie Brice, and had
dreaded testifying. Not a woman in that court room, and hardly a man,
but believed when he left the stand, that he was, or had been, Jennie
Brice's lover, and as such was assisting her to leave her husband.

"Then you believe," the district attorney said at the end,--"you
believe, Mr. Howell, that Jennie Brice is living?"

"Jennie Brice was living on Monday morning, March the fifth," he said
firmly.

"Miss Shaeffer has testified that on Wednesday this woman, who you
claim was Jennie Brice, sent a letter to you from Horner. Is that the
case?"

"Yes."

"The letter was signed 'Jennie Brice'?"

"It was signed 'J.B.'"

"Will you show the court that letter?"

"I destroyed it."

"It was a personal letter?"

"It merely said she had arrived safely, and not to let any one know
where she was."

"And yet you destroyed it?"

"A postscript said to do so."

"Why?"

"I do not know. An extra precaution probably."

"You were under the impression that she was going to stay there?"

"She was to have remained for a week."

"And you have been searching for this woman for two months?"

He quailed, but his voice was steady. "Yes," he admitted.

He was telling the truth, even if it was not all the truth. I believe,
had it gone to the jury then, Mr. Ladley would have been acquitted.
But, late that afternoon, things took a new turn. Counsel for the
prosecution stated to the court that he had a new and important
witness, and got permission to introduce this further evidence. The
witness was a Doctor Littlefield, and proved to be my one-night tenant
of the second-story front. Holcombe's prisoner of the night before
took the stand. The doctor was less impressive in full daylight; he
was a trifle shiny, a bit bulbous as to nose and indifferent as to
finger-nails. But his testimony was given with due professional
weight.

"You are a doctor of medicine, Doctor Littlefield?" asked the district
attorney.

"Yes."

"In active practise?"

"I have a Cure for Inebriates in Des Moines, Iowa. I was formerly in
general practise in New York City."

"You knew Jennie Ladley?"

"I had seen her at different theaters. And she consulted me
professionally at one time in New York."

"You operated on her, I believe?"

"Yes. She came to me to have a name removed. It had been tattooed over
her heart."

"You removed it?"

"Not at once. I tried fading the marks with goat's milk, but she was
impatient. On the third visit to my office she demanded that the name
be cut out."

"You did it?"

"Yes. She refused a general anesthetic and I used cocaine. The name
was John--I believe a former husband. She intended to marry again."

A titter ran over the court room. People strained to the utmost are
always glad of an excuse to smile. The laughter of a wrought-up crowd
always seems to me half hysterical.

"Have you seen photographs of the scar on the body found at Sewickley?
Or the body itself?"

"No, I have not."

"Will you describe the operation?"

"I made a transverse incision for the body of the name, and two
vertical ones--one longer for the _J_, the other shorter, for the
stem of the _h_. There was a dot after the name. I made a half-inch
incision for it."

"Will you sketch the cicatrix as you recall it?"

The doctor made a careful drawing on a pad that was passed to him. The
drawing was much like this.

Line for line, dot for dot, it was the scar on the body found at
Sewickley.

"You are sure the woman was Jennie Brice?"

"She sent me tickets for the theater shortly after. And I had an
announcement of her marriage to the prisoner, some weeks later."

"Were there any witnesses to the operation?"

"My assistant; I can produce him at any time."

That was not all of the trial, but it was the decisive moment. Shortly
after, the jury withdrew, and for twenty-four hours not a word was
heard from them.




CHAPTER XV

After twenty-four hours' deliberation, the jury brought in a verdict
of guilty. It was a first-degree verdict. Mr. Howell's unsupported
word had lost out against a scar.

Contrary to my expectation, Mr. Holcombe was not jubilant over the
verdict. He came into the dining-room that night and stood by the
window, looking out into the yard.

"It isn't logical," he said. "In view of Howell's testimony, it's
ridiculous! Heaven help us under this jury system, anyhow! Look at the
facts! Howell knows the woman: he sees her on Monday morning, and
puts her on a train out of town. The boy is telling the truth. He has
nothing to gain by coming forward, and everything to lose. Very
well: she was alive on Monday. We know where she was on Tuesday and
Wednesday. Anyhow, during those days her gem of a husband was in jail.
He was freed Thursday night, and from that time until his rearrest on
the following Tuesday, I had him under observation every moment. He
left the jail Thursday night, and on Saturday the body floated in at
Sewickley. If it was done by Ladley, it must have been done on Friday,
and on Friday he was in view through the periscope all day!"

Mr. Reynolds came in and joined us. "There's only one way out that I
see," he said mildly. "Two women have been fool enough to have a name
tattooed over their hearts. No woman ever thought enough of me to have
_my_ name put on her."

"I hope not," I retorted. Mr. Reynold's first name is Zachariah.

But, as Mr. Holcombe said, all that had been proved was that Jennie
Brice was dead, probably murdered. He could not understand the defense
letting the case go to the jury without their putting more stress on
Mr. Howell's story. But we were to understand that soon, and many
other things. Mr. Holcombe told me that evening of learning from John
Bellows of the tattooed name on Jennie Brice and of how, after an
almost endless search, he had found the man who had cut the name away.

At eight o'clock the door-bell rang. Mr. Reynolds had gone to lodge,
he being an Elk and several other things, and much given to regalia
in boxes, and having his picture in the newspapers in different
outlandish costumes. Mr. Pitman used to say that man, being denied his
natural love for barbaric adornment in his every-day clothing, took to
the different fraternities as an excuse for decking himself out. But
this has nothing to do with the door-bell.

It was old Isaac. He had a basket in his hand, and he stepped into the
hall and placed it on the floor.

"Evening, Miss Bess," he said. "Can you see a bit of company
to-night?"

"I can always see you," I replied. But he had not meant himself. He
stepped to the door, and opening it, beckoned to some one across the
street. It was Lida!

She came in, her color a little heightened, and old Isaac stood back,
beaming at us both; I believe it was one of the crowning moments
of the old man's life--thus to see his Miss Bess and Alma's child
together.

"Is--is he here yet?" she asked me nervously.

"I did not know he was coming." There was no need to ask which "he."
There was only one for Lida.

"He telephoned me, and asked me to come here. Oh, Mrs. Pitman, I'm
so afraid for him!" She had quite forgotten Isaac. I turned to the
school-teacher's room and opened the door. "The woman who belongs here
is out at a lecture," I said. "Come in here, Ikkie, and I'll find the
evening paper for you.

"'Ikkie'!" said Lida, and stood staring at me. I think I went white.

"The lady heah and I is old friends," Isaac said, with his splendid
manner. "Her mothah, Miss Lida, her mothah--"

But even old Isaac choked up at that, and I closed the door on him.

"How queer!" Lida said, looking at me. "So Isaac knew your mother?
Have you lived always in Allegheny, Mrs. Pitman?"

"I was born in Pittsburgh," I evaded. "I went away for a long time,
but I always longed for the hurry and activity of the old home town.
So here I am again."

Fortunately, like all the young, her own affairs engrossed her. She
was flushed with the prospect of meeting her lover, tremulous over
what the evening might bring. The middle-aged woman who had come back
to the hurry of the old town, and who, pushed back into an eddy of the
flood district, could only watch the activity and the life from behind
a "Rooms to Let" sign, did not concern her much. Nor should she have.

Mr. Howell came soon after. He asked for her, and going back to the
dining-room, kissed her quietly. He had an air of resolve, a sort of
grim determination, that was a relief from the half-frantic look he
had worn before. He asked to have Mr. Holcombe brought down, and so
behold us all, four of us, sitting around the table--Mr. Holcombe with
his note-book, I with my mending, and the boy with one of Lida's hands
frankly under his on the red table-cloth.

"I want to tell all of you the whole story," he began. "To-morrow I
shall go to the district attorney and confess, but--I want you all to
have it first. I can't sleep again until I get it off my chest. Mrs.
Pitman has suffered through me, and Mr. Holcombe here has spent money
and time--"

Lida did not speak, but she drew her chair closer, and put her other
hand over his.

"I want to get it straight, if I can. Let me see. It was on Sunday,
the fourth, that the river came up, wasn't it? Yes. Well, on the
Thursday before that I met you, Mr. Holcombe, in a restaurant in
Pittsburgh. Do you remember?"

Mr. Holcombe nodded.

"We were talking of crime, and I said no man should be hanged on
purely circumstantial evidence. You affirmed that a well-linked chain
of circumstantial evidence could properly hang a man. We had a long
argument, in which I was worsted. There was a third man at the
table--Bronson, the business manager of the Liberty Theater."

"Who sided with you," put in Mr. Holcombe, "and whose views I refused
to entertain because, as publicity man for a theater, he dealt in
fiction rather than in fact."

"Precisely. You may recall, Mr. Holcombe, that you offered to hang any
man we would name, given a proper chain of circumstantial evidence
against him?"

"Yes."

"After you left, Bronson spoke to me. He said business at the theater
was bad, and complained of the way the papers used, or would not use,
his stuff. He said the Liberty Theater had not had a proper deal, and
that he was tempted to go over and bang one of the company on the
head, and so get a little free advertising.

"I said he ought to be able to fake a good story; but he maintained
that a newspaper could smell a faked story a mile away, and that,
anyhow, all the good stunts had been pulled off. I agreed with him. I
remember saying that nothing but a railroad wreck or a murder hit the
public very hard these days, and that I didn't feel like wrecking the
Pennsylvania Limited.

"He leaned over the table and looked at me. 'Well, how about a murder,
then?' he said. 'You get the story for your paper, and I get some
advertising for the theater. We need it, that's sure.'

"I laughed it off, and we separated. But at two o'clock Bronson called
me up again. I met him in his office at the theater, and he told me
that Jennie Brice, who was out of the cast that week, had asked for a
week's vacation. She had heard of a farm at a town called Horner, and
she wanted to go there to rest.

"'Now the idea is this,' he said. 'She's living with her husband, and
he has threatened her life more than once. It would be easy enough to
frame up something to look as if he'd made away with her. We'd get a
week of excitement, more advertising than we'd ordinarily get in a
year; you get a corking news story, and find Jennie Brice at the end,
getting the credit for that. Jennie gets a hundred dollars and a rest,
and Ladley, her husband, gets, say, two hundred.'

"Mr. Bronson offered to put up the money, and I agreed. The flood came
just then, and was considerable help. It made a good setting. I went
to my city editor, and got an assignment to interview Ladley about
this play of his. Then Bronson and I went together to see the Ladleys
on Sunday morning, and as they needed money, they agreed. But Ladley
insisted on fifty dollars a week extra if he had to go to jail. We
promised it, but we did not intend to let things go so far as that.

"In the Ladleys' room that Sunday morning, we worked it all out. The
hardest thing was to get Jennie Brice's consent; but she agreed,
finally. We arranged a list of clues, to be left around, and Ladley
was to go out in the night and to be heard coming back. I told him to
quarrel with his wife that afternoon,--although I don't believe
they needed to be asked to do it,--and I suggested also the shoe or
slipper, to be found floating around."

"Just a moment," said Mr. Holcombe, busy with his note-book. "Did you
suggest the onyx clock?"

"No. No clock was mentioned. The--the clock has puzzled me."

"The towel?"

"Yes. I said no murder was complete without blood, but he kicked on
that--said he didn't mind the rest, but he'd be hanged if he was going
to slash himself. But, as it happened, he cut his wrist while cutting
the boat loose, and so we had the towel."

"Pillow-slip?" asked Mr. Holcombe.

"Well, no. There was nothing said about a pillow-slip. Didn't he say
he burned it accidentally?"

"So he claimed." Mr. Holcombe made another entry in his book.

"Then I said every murder had a weapon. He was to have a pistol at
first, but none of us owned one. Mrs. Ladley undertook to get a knife
from Mrs. Pitman's kitchen, and to leave it around, not in full view,
but where it could be found."

"A broken knife?"

"No. Just a knife."

"He was to throw the knife into the water?"

"That was not arranged. I only gave him a general outline. He was to
add any interesting details that might occur to him. The idea, of
course, was to give the police plenty to work on, and just when
they thought they had it all, and when the theater had had a lot of
booming, and I had got a good story, to produce Jennie Brice, safe
and well. We were not to appear in it at all. It would have worked
perfectly, but we forgot to count on one thing--Jennie Brice hated her
husband."

"Not really hated him!" cried Lida.

"_Hated_ him. She is letting him hang. She could save him by coming
forward now, and she won't do it. She is hiding so he will go to the
gallows."

There was a pause at that. It seemed too incredible, too inhuman.

"Then, early that Monday morning, you smuggled Jennie Brice out of the
city?"

"Yes. That was the only thing we bungled. We fixed the hour a little
too late, and I was seen by Miss Harvey's uncle, walking across the
bridge with a woman."

"Why did you meet her openly, and take her to the train?"

Mr. Howell bent forward and smiled across at the little man. "One
of your own axioms, sir," he said. "Do the natural thing; upset the
customary order of events as little as possible. Jennie Brice went to
the train, because that was where she wanted to go. But as Ladley was
to protest that his wife had left town, and as the police would
be searching for a solitary woman, I went with her. We went in a
leisurely manner. I bought her a magazine and a morning paper, asked
the conductor to fix her window, and, in general, acted the devoted
husband seeing his wife off on a trip. I even"--he smiled--"I even
promised to feed the canary."

Lida took her hands away. "Did you kiss her good-by?" she demanded.

"Not even a chaste salute," he said. His spirits were rising. It was,
as often happens, as if the mere confession removed the guilt. I have
seen little boys who have broken a window show the same relief after
telling about it.

"For a day or two Bronson and I sat back, enjoying the stir-up. Things
turned out as we had expected. Business boomed at the theater. I got
a good story, and some few kind words from my city editor. Then--the
explosion came. I got a letter from Jennie Brice saying she was going
away, and that we need not try to find her. I went to Horner, but I
had lost track of her completely. Even then, we did not believe things
so bad as they turned out to be. We thought she was giving us a bad
time, but that she would show up.

"Ladley was in a blue funk for a time. Bronson and I went to him. We
told him how the thing had slipped up. We didn't want to go to the
police and confess if we could help it. Finally, he agreed to stick it
out until she was found, at a hundred dollars a week. It took all we
could beg, borrow and steal. But now--we have to come out with the
story anyhow."

Mr. Holcombe sat up and closed his note-book with a snap. "I'm not so
sure of that," he said impressively. "I wonder if you realize, young
man, that, having provided a perfect defense for this man Ladley, you
provided him with every possible inducement to make away with his
wife? Secure in your coming forward at the last minute and confessing
the hoax to save him, was there anything he might not have dared with
impunity?"

"But I tell you I took Jennie Brice out of town on Monday morning."

"_Did you_?" asked Mr. Holcombe sternly.

But at that, the school-teacher, having come home and found old Isaac
sound asleep in her cozy corner, set up such a screaming for the
police that our meeting broke up. Nor would Mr. Holcombe explain any
further.




CHAPTER XVI

Mr. Holcombe was up very early the next morning. I heard him moving
around at five o'clock, and at six he banged at my door and demanded
to know at what time the neighborhood rose: he had been up for an hour
and there were no signs of life. He was more cheerful after he had had
a cup of coffee, commented on Lida's beauty, and said that Howell was
a lucky chap.

"That is what worries me, Mr. Holcombe," I said. "I am helping the
affair along and--what if it turns out badly?"

He looked at me over his glasses. "It isn't likely to turn out badly,"
he said. "I have never married, Mrs. Pitman, and I have missed a great
deal out of life."

"Perhaps you're better off: if you had married and lost your wife--" I
was thinking of Mr. Pitman.

"Not at all," he said with emphasis. "It's better to have married and
lost than never to have married at all. Every man needs a good woman,
and it doesn't matter how old he is. The older he is, the more he
needs her. I am nearly sixty."

I was rather startled, and I almost dropped the fried potatoes. But
the next moment he had got out his note-book and was going over
the items again. "Pillow-slip," he said, "knife _broken_, onyx
clock--wouldn't think so much of the clock if he hadn't been so
damnably anxious to hide the key, the discrepancy in time as revealed
by the trial--yes, it is as clear as a bell. Mrs. Pitman, does that
Maguire woman next door sleep all day?"

"She's up now," I said, looking out the window.

He was in the hall in a moment, only to come to the door later, hat in
hand. "Is she the only other woman on the street who keeps boarders?"

"She's the only woman who doesn't," I snapped. "She'll keep anything
that doesn't belong to her--except boarders."

"Ah!"

He lighted his corn-cob pipe and stood puffing at it and watching me.
He made me uneasy: I thought he was going to continue the subject of
every man needing a wife, and I'm afraid I had already decided to take
him if he offered, and to put the school-teacher out and have a real
parlor again, but to keep Mr. Reynolds, he being tidy and no bother.

But when he spoke, he was back to the crime again: "Did you ever work
a typewriter?" he asked.

What with the surprise, I was a little sharp. "I don't play any
instrument except an egg-beater," I replied shortly, and went on
clearing the table.

"I wonder--do you remember about the village idiot and the horse? But
of course you do, Mrs. Pitman; you are a woman of imagination. Don't
you think you could be Alice Murray for a few moments? Now think--you
are a stenographer with theatrical ambitions: you meet an actor and
you fall in love with him, and he with you."

"That's hard to imagine, that last."

"Not so hard," he said gently. "Now the actor is going to put you on
the stage, perhaps in this new play, and some day he is going to marry
you."

"Is that what he promised the girl?"

"According to some letters her mother found, yes. The actor is
married, but he tells you he will divorce the wife; you are to wait
for him, and in the meantime he wants you near him; away from the
office, where other men are apt to come in with letters to be typed,
and to chaff you. You are a pretty girl."

"It isn't necessary to overwork my imagination," I said, with a little
bitterness. I had been a pretty girl, but work and worry--

"Now you are going to New York very soon, and in the meantime you have
cut yourself off from all your people. You have no one but this man.
What would you do? Where would you go?"

"How old was the girl?"

"Nineteen."

"I think," I said slowly, "that if I were nineteen, and in love with a
man, and hiding, I would hide as near him as possible. I'd be likely
to get a window that could see his going out and coming in, a place so
near that he could come often to see me."

"Bravo!" he exclaimed. "Of course, with your present wisdom and
experience, you would do nothing so foolish. But this girl was in her
teens; she was not very far away, for he probably saw her that Sunday
afternoon, when he was out for two hours. And as the going was slow
that day, and he had much to tell and explain, I figure she was not
far off. Probably in this very neighborhood."

During the remainder of that morning I saw Mr. Holcombe, at intervals,
going from house to house along Union Street, making short excursions
into side thoroughfares, coming back again and taking up his door-bell
ringing with unflagging energy. I watched him off and on for two
hours. At the end of that time he came back flushed and excited.

"I found the house," he said, wiping his glasses. "She was there, all
right, not so close as we had thought, but as close as she could get."

"And can you trace her?" I asked.

His face changed and saddened. "Poor child!" he said. "She is dead,
Mrs. Pitman!"

"Not she--at Sewickley!"

"No," he said patiently. "That was Jennie Brice."

"But--Mr. Howell--"

"Mr. Howell is a young ass," he said with irritation. "He did not take
Jennie Brice out of the city that morning. He took Alice Murray in
Jennie Brice's clothing, and veiled."

Well, that is five years ago. Five times since then the Allegheny
River, from being a mild and inoffensive stream, carrying a few boats
and a great deal of sewage, has become, a raging destroyer, and has
filled our hearts with fear and our cellars with mud. Five times since
then Molly Maguire has appropriated all that the flood carried from my
premises to hers, and five times have I lifted my carpets and moved
Mr. Holcombe, who occupies the parlor bedroom, to a second-floor room.

A few days ago, as I said at the beginning, we found Peter's body
floating in the cellar, and as soon as the yard was dry, I buried him.
He had grown fat and lazy, but I shall miss him.

Yesterday a riverman fell off a barge along the water-front and was
drowned. They dragged the river for his body, but they did not find
him. But they found something--an onyx clock, with the tattered
remnant of a muslin pillow-slip wrapped around it. It only bore out
the story, as we had known it for five years.

The Murray girl had lived long enough to make a statement to the
police, although Mr. Holcombe only learned this later. On the
statement being shown to Ladley in the jail, and his learning of the
girl's death, he collapsed. He confessed before he was hanged, and his
confession, briefly, was like this:

He had met the Murray girl in connection with the typing of his play,
and had fallen in love with her. He had never cared for his wife, and
would have been glad to get rid of her in any way possible. He had not
intended to kill her, however. He had planned to elope with the Murray
girl, and awaiting an opportunity, had persuaded her to leave home and
to take a room near my house.

Here he had visited her daily, while his wife was at the theater.

They had planned to go to New York together on Monday, March the
fifth. On Sunday, the fourth, however, Mr. Bronson and Mr. Howell
had made their curious proposition. When he accepted, Philip Ladley
maintained that he meant only to carry out the plan as suggested. But
the temptation was too strong for him. That night, while his wife
slept, he had strangled her.

I believe he was frantic with fear, after he had done it. Then it
occurred to him that if he made the body unrecognizable, he would be
safe enough. On that quiet Sunday night, when Mr. Reynolds reported
all peaceful in the Ladley room, he had cut off the poor wretch's head
and had tied it up in a pillow-slip weighted with my onyx clock!

It is a curious fact about the case that the scar which his wife
incurred to enable her to marry him was the means of his undoing. He
insisted, and I believe he was telling the truth, that he did not know
of the scar: that is, his wife had never told him of it, and had been
able to conceal it. He thought she had probably used paraffin in some
way.

In his final statement, written with great care and no little literary
finish, he told the story in detail: of arranging the clues as Mr.
Howell and Mr. Bronson had suggested; of going out in the boat, with
the body, covered with a fur coat, in the bottom of the skiff: of
throwing it into the current above the Ninth Street bridge, and of
seeing the fur coat fall from the boat and carried beyond his reach;
of disposing of the head near the Seventh Street bridge: of going to a
drug store, as per the Howell instructions, and of coming home at four
o'clock, to find me at the head of the stairs.

[Illustration: While his wife slept.]

Several points of confusion remained. One had been caused by Temple
Hope's refusal to admit that the dress and hat that figured in the
case were to be used by her the next week at the theater. Mr. Ladley
insisted that this was the case, and that on that Sunday afternoon
his wife had requested him to take them to Miss Hope; that they had
quarreled as to whether they should be packed in a box or in the brown
valise, and that he had visited Alice Murray instead. It was on the
way there that the idea of finally getting rid of Jennie Brice came
to him. And a way--using the black and white striped dress of the
dispute.

Another point of confusion had been the dismantling of his room that
Monday night, some time between the visit of Temple Hope and the
return of Mr. Holcombe. This was to obtain the scrap of paper
containing the list of clues as suggested by Mr. Howell, a clue that
might have brought about a premature discovery of the so-called hoax.

To the girl he had told nothing of his plan. But he had told her she
was to leave town on an early train the next morning, going as his
wife; that he wished her to wear the black and white dress and hat,
for reasons that he would explain later, and to be veiled heavily,
that to the young man who would put her on the train, and who had seen
Jennie Brice only once, she was to be Jennie Brice; to say as little
as possible and not to raise her veil. Her further instructions were
simple: to go to the place at Horner where Jennie Brice had planned
to go, but to use the name of "Bellows" there. And after she had been
there for a day or two, to go as quietly as possible to New York. He
gave her the address of a boarding-house where he could write her, and
where he would join her later.

He reasoned in this way: That as Alice Murray was to impersonate
Jennie Brice, and Jennie Brice hiding from her husband, she would
naturally discard her name. The name "Bellows" had been hers by a
previous marriage and she might easily resume it. Thus, to establish
his innocence, he had not only the evidence of Howell and Bronson that
the whole thing was a gigantic hoax; he had the evidence of Howell
that he had started Jennie Brice to Horner that Monday morning, that
she had reached Horner, had there assumed an incognito, as Mr.
Pitman would say, and had later disappeared from there, maliciously
concealing herself to work his undoing.

In all probability he would have gone free, the richer by a hundred
dollars for each week of his imprisonment, but for two things: the
flood, which had brought opportunity to his door, had brought Mr
Holcombe to feed Peter, the dog. And the same flood, which should have
carried the headless body as far as Cairo, or even farther on down the
Mississippi, had rejected it in an eddy below a clay bluff at
Sewickley, with its pitiful covering washed from the scar.

Well, it is all over now. Mr Ladley is dead, and Alice Murray, and
even Peter lies in the yard. Mr Reynolds made a small wooden cross
over Peter's grave, and carved "Till we meet again" on it. I dare say
the next flood will find it in Molly Maguire's kitchen.

Mr Howell and Lida are married. Mr Howell inherited some money, I
believe, and what with that and Lida declaring she would either marry
him in a church or run off to Steubenville, Ohio, Alma had to consent.
I went to the wedding and stood near the door, while Alma swept in, in
lavender chiffon and rose point lace. She has not improved with age,
has Alma. But Lida? Lida, under my mother's wedding veil, with her
eyes like stars, seeing no one in the church in all that throng but
the boy who waited at the end of the long church aisle-I wanted to run
out and claim her, my own blood, my more than child.

I sat down and covered my face. And from the pew behind me some one
leaned over and patted my shoulder.

"Miss Bess!" old Isaac said gently. "Don't take on, Miss Bess!"

He came the next day and brought me some lilies from the bride's
bouquet, that she had sent me, and a bottle of champagne from the
wedding supper. I had not tasted champagne for twenty years!

That is all of the story. On summer afternoons sometimes, when the
house is hot, I go to the park and sit. I used to take Peter, but now
he is dead. I like to see Lida's little boy; the nurse knows me by
sight, and lets me talk to the child. He can say "Peter" quite
plainly. But he does not call Alma "Grandmother." The nurse says she
does not like it. He calls her "Nana."

Lida does not forget me. Especially at flood-times, she always comes
to see if I am comfortable. The other day she brought me, with
apologies, the chiffon gown her mother had worn at her wedding. Alma
had never worn it but once, and now she was too stout for it. I took
it; I am not proud, and I should like Molly Maguire to see it.

Mr. Holcombe asked me last night to marry him. He says he needs me,
and that I need him.

I am a lonely woman, and getting old, and I'm tired of watching the
gas meter; and besides, with Peter dead, I need a man in the house all
the time. The flood district is none too orderly. Besides, when I have
a wedding dress laid away and a bottle of good wine, it seems a pity
not to use them.

I think I shall do it.


THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's The Case of Jennie Brice, by Mary Roberts Rinehart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASE OF JENNIE BRICE ***

***** This file should be named 11127.txt or 11127.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/1/2/11127/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst and Project Gutenberg Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


