Project Gutenberg's Deccan Nursery Tales, by Charles Augustus Kincaid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Deccan Nursery Tales
       or, Fairy Tales from the South

Author: Charles Augustus Kincaid

Illustrator: M. V. Dhurandhar

Release Date: December 21, 2009 [EBook #11167]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECCAN NURSERY TALES ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Distributed
Proofreaders Team from scans of the Million Books Project.






                      Deccan Nursery Tales
                               or
                   Fairy Tales from the South


                               by

                      C.A. Kincaid, C.V.O.



                             1914.




                        To my little son

                             Dennis

                Whose interest in these stories
          first induced me to offer them to the public
         this little volume is affectionately inscribed



PREFACE

These stories first appeared in the Times of India newspaper, and my
acknowledgments are due to the editor for his courtesy in permitting
their publication.

I have translated all of them as literally as possible from the
original Marathi. But, owing to the difference between Marathi and
English canons of taste, I have had in a very few places slightly
to change the sense. In some places, owing to the obscurity of the
original text, I have had to amplify the translation. In other places
I have had to cut short the descriptions of Hindu rites and ceremonies
so as to avoid wearying the English reader.

It may not be out of place to say just a word about the Indian gods
mentioned in the stories. It must be remembered that the main Hindu
gods are three in number. They are all sprung from a common origin,
Brahma, but they are quite separate beings. They do not form a trinity,
i.e. three in one or one in three. And each of them has a wife and a
family. The following genealogical tree will, I hope, help the reader.


    Brahma
        Shiva = Parwati
            Ganpati
              = the daughters of Agni
            Kartakswami [1]
        Vishnu = Mahalaxmi
        Brahmadev = Saraswati


Of the above gods, Shiva, his son Kartakswami, and his wife Parwati,
Vishnu and his wife Mahalaxmi only are mentioned in the following
stories. Besides these, however, the Sun and Moon and the five
principal planets obtain a certain amount of worship. The Sun is
worshipped every morning by every orthodox Hindu. And Shani or Saturn
inspires a wholesome fear, for his glance is supposed to bring ill
fortune. Then again, besides the main gods, the world according
to Hindu belief, which in this respect closely resembles that of
the ancient Greeks, is peopled with Asuras (demons), Devkanya
(wood-nymphs), Nag-kanya (the serpent-maidens of Patala), and
Gandharwas (a kind of cherubim). The first three of these find a
place in the ensuing fairy tales.

The scientific doctrine is that Shiva is the destroyer and Vishnu
the preserver of life, and that Brahmadev is the creative spirit. In
practice, however, Brahmadev is almost entirely disregarded, while the
Hindus worship Shiva, Vishnu, Parwati, or Mahalaxmi just as   they feel
inclined, or as the particular sect to which they belong requires them.

Lastly, it must be borne in mind that the Hindu year consists of
twelve lunar months. In the Deccan the year begins with Chaitra,
corresponding roughly with April. The months then succeed each other
in the following order: Vaishak, Jesht, Ashad, Shravan, Bhadrapad,
Ashwin, Kartih, Margshish, Paush, Mag, Phalgun, Each month begins on
the first day of the new moon and is divided into two parts. The first
half comprises the period from the new moon to the full moon. This is
the bright half of the month. The second half comprises the period
from the full moon to the new moon. This is the dark half of the
month. The lunar months are made to correspond with the solar year by
the interposition of an "adhik" or intercalary month every third year.

C.A.K.



CONTENTS


    I.      The Sunday Story
    II.     The Monday Story
    III.    The Tuesday Story
    IV.     The Wednesday and Thursday Story
    V.      The Friday Story
    VI.     The Saturday Story
    VII.    Mahalaxmi and the Two Queens
    VIII.   The Island Palace
    IX.     Nagoba, the Snake-King
    X.      Parwati and the Beggar-Man
    XL      Parwati and the Brahman
    XII.    Soma, the Washerwoman
    XIII.   Vasishta and the Four Queens
    XIV.    The Lamps and the King's Daughter-in-Law
    XV.     Parwati and the Priest
    XVI.    The Rishi and the Brahman
    XVII.   The King and the Water-Goddesses
    XVIII.  The Lid of the Sacred Casket
    XIX.    The Brahman Wife and Her Seven Sons
    XX.     The Golden Temple



ILLUSTRATIONS


"Gave memorial honours to his dead father"
"It curled itself up inside the earthen jar"
"And fill her lap with wheat cakes and bits of cocoa-nut"
"And stuck them into a corner of the eaves"
"They no longer wished to kill or bite the little daughter-in-law"
"They asked her what the reason was, and she told them"
"She has lived here just as if she had been in her father's house"
"The god revealed himself to the king and his companions in all his
glory and splendour"






CHAPTER I

The Sunday Story

When Englishmen and Englishwomen are little boys and girls, they
listen with open ears to the tales of Golden-hair and the three Bears,
of Cinderella and the Prince, and of the Wolf and Little Red Riding
Hood. As the boys and girls grow up, the stories fade gradually from
their minds. But a time comes when they have children of their own. And
then, to amuse the children, they can find no tales more thrilling
than those which fascinated them in their own childhood. Thus the
old nursery tales are handed down for centuries from generation to
generation. Exactly the same process goes on in India, There, too, when
little Indian boys and girls grow up and have little boys and girls of
their own, they too tell to wide-eyed audiences the tales which they
themselves found so thrilling in their own childhood. Indian nursery
tales, it is true, have a more religious tinge than those of Europe,
but they are none the less appreciated on that account. The first six
stories in this little book purport to explain the connexion between
the heavenly bodies and the days of the week. So each day of the week
has its separate tale. And all through Shravan or August, probably
because it is the wettest month in the year, Deccan mothers tell afresh
every week-day that day's story. And little Deccan children listen
to the tales as they fall due with the same unvarying attention. For
in nurseries, Indian as well as English, tales are loved the better
when no longer new, and where the end is well known to, and therefore
the better understood by, the tiny round-eyed listeners.

Now this is the tale which is told every Sunday [2] in Shravan: Once
upon a time there was a town called Atpat, and in it there lived a
poor Brahman. Every day he used to go into the woods to fetch sticks
and to cut grass. One day he met there some nymphs and wood-fairies,
who said that they were performing holy rites in honour of the sun. He
asked, "What are these rites?" They replied, "If we tell you, you will
become proud and vain and you will not perform them properly." But the
Brahman promised, "No, I shall not become proud or vain and I shall
observe the rites you tell me." They then told him that the month of
Shravan was coming, and that on the first Sunday of Shravan he was
to draw a picture of the sun with red sandal paste, that he was to
offer to the drawing flowers and fruit, and that he should continue
doing this for six months. Thereafter he should in various ways,
which they told him, entertain guests and give alms to the poor.

The Brahman went home and performed the rites to the letter, so that
the sun-god was very pleased. Wealth came to the Brahman and he grew
richer and richer, and at last the queen of the land sent for him. The
poor Brahman began to tremble and shake all over, but the queen said,
"Do not shake or tremble, but give your daughters in marriage to our
house." The Brahman said, "My daughters are poor; you will make them
slaves or maid-servants." "No," said the queen, "I shall not make
them slaves or maid-servants; I shall marry one to a king, and one to
a minister." The Brahman agreed, and when the month of Margashish,
or December, came he gave his two daughters in marriage, one to the
king and one to the minister. Immediately after the marriage the
Brahman said good-bye to his daughters, and did not see them again
for twelve years. Then he visited the elder one, who had married the
king. She gave him a wooden stand on which to sit while eating, and
water in which to wash his feet, and then said, "Papa, papa, there
is pudding to eat, there is water to drink." But the Brahman said,
"Before I eat or drink, I must tell you my story." But his daughter
said, "Papa, I have no time to listen to your story; the king is
going a-hunting, and I must not keep him waiting for his dinner." The
Brahman thought this very disrespectful and went off in a great rage
to the house of his other daughter, who had married a minister. She
welcomed her father and gave him a wooden stand on which to eat,
and water to wash his feet, and said, "Papa, papa, here is pudding to
eat and here is water to drink." But the Brahman said, "Before I eat
or drink I must tell you my story." His daughter said, "Of course,
papa, tell it to me, and I shall listen as long as you like." Then
she went into an inner room and she fetched six pearls. She took three
herself and three she put in her father's hand. And he told her how he
had met the nymphs and wood-fairies, who had told him to worship the
sun-god, and she listened to it all without missing a syllable. Then
the Brahman ate and drank and went back to his own house. His wife
asked him about their two daughters. He told her everything and said,
"The elder one who would not listen to my story will come to grief."

And so she did. For the king, her husband, took an army into a
far country and never came back. But the daughter who had listened
to the story lived well and happy. As time went on the undutiful
daughter became poorer and poorer, until one day she said to her
eldest son, "Go to your aunt's house and beg of her to give you a
present, and bring back whatever she gives you." Next Sunday the
boy started and went to the village where his aunt lived. Standing
by the village tank he called out, "O maids, O slave-girls, whose
maids and slave-girls are ye?" They answered, "We are the maids and
the slave-girls of the minister." The boy said, "Go and tell the
minister's wife that her sister's son is here. Tell her that he is
standing by the village tank, that his coat is tattered and that
his garments are torn, and ask her to let him come into her house
through the back door." The slave-girls took him in through the
back door. His aunt had him bathed, and gave him clothes to wear,
and food to eat, and drink, and a pumpkin hollowed out and filled
with gold coins. As he left, she called to him, "Do not drop it, do
not forget it, but take it carefully home." But as the boy went home,
the sun-god came disguised as a gardener and stole the pumpkin filled
with gold. When the boy reached his mother's house she asked, "Well,
my son, what did your aunt give you?" He said, "Fortune gave, but Karma
[3] took away; I lost everything my aunt bestowed on me." Next Sunday
the second son went and stood by the village tank and called out,
"O slave-girls and maid-servants, who is your master?" They said,
"Our master is the minister." "Then tell the minister's wife that
her nephew is here." He was taken in by the back door. He was bathed
and clothed and given food and drink. As he was going, his aunt gave
him a hollow stick full of gold coins and said, "Do not drop it,
do not forget it, mind it carefully and take it home." On the way
the sun-god came in the guise of a cowherd and stole the stick. When
the boy got home his mother asked him what he had brought. He said,
"Fortune gave, but Karma took away." On the third Sunday a third son
went and stood by the village tank. His aunt received him like the
others and had him bathed, clothed, and fed. As he was going away,
she gave him a hollow cocoa-nut stuffed with gold coins and said,
"Do not drop it, do not forget it, but mind it carefully and take it
home." On the way back he put down the cocoa-nut on the edge of a well,
and it toppled over and fell into the water with a great splash. When
he reached his mother's house she asked him what his aunt's present
was. He said, "I have lost everything which fortune brought me." On
the fourth Sunday the fourth son went. His aunt welcomed him like
the others, and had him bathed and fed. When he left she gave him an
earthen pot full of gold coins. But the sun-god came in the guise
of a kite and snatched the pot away. When the boy reached home his
mother asked him whether his aunt had given him anything. He said,
"I have lost everything which my aunt gave me." On the fifth Sunday
the mother herself got up and went to her sister's village and stood
by the tank. The minister's wife took her in through her back door
and had her clothed and fed. Then the minister's wife told her that
all her trouble had come through not listening to her father's story,
and the minister's wife repeated it to her. The king's wife listened
to it, and stayed with her sister until the following month of Shravan,
or August, when she did fitting worship to the sun.

Instantly good fortune came to her. After years of weary fighting, her
husband, the king, at last overcame his enemies, and after taking great
wealth from them turned homewards with his army. As he went towards his
capital, he passed the village where the minister's wife lived. There he
learnt that his queen was with her sister, so he sent for her with a
befitting escort. "O auntie, auntie," cried all the queen's little
nephews and nieces, "umbrellas have come for you, and horse-tails and
guards and foot-soldiers." Every one rushed out to see, and the king and
queen greeted each other after years of separation. The sisters gave
each other gifts of clothes, and the king and his queen went away
together. At the first halting-place the servants cooked the food. The
queen filled the king's plate and then her own, and then she thought of
the story which her sister had told her. She ordered her servants to go
through the neighbouring village and bring in any one who was hungry and
too poor to buy food. They found none such in the village, but on the
way back they met a starving wood-cutter, and, bringing him to the
queen, told him to listen to the tale which she would tell him. The
queen brought six pearls. Three she gave to the wood-cutter, and three
she kept herself. Then she told him the story of her father and the
wood-fairies. The wood-cutter listened with all attention, and as he
listened his faggot of wood became all of gold. He went away delighted,
promising to worship the sun in the way the wood-fairies had shown to
the Brahman.

Next day the cavalcade reached the second halting-place. Food was
cooked; the queen filled the king's plate and then her own plate, and
again she told her, servants to bring from the neighbouring village any
one who was hungry and too poor to buy food. They came upon a petty
farmer, whose well had dried up and whose crops had withered. He was
sitting sadly by his field when they called him to go with them and
listen to the queen's tale. He went with them to the camp. There the
queen brought six pearls and gave three of them to the farmer and
kept three of them herself. Then she told the story of her father
and the wood-fairies. And as the farmer listened, all attention,
the water began to pour into the well, and the crop began to look
fresh and green. He went away delighted, and promised to worship the
sun in the way the wood-fairies had told the Brahman. Next day the
cavalcade reached the third halting-place. Food was cooked, and the
queen filled the king's plate and then her own plate. Then she told
the servants to search in the neighbouring village for any one who
was hungry and too poor to buy food. They met an old woman. Her eldest
son had been lost in the forest. Her second son had been drowned in a
pond. Her third son had died of snake-bite. They told her to come and
listen to the queen's story. She went with them, and as she listened,
all attention, first the son who had been lost in the forest walked
into the camp, next the son who had been drowned in the pond, and
last of all the son who had died of a snake-bite. The old woman went
away crying with joy, and promising to worship the sun in the way
the wood-fairies had instructed the Brahman. Next day the cavalcade
reached the fourth halting-place. Food was cooked, and the queen first
filled the king's plate and then her own. After dinner she sent her
servants as before to bring in some poor and hungry man from the
neighbouring village. They found a man whose eyes were so crooked
that he could hardly see, who had no arms or legs, and who had not
even a name. For he was only known as "Lump of flesh." He was lying
on his face, but when they brought him into camp, the queen had him
placed on his back and had a jug of water poured over him. Then she
took six pearls. Three she kept herself, and three she placed on the
stomach of "Lump of flesh." Then she told him the tale of her father
and the wood-fairies. He listened, all attention, and as he listened
his arms and legs grew out of his body, and hands and feet appeared
at the ends of them. He too went away delighted, and he promised to
worship the sun in the way the wood-fairies had told the Brahman.

At the end of the next day's march the king and queen reached their
home. Food was cooked, and as they sat down to dinner the sun-god
himself appeared and joined them at their meal. The king had all
the doors flung wide open, and ordered a fresh and far more splendid
dinner to be prepared, with any number of dishes, each dish having
six separate flavours. When it was served the sun-god and the king
began to eat, but in the first mouthful the sun-god found a hair. He
got very very angry, and called out, "To what sinful woman does this
hair belong?" Then the poor queen remembered that during her twelve
years of poverty she had always sat under the eaves combing her hair,
and knew that it must have been one of her hairs which had got into
the sun-god's food. She begged for mercy, but the sun-god would
not forgive her until she had clothed herself in a black blanket,
plucked a stick out of the eaves, and had gone outside the town and
there thrown the stick and the hair over her left shoulder. Then the
sun-god recovered his good-humour, and finished his dinner. And the
Brahman, the king and queen, and the wood-cutter and the farmer whose
well had dried up, and the old woman who had lost her children, and
"Lump of flesh" with the cross eyes, they all remained in the favour
of the sun-god and lived happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER II

The Monday Story

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
very saintly king. One day he formed the wish to fill the shrine of
Shiva, the moon-god, with milk up to the ceiling. He consulted his
chief minister, and the latter sent a crier through Atpat ordering,
under terrible penalties, all the townspeople to bring every Monday all
the milk in their houses and offer it to the god Shiva. The townspeople
were frightened at the threatened punishments, and the next Monday
they brought all the milk in Atpat to Shiva's shrine, not keeping a
drop for their calves or even for their children. But although all the
milk in Atpat was every Monday poured into Shiva's shrine, it yet did
not become full to the ceiling. But one day an old woman came to the
shrine. She had done all her housework. She had fed all the children
and had bathed all her little daughters-in-law. Then she took a few
drops of milk, a little sandal-wood paste, and a few flowers, and
half-a-dozen grains of rice and went to worship at Shiva's shrine. She
prayed to Shiva, "The little milk that I can offer is not likely to
fill your shrine, seeing that all the milk offered by the king could
not. Nevertheless I offer the milk with all my heart." She then got
up and went back to her house. Then a strange thing happened. Directly
the old woman turned her back, the shrine filled with milk right up to
the ceiling. The priests ran and told the king, but none of them could
say how it happened. The following Monday the king placed a soldier
by the door; and again the old woman came and worshipped, and again
the shrine filled with milk to the ceiling. The soldier ran and told
the king, but could not explain the cause. The third Monday the king
himself went and watched by the shrine. From his hiding-place he saw
the old woman come up and noticed that the shrine filled with milk
immediately after she had worshipped. He ran after her and caught
her. The old woman begged the king to spare her life, and this he
promised to do if she told the truth. She said, "O King! you ordered
all the milk in Atpat to be brought to Shiva's shrine. But what was
the result? All the calves began lowing and all the children began
crying, because they could get no milk. And all the grown-up people
were so worried by the noise that they did not know what to do. Shiva
was displeased at this, so He would not let the shrine fill. This,
therefore, is what you should do. Let the children and the calves
have their milk. Then take whatever is over to the shrine, and it
will at once fill up to the ceiling." The king let the old woman go,
and had it proclaimed by beat of drum that the townspeople were to
bring to the shrine on the following Monday only the milk remaining
after the children and the calves had been fed. The townspeople were
delighted. The children stopped crying and the calves stopped lowing,
and all the milk left by them was brought to Shiva's shrine. The
king prayed long and earnestly, and when he looked up he saw that
the shrine was full right up to the ceiling. He gave the old woman
a handsome present. And she went back to her home, and she did her
housework, and then she bathed all her little daughters and all her
little daughters-in-law.



CHAPTER III

The Tuesday Story

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. [4] In it there lived
a bania who had no son. Every day a religious mendicant used to come
to his house and call out, "Alms! Alms! In the name of God, give me
alms." But when the bania's wife offered him alms he refused them,
because she had no children. She told her husband, who advised her
to play a trick on the mendicant. She hid behind her door, and as he
called out "Alms! alms!" she slipped a gold piece into his wallet. But
the mendicant caught her and became very angry. He cursed her and
told her that she would always remain without any children. She
was terrified and fell at his feet and begged for forgiveness. Then
he pitied her and said, "Tell your husband to put on blue clothes,
mount a blue horse, and ride into the jungle. He should ride on until
he meets a horse. He should then dismount and dig in the ground. He
will in the end come to a temple to Parwati. He must pray to her and
she will bestow a child on him." When her husband came back she told
him what had happened. So he at once put on blue clothes, mounted a
blue horse, and rode into the forest. He met the horse, dismounted,
and began digging. At last he discovered a temple to Parwati, all of
gold, with diamond pillars and a spire made of rubies. Inside was a
statue of the goddess, and to it he prayed, saying, "I have houses and
cottages, cattle and horses, money and goods of all kinds, but I am
very sad because I have no son." The goddess pitied him and asked,
"Which will you have, a son who will be good but will die young,
or a son who will live long but will be born blind?" The poor bania
became greatly perplexed, but at last said, "I choose a son who will be
good but will die young,"  The goddess said, "Very well. Step behind
me. There you will find an image of Ganpati. Behind it is a mango
tree. Climb upon Ganpati's stomach and pick one mango. Go home and give
it to your wife to eat, and your wish will be gratified." Parwati then
disappeared. The bania climbed upon Ganpati's stomach and ate as many
mangoes as he could. He next filled a large bundle full of mangoes
and stepped down. But when he reached the ground he found that there
was only one mango in the bundle. He climbed up again and refilled his
bundle, but when he stepped down he again found only one mango. This
happened three or four times. At last Ganpati got very sore and angry
with having his stomach trampled on. So he shouted out, "One mango is
all you'll get. So be off home!" The bania was frightened out of his
wits and galloped home with his one mango. His wife ate it, and in nine
months she presented her husband with a son. When the little boy was
eight years old his sacred thread was put on, and his mother said,
"It is time to think of his marriage." But the bania said, "I dare
not marry him unless he first makes a pilgrimage to Benares." His
maternal uncle agreed to take the little boy to Benares.

So off they started together, and some days later the uncle and nephew
halted at a village where some little girls were playing. One of
the little girls said to the other, "You are nothing but a wretched
little widow." But the other little girl said, "Oh no! there are
never any widows in our family. Mother worships Parwati and so I
can never be a widow." The uncle heard this, and thought that if his
nephew could only marry a little girl who could not become a widow,
he would not die young. So he began to think how he could bring
about the marriage. Now it so happened that the little girl was
to be married that day. But in the morning the boy to whom she was
betrothed fell ill. Her parents were in great trouble, but at last
they thought that, rather than postpone the wedding and disappoint
all the guests, it would be better to marry their little daughter to
the first traveller who passed through the village. So they went to
the rest-house to inquire if any one was there. There they found the
uncle and nephew, and they married their little girl to the latter
that very evening when the cows were homing. They drew on the wall
a picture of Shiva and Parwati, and they put the children to bed
beneath it. Parwati appeared to the little girl in her sleep. The
goddess said, "My child, a snake will come to bite your husband: give
it milk to drink. Then put near it a new earthen jar. When the snake
has finished drinking, it will enter the earthen jar. Then at once
pull off your bodice and stuff it into the jar's mouth. Next morning
give the jar to your mother." Next evening everything happened as
Parwati had said. The snake came to bite her husband as he slept. But
the little girl offered it milk, which it drank. After drinking,
it curled itself up inside the earthen jar, and, the moment it did
so, the little girl slipped off her bodice and stuffed it into the
mouth of the jar. Next morning her husband gave her a ring, and she
in exchange gave him a sweet-dish, and he and his uncle continued
their journey to Benares. When they had gone, the little girl gave the
earthen jar with the snake inside it to her mother. The mother took
out the bodice, but instead of a snake a garland lay inside, and the
mother put it round her little daughter's neck. Some weeks passed,
but neither uncle nor nephew returned. So the little girl's parents
grew anxious. The sick boy who was to have been her husband recovered,
but she could no longer marry him, and the boy whom she had married
had gone away and might never return. In despair the parents built
a house, in which they entertained every traveller who passed by,
hoping that sooner or later one of the travellers would prove to be
their daughter's husband. To all of them the mother gave water; the
daughter washed their feet; her brother gave them sandal-wood paste;
and her father gave them betel-nut. But it was all in vain; none of
the travellers' fingers fitted the ring given to the little girl by
her husband, nor could any of them produce the sweet-dish which she
had given him in exchange.

In the meantime the uncle and nephew had reached Benares and had
given large sums in charity, and had visited all the holy places
and had received the blessings of all the Brahmans. One day the
little boy, fainted. And in a dream he saw the messenger of Yama,
the god of death, come close to him as if to carry him off. Next he
saw the goddess Parwati come to his rescue and, after a struggle,
drive away Yama's messenger. When the boy woke up he told the dream to
his uncle. The latter was overjoyed because he felt certain that now
the boy would no longer die young. He told his nephew to get ready,
and next day they left Benares. On their way home they passed by
the village where the nephew had been married. As they were having
breakfast near the village tank, a maid-servant invited them to come
to the house which the girl's parents had built for the reception of
travellers. At first the uncle declined, but when a palki was sent
for them, he and his nephew entered it. When the little girl began to
wash her husband's feet, she recognised him. She tried on the ring,
which fitted his finger, and he in turn showed her the sweet-dish
which she had given him. The parents were as pleased as possible, and
they sent a messenger to invite the boy's parents. They came, and the
boy's mother threw herself at her daughter-in-law's feet and thanked
her for saving her son. Then there was a great feast and everybody
was very happy indeed, and at the end they all worshipped Parwati,
[5] so she became as pleased as everybody else.



CHAPTER IV

The Wednesday and Thursday Story

There was once upon a time a town called Atpat. In it there lived
a prince who had seven sons and seven daughters-in-law. Every day
there used to come to the prince's house two Brahmans, an uncle and a
nephew. But when they asked for alms the daughters-in-law sent word
that they were too busy to give them any. Some time afterwards the
prince lost all his riches and became very poor. The two Brahmans
again came to beg, but the elder daughter-in-law said to them,
"We are no longer busy, but we have nothing to give you. If we had,
we should give it to you." The youngest daughter-in-law, however,
was a clever little girl, and she thought to herself, "The Brahmans
will get very angry with us. When we had money, we gave them nothing;
and now we give them nothing because we have nothing to give." So she
fell at the elder Brahman's feet and said, "We have been very wicked
and have deserved to become poor. But please forgive us and tell me
how we may become rich as we were before." The elder Brahman said,
"Every Wednesday and every Thursday you must invite a Brahman to
dinner. And if you have no money to pay for the dinner, draw a pair
of cow's feet on your money-box. If you want grain for the dinner,
draw a pair of cow's feet on your corn-bin. Then worship the feet and
welcome the Brahmans. For you will find that you will have money in
your box and grain in your corn-bin. And in time you will all get as
rich as you were before." The little girl did what the Brahman told
her. And whenever she invited Brahmans to dinner, she drew the cow's
feet on the cash-box and on the corn-bin, and there was always money
and grain sufficient for the meal.

But some days later she fell asleep and dreamt that Budh [6] and
Brahaspati came to her bedside and said, "Little girl, little girl,
your husband has been made king over a great country. Go to him, and,
when you have found him, do not forget to worship us and to give feast
to the Brahmans." Then the little girl woke up and she told the other
six daughters-in-law. But they were jealous of her, and they became
very angry; and they kicked her so often and boxed her ears so hard
that she forgot all about drawing the cow's feet on her money-box and
on the corn-bin. So she never found any money in the box or any corn
in the bin. And every day they became poorer and poorer. First all the
men servants ran away, then the male members of the family left, and
at last the seven daughters-in-law were left alone in the house. They
were starving, but they did not know how to get any food. One day
they heard that a king in a neighbouring country wished to construct
a tank and was calling for labourers. So they decided to go to the
tank and work there just like common coolie women. Now who do you
think the king was? He was the youngest son of the prince of Atpat
and the husband of the youngest daughter-in-law. When the prince had
lost all his money, his youngest son left the house and set off on
a journey. As he travelled he came to a city, the king of which had
just died without leaving any children or relatives. His subjects
did not know how to choose a successor. At last they gave a garland
of flowers to a she-elephant and turned it loose. The elephant walked
straight to the prince's son and put the garland round his neck. The
townspeople were very angry. They snatched away the garland and drove
away the prince's son. They again gave the garland to the elephant,
but the elephant again put the garland round the neck of the prince's
son. The townspeople again snatched away the garland. But when the
elephant put it round the young man's neck for the third time, they
lifted him high in the air and declared him to be their king. At first
he was so pleased at being king that he forgot all about his poor
little wife. But one night Budh and Brahaspati appeared to him in a
dream and reminded him of her and told him how poor she was. But he
could not leave his kingdom to go and look for her. So he thought that
he would dig a tank and call together labourers from every quarter. And
every day he used to go to the tank and search among the labourers to
see if his wife was there. One day he recognised his wife and called
her to him. Then they told each other how Budh and Brahaspati had
appeared to each of them in a dream. And the king was so delighted at
finding his wife that he at once proclaimed her queen of the country.

So the little daughter-in-law was crowned queen, but she did not let
the other daughters-in-law who were also working at the tank know of
her good fortune. As queen, she gave a great feast to all the workers
on the tank. But in her own palace she took some wheat flour, and
she kneaded it into shapes resembling human feet and human fists. And
when the other daughters-in-law were with the crowd of workers eating
at the feast, she went up to them, and to each daughter-in-law who
had kicked her she gave a flour foot, and to each daughter-in-law
who had struck her with her hands she gave a flour fist. Then the
daughters-in-law recognised who the little queen was, and they fell at
her feet and begged for her forgiveness. So the little queen forgave
them and took them back with her into her husband's palace. And they
all lived together happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER V

The Friday Story

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
miserably poor Brahman. He had a wife who was as poor as he was. One
day she felt her poverty so much that she went to a gossip of hers
who lived close by and told her all about her troubles. The neighbour
could suggest nothing better than that the poor woman should worship
the goddess Shukra or Venus. So she told the Brahman woman to fast
every Friday through the month of Shravan. Every Friday evening she
should invite a married lady friend to her house. She should bathe her
friend's feet. She should give her sweetened milk to drink and fill
her lap with wheat cakes and bits of cocoa-nut. She should continue
to worship Shukra in this way every Friday for a whole year, and in
the end the goddess would certainly do something for her. The Brahman
woman thought the advice good, and every Friday she worshipped Shukra
and had a married friend to dine with her just as her neighbour had
advised her.

Now the Brahman woman had a rich brother living in the same town,
who one day invited one thousand Brahmans to dine. At the same
time he invited all the townspeople with the single exception of
his sister. The poor lady thought that she must have been left out
by accident, and that there would be no harm in going, even although
uninvited. She put on her silk dining-clothes, and, taking her children
with her, went off to the dinner. She seated herself close to her
children, and was eating away when her brother came round serving
ghee. When he saw his sister he shouted at her, "You have neither nice
clothes nor nice jewelry. You have made me a laughing-stock by coming
as you have come. I shall not turn you out, but do not come to-morrow."

Next day she did not want to go, but her children, who had enjoyed
the previous day's feast, persuaded their mother to take them again
to her brother's house. Once more she went and sat down with her
children among the rows of feasters. Her brother saw her as before
when he came round serving the ghee. He shouted at her, "A beggar
woman must, I suppose, act like a village sow, and will not go away
although told to. But do not come to-morrow. If you do, I'll have you
turned out." Next day, however, she again went with her children to
her brother's house. But near the entrance his servants caught her
and turned her out before she could eat anything. She went home sad
and hungry and prayed to Shukra. Now the goddess had been pleased
with her devotion and so took pity on her. She helped the poor
woman's husband so that he rapidly acquired great wealth. When her
husband had become very rich she asked her brother to dinner. But
the brother remembered how he had treated her and was ashamed to
accept. He pressed her to dine with him first, and begged so hard
that she at last consented. Next day she put on all her jewels and
her finest clothes. Her brother gave her a wooden platform to sit on
and plates made out of leaves from which to eat her dinner. Before
she sat down she took off her gold-embroidered shawl and put it
close to her plate. Her brother saw her, but thought she did it
because she felt the room hot. She then placed her jewelry on the
wooden platform. Her brother thought that she did it because she
felt the jewelry heavy. She took a portion of rice and placed it on
her necklace. She put a portion of vegetables on her pendant, and a
sweet ball she placed on her jewelled star.

Her brother at last asked her, "What are you doing?" She said,
"I am giving to the guests whom you really invited." But he did
not understand, and asked, "Why do you not begin to eat?" She said,
"I have not been invited to this dinner. It was given in honour of
my finery and not of me. I had my dinner the day when you gave the
feast to the one thousand Brahmans."

The brother felt thoroughly ashamed of himself. He threw himself at
his sister's feet and begged for her forgiveness. So she forgave him
and sat down to dinner. And the brother in turn went to her house and
dined with her. And Shukra was pleased with both sister and brother,
and they all lived happily ever afterwards. May I and my readers do
the same.



CHAPTER VI

The Saturday Story

Once upon a time there was a town-called Atpat. In it there lived a
poor Brahman who had three daughters-in-law. He rose early even during
the rainy season, and every day immediately after his morning meal he
used to go to his field with his children and his daughters-in-law. One
first Saturday in Shravan he got up as usual and said to the youngest
of his daughters-in-law, "To-day is Saturday; you had better stay
at home, and although there is very little in the house, you must
try to get some sort of a dinner ready. Go upstairs and scrape
together all the grain there is in the grain-jars and make bread
with it. For vegetables you had better gather grass and make some
chutney out of clover leaves." When the Brahman had left, his little
daughter-in-law followed his orders as best she could. There was in the
jar upstairs only grain for half an ordinary loaf. So she made tiny,
tiny loaves and prepared some vegetables out of grass and made some
clover chutney. Then she sat down to wait for the family's return
from the field. As she did so, Saturn came disguised as a beggar all
covered with sores, and cried, "O Lady! I am aching all over: give
me hot water to bathe in and oil to rub myself with, and then give me
something to eat." The little daughter-in-law felt very sorry for the
poor beggar. She went inside and got him a few drops of oil and warmed
some water for his bath, and then gave him one of the tiny loaves to
eat. The beggar ate it, and then gave her his blessing, saying, "You
will never want for anything." He then folded up the leaves from which
he had eaten, stuck them into a corner of the eaves, and disappeared.

Shortly afterwards the family came home and found a splendid dinner
waiting for them. They said to themselves, "Where did this all come
from? There was practically nothing in the house." Next Saturday
another daughter-in-law stayed at home. Again Saturn in the guise
of a beggar covered with sores came to the house. He asked as
before for hot water, oil, and food. But his daughter-in-law said,
"I have nothing to give you." The god pressed her, saying, "Give me a
little of anything that you have." But the daughter-in-law repeated,
"I have nothing." The god replied, "Very well, you will lose that
little you have." With this threat he disappeared. But, when the
daughter-in-law went upstairs to fetch grain for dinner, she could
find nothing in any of the jars. Shortly afterwards the family came
home, but there was no dinner for them. So they all got angry with
the daughter-in-law, and, although she told them about the beggar,
they scolded her harder than ever. A third Saturday came round, and
a third daughter-in-law remained at home. Again Saturn came, and the
third daughter-in-law behaved just as the second had done. She gave
the god neither hot water, oil, nor food. And the god told her that
she should lose the little she had. When the family came home there
was no dinner for them, and they scolded the third daughter-in-law
just as hard as they had scolded the second one.

The fourth Saturday it was once more the
turn of the youngest daughter-in-law. Again
Saturn came in the guise of a beggar covered
with sores and asked for hot water, oil, and
food. The little daughter-in-law gave them
as she had done before, and the god blessed
her, saying, "God will make you rich and
happy." Then he folded up the leaves from
which he had eaten and stuck them into a
corner of the eaves. When the little daughter-in-law
went upstairs, she saw any amount of
grain in the jars, and she prepared a splendid
dinner. So when the family came home they
were delighted. They could no longer restrain
their curiosity, and exclaimed, "Where did all
this food come from?" The little daughter-in-law
told them about the beggar covered with
sores and about his blessing. To test her
story, they looked for the folded leaves which
he had stuck into a corner of the roof. They
found them, but when they pulled them out
they were full of pearls and diamonds. Then
the old Brahman guessed that the beggar was
Saturn in disguise, and he also understood why,
when the other two daughters-in-law gave him
nothing and were cursed by him, there was
nothing for dinner. So they all knelt down
and prayed to Saturn, and the god forgave the
two-daughters-in-law who had given him
nothing. And he was more pleased than ever
with the little daughter-in-law who had befriended
him. And so they all lived happily
ever afterwards. And may Saturn be pleased
with us all as he was with the little daughter-in-law.



CHAPTER VII

Mahalaxmi and the Two Queens

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived
a king who had two queens. Of one of them he was very fond, but
the other one he did not care for. The name of the favoured one was
Patmadhavrani, and the name of the unloved one was Chimadevrani. Now
the king had an enemy called Nandanbaneshwar. Such a terrible enemy
he was too! He could jump into the clouds or dive into the bottom of
the ocean. At one moment he would shoot up into heaven. At another he
would sink down into hell, and through fear of his enemy, the king had
become as dry and as thin as an old bit of stick. One day the king, in
despair, assembled all his subjects and ordered them to seek out and
kill Nandanbaneshwar. All the subjects said, "Certainly, certainly,
O King," and began to search everywhere for Nandanbaneshwar. Now in
Atpat there lived a poor woman who had one son. On hearing the orders
of the king, he said to her, "Mother, Mother, give me some bread,
for I am going out to kill the king's enemy." The old woman said,
"Do not be silly; you are only a poor boy, and people will laugh
at you. Here, take this bit of bread and go and eat it behind a
tree." The boy said, "Very well," and took the bread. But, after
taking it, he joined the other villagers and went at their head to
seek out and kill Nandanbaneshwar. But when evening fell they had
not yet met Nandanbaneshwar, so all the villagers returned home. And
when the king heard of their ill-success he was greatly grieved. But
the old woman's son stayed in a wood outside the village. And lo
and behold! just about midnight the serpent-maidens from Patala [7]
and the wood-nymphs came close to where he was and began to worship
Mahalaxmi. The boy was at first terribly frightened, but at last he
plucked up courage enough to ask, "Ladies, ladies, what does one gain
by worshipping Mahalaxmi?" "Whatever you lose you will find," said the
serpent-maidens from Patala; "and whatever you want you will get." The
boy resolved that he too would worship Mahalaxmi. And he joined the
serpent-maidens from Patala and the wood-nymphs, and all night long
they blew on earthen pots to do the goddess honour; and the woods
echoed and re-echoed with the deep-booming noise which they made. [8]

At dawn Mahalaxmi revealed herself, and all of them, the boy included,
prostrated themselves before her and asked for her blessing. She first
blessed the serpent--maidens from Patala and then the wood-nymphs. And
then she blessed the poor old woman's son and said, "You will get half
the kingdom of Atpat and half the king's treasure. He will build you a
house as high as his own, and he will give you the name of 'Navalvat'
or 'Wonderways.' For this very morning the king's mighty enemy will
break his neck and be found lying dead in the king's courtyard,"
With these words the goddess vanished and flew to Kolhapur, [9] and
the old woman's son went home. Now at dawn Queen Patmadhavrani got up
and went into the king's courtyard, and there she saw Nandanbaneshwar
lying dead from a broken neck. She was overjoyed, and ran back
into the palace to tell the king. The king inquired who had killed
Nandanbaneshwar. Every one said that the old woman's son must have
killed him, because he stayed behind when the others went home. The
king sent for the old woman's son. He was very frightened, and when
he reached the royal hall he called out, "I have made no false charge
against any one. I have done no one any harm. Why, therefore, O King,
have you sent for me?" "Do not be afraid," said the king. "My enemy
Nandanbaneshwar is dead, and every one says that it is you who killed
him. Tell me if this is true." "No, O King," said the boy, "he was
killed by the arts of Mahalaxmi." "Where did you meet her?" asked the
king. The boy said, "I stayed when the other villagers returned home,
and during the night there came the serpent-maidens from Patala and the
wood-nymphs. They taught me how to worship Mahalaxmi. In the morning
she revealed herself and promised me that Nandanbaneshwar would be
found lying dead, that you would give me half your kingdom and half
your treasure, that you would build me a palace as high as your own,
and that you would call me Navalvat or Wonderways." The king did as
the goddess had foretold. He handed half his provinces and half his
treasuries to Wonderways, and built him a palace of which the roof
was exactly on the same level as that of his own palace.

When Queen Patmadhavrani heard what had happened, she sent for
Wonderways and asked him how to worship Mahalaxmi. And he told
her all that he had seen the serpent-maidens of Patala do, and
he also told her on the eighth day of the month of Ashwin [10] to
tie on her wrist a thread with sixteen strands in it, and to wear
it continually for the rest of the month. When the 8th of Ashwin
came, Queen Patmadhavrani dutifully tied round her wrist a thread of
sixteen strands, and resolved to wear it every day for the rest of the
month. But a day or two later the king came to Queen Patmadhavrani's
apartments and began to play saripat [11] with her. As they played
he noticed the thread on her wrist and asked what it was. She told
him how Wonderways had instructed her to tie it on. But the king got
very angry and roared out, "I have in my palace garlands and twine,
bracelets, and hobbling-ropes. So throw away that wretched piece of
thread. I will not let you wear it." The queen did as she was bid, and,
pulling off the thread bracelet, threw it on the floor. Next morning
the maids and the slave-girls began to sweep the palace, and among
the sweepings one of them noticed the queen's thread bracelet. She
picked it up and showed it to Wonderways, and he grew very wroth with
Queen Patmadhavrani. He took the thread and at once went with it to
the palace of the unloved Queen Chimadevrani. He told her what had
happened, and she begged him to give the thread to her and to tell
her how to worship Mahalaxmi. But he said, "You will grow vain and
get so conceited that you will not do what I tell you to do." But
she promised that she would obey him in everything. So just as he had
told the Queen Patmadhavrani, he told Queen Chimadevrani all the rites
which he had seen the serpent-maidens from Patala and the wood-nymphs
perform. Everything went on just the same for a whole year. But the
next year on the 8th of Ashwin a very strange thing happened. The
goddess Mahalaxmi disguised herself as an old beggar-woman and
came to Atpat. First she went to the part of the palace where Queen
Patmadhavrani lived. But no one there was paying the least honour
to the goddess Mahalaxmi, although it was the 8th of Ashwin, and
therefore specially sacred to her. Mahalaxmi was dreadfully put out
at this, and when she saw Queen Patmadhavrani she said, "Lady, lady,
Patmadhavrani, mother of sons, what have you in your house to-day?" The
queen replied, "I have nothing in my house to-day." The old woman
went on, "Lady, lady, Patmadhavrani, mother of sons, if you give
this beggar-woman a little water, you will acquire merit sufficient
for all your kingdom." But the queen replied, "Even if I were to
give you a copper cauldron of water it would not suffice for all my
kingdom." The old woman then said, "Lady, lady, Patmadhavrani, mother
of sons, if you give this old beggar-woman a little rice and curds,
you will gain enough merit for all your kingdom." The queen replied,
"Even if I were to give you a big dinner of nothing but rice and curds,
I should not gain enough merit for all my kingdom." Then the old woman
got very angry and cursed the queen, saying, "You will become half a
frog and half a human being, and you will stand outside your co-wife's
bath-room and croak like a frog." But the queen did not mind her the
least little bit, and she laughed so loud at the old woman that the
noise was like two chains rattling together. Mahalaxmi went off in a
great rage and entered Queen Chimadevrani's part of the palace. There
she saw all the accessories of worship ready, and there was a beautiful
image of Mahalaxmi leaning against the wall; The old woman cried,
"Lady, lady, Chimadevrani, mother of sons, what have you in your house
to-day?" "To-day," said the queen, "we are worshipping Mahalaxmi." Then
the old beggar-woman said, "I am Mahalaxmi." But the queen doubted and
asked her, "By what sign shall I know you?" The goddess replied, "In
the morning I shall take the shape of a little girl. In the afternoon
I shall take that of a young married woman. In the evening I shall
become an old hag." After the goddess had taken all three shapes,
Queen Chimadevrani called her into the palace and bathed and anointed
her. She gave her a silk skirt and a platform to sit upon. Then she
sent for Wonderways, and both of them worshipped the old beggar-woman
and blew on earthen pots in her honour. The king heard the blowing
on the pots and told a sepoy to find out why there was such a noise
in Queen Chimadevrani's quarters. The sepoy went there, and when he
saw what was happening joined also in the worship. After a little
while he went back and told the king. The king said that he would
go there too. He followed the sepoy, and Queen Chimadevrani came
to the steps and met him and took him upstairs, where both played
at saripat until dawn. And all the time Mahalaxmi sat by and watched
them. At dawn Queen Chimadevrani asked Mahalaxmi for her blessing. She
blessed the queen and said, "The king will take you back with him to
the palace, and your co-wife will become half frog, half human being,
and will have to croak outside your bath-room while you bathe." But
Queen Chimadevrani begged the goddess not to place such a terrible
curse on Patmadhavrani. The goddess relented a little, but said,
"The king will drive her into the jungle for twelve years." At these
words she vanished and flew to Kolhapur. When the sun rose the king
placed Queen Chimadevrani in his chariot and drove her to his own
part of the palace. He then sent a message to Queen Patmadhavrani
asking her to join them. Shortly afterwards Queen Patmadhavrani
appeared, dressed all in rags with a skirt round her legs and her
hair all unfastened. On her head was a pot full of burning coal,
and she began to shout and scream at the top of her voice. The king
became very angry and roared out, "Who is this that is shouting
and screaming? Is it a ghost or a she-devil or what?" The sepoys
replied, "O King, it is neither a ghost nor a she-devil, it is your
Queen Patmadhavrani." "Take her into the jungle," roared the king,
"and kill her there." Then he went back into the palace and began
to live in great happiness with Queen Chimadevrani. But the sepoys
took Patmadhavrani into the jungle and told her that they had been
ordered to kill her. She began to weep. The sepoys were kind-hearted
men and they felt very sorry for her. They said, "Lady, lady, do not
weep. We have eaten bread and drunk water at your hands so we cannot
kill you. We will leave you here, but you must never come back into
the kingdom again." The sepoys left her and returned to Atpat. But
the poor queen wandered on until she came to a distant town, where
she entered a coppersmith's lane. Therein a coppersmith was making
bangles for a beautiful young princess who had just been crowned
queen of the city. But suddenly none of the bangles would join. He
began to search for the cause, and asked his workmen whether any
stranger had come near his house. The workmen looked about and found
Queen Patmadhavrani in hiding close by. They told the coppersmith,
and he and his men beat her soundly and drove her away. She ran
into the lane of some weavers who were weaving a sari for the new
queen. Suddenly none of the looms would work. They began looking
about to see if any stranger had come. After a little while they found
the queen. So they beat her soundly and drove her away. Then she ran
out of the town back into the jungle. There she wandered about until
she came to the cave of a rishi or sage. The rishi was sitting lost
in meditation. But she bided her time, and, when he went to bathe,
she slipped into the cave and swept it and neaped it and tidied up
all the utensils used by him for worship. Then she slipped out of
the cave and ran back into the jungle. This went on every day for
twelve years without the rishi showing that he was aware of what she
was doing. But in his heart he was really pleased with her. And one
day he called out in a loud voice, "Who is it who sweeps and neaps my
cave? Whoever she is, let her step forward." The queen stepped into
the presence of the rishi and threw herself at his feet and said, "If
you promise not to punish me, I shall tell you." The rishi promised,
and she told him her story. The rishi took out his magic books and,
consulting them, learned that Mahalaxmi had cursed her. So he taught
her how to worship Mahalaxmi, and all night long they blew on earthen
pots and performed rites in her honour. At dawn she revealed herself
and the queen asked her for her blessing. But the goddess was still
very angry with the queen. Then the rishi joined her in begging the
goddess's pardon, and at last she relented. She said to the queen,
"Put under that tree a foot-bath full of water, sandal-wood ointment,
plates full of fruit, a stick of camphor, fans made of odorous
grasses; and handle them all so that they retain the fragrance of
some scent which the king will remember you used. To-morrow the king
will come. He will be thirsty. He will send his sepoys to look for
water. They will see all your things ready. And when they go back and
tell him, he will come himself." Next morning, as the goddess had
foretold, the king came. He saw the cool shade of the tree. He was
tired with hunting, so he sat down and rested. He washed his feet
in the foot-bath. He ate up all the fruit, drank the cold water,
and sucked the stick of camphor. When he had rested to his heart's
content, he asked the sepoy, "How is it that in the water I drank,
in the fruit I took, in the camphor I ate, I noticed a scent which
Patmadhavrani always used?" The sepoys replied, "If the king promises
to pardon us, we will tell him." The king promised. The sepoys then
told him how they had not killed the queen, because they had eaten
bread and had drunk water at her hands, but had let her go. The king
told them to look and see if she was anywhere about. They searched
and searched until they came to the rishi's cave. Then they ran back
and told the king. The king rose, and going to the cave did homage to
the rishi. The rishi accepted the homage and lectured him at great
length. At last he ordered the king to prostrate himself before the
queen. The king obeyed, and the rishi handed Patmadhavrani back to
his care and blessed both her and her husband. The king put her in
his chariot and took her to Atpat. Outside the town the king stopped
his chariot and sent for Queen Chimadevrani Chimadevrani bathed
and anointed herself, and put on all her silk clothes, her shawls,
her embroideries, and her jewels. In front of her she placed all the
horn-blowers of Atpat. And as she went to meet the king they blew their
very loudest on their horns. The king was amazed when he heard the
noise, and roared out, "Who is coming with such pomp and splendour? Is
it the serpent-maidens of Patala or is it the wood-nymphs who live
in the heart of the forest?" The sepoys said, "O King, it is neither
the serpent-maidens of Patala nor is it the wood-nymphs who live in
the heart of the forest. It is Queen Chimadevrani, who is coming to
meet you as you ordered." The king turned to Patmadhavrani and said,
"If you had come in this guise to meet me, instead of coming like a mad
woman, you would never have suffered as you did." Queen Patmadhavrani
said nothing, but sat still in the chariot, and the king lifted Queen
Chimadevrani into the chariot, and all three entered the city. And as
they entered, the horn-blowers blew so loud that every one was quite
deafened. And the king lived from that time forth in perfect happiness
with both his wives. And because of his happiness, he ruled so well
that his subjects thought that King Ramchandra of Ayodhya had come
back to rule over them.



CHAPTER VIII

The Island Palace

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
Brahman. He had a disciple who used every day to go to the village pond
and bathe and worship the god Shiva. On the way he had to walk through
the sandy island in the dry bed of the river. And, as he went home
across the island, he used to hear a voice cry, "Shall I come? Shall I
come? Shall I come?"; but when he looked round he could see no one. The
Brahman's disciple at last got so frightened that he withered up until
he became as dry and as thin as a bone. At last the Brahman said,
"You have no wish to eat or drink; yet you are so thin. What is the
reason?" The boy replied, "I neither wish to eat, nor want to eat,
nor crave to eat. But I am frightened out of my wits. For whenever
I come back from my bath I hear a voice behind me call out, 'Shall I
come? Shall I come? Shall I come?'; but when I look round there is no
one there." The Brahman said, "Do not be afraid, and when you next hear
the voice, do not look behind you, but call out as boldly as you can,
'Come along, come along, come along.'" Next day the disciple went as
usual to his bath in the village pond. He worshipped the god Shiva,
and as he came home he heard the cry behind him, "Shall I come? Shall
I come? Shall I come?" The boy was very frightened, but he did not
look behind him. In a short time he mastered his fears, and then in
a voice like a bull roaring he cried out, "Come along, come along,
come along." At last he reached home, calling all the time and without
once looking behind him.

The Brahman looked up as the disciple came in, and he saw that just
behind was walking a young girl. He at once married the girl to his
disciple and gave them a house to live in close by his own. Now, on
the first Monday in the month of Shravan, or August, the disciple
got up and said to his wife, "I am going out to worship the god
Shiva. But do not wait for me. Just eat your breakfast directly you
feel hungry."  He went out, and in a little time his wife began
to feel hungry. Nevertheless, she knew that, in spite of what
her husband had said, she ought not to eat anything while he was
worshipping Shiva. So she waited for a little time, but at last she
got so terribly hungry that she could not wait any more. So she sat
down and cooked her breakfast, and had just put one mouthful into
her mouth when her husband came to the outer door. "Wife, wife," he
called, "open the door!" Then the little wife got very frightened. She
pushed the uneaten breakfast under the bed, got up, washed her hands,
and opened the door. She then told her husband that she had waited
for him, and she cooked a fresh breakfast, which both ate one after
the other. Next Monday exactly the same thing happened. The little
wife cooked her breakfast and was just beginning it when her husband
came. She then hid her uneaten breakfast under her bed and pretended
that she had waited for his return. And on the two following Mondays
the naughty little wife deceived her husband in just the same way.

Now on the last Sunday in Shravan, when husband and wife went to lie
down, the former noticed a light shining under the bed. He looked to
see what it was, and saw several platefuls of jewels. He asked his wife
whence they had come. Now they were really the uneaten breakfasts,
which the god Shiva had turned into gold and jewels. But the naughty
little wife got very frightened and told her husband a bigger story
than ever. "They are presents," she said, "from my mother and father
and their family." "But where is your father's house?" asked the
husband. "It is in the sandy island," said the little wife, "which
lies in the dry bed of the river." "You must take me there," said her
husband. Next morning they started off together. And the naughty little
wife could hardly walk, she was so frightened. For she knew quite well
that her father had no house in the sandy island. But on the way she
prayed to Shiva, "Please, please, god Shiva, create a house for my
father in the sandy island which lies in the dry bed of the river,
even if it be only for half an hour."

At last the husband and wife came to the sandy island. And there, lo
and behold! they saw a great big palace, and a splendidly dressed young
man came forward and greeted the disciple as his brother-in-law. And
a handsome old knight came forward and greeted the disciple as his
son-in-law. And a beautiful young woman greeted the naughty little
wife as the sister of her husband. And a lovely little girl ran up and
embraced her and called her "sister." And slave girls and maid-servants
ran forward to offer her their service. A guard of soldiers kept
watch by the palace, and at the door there were sentries, who made
way for them as they passed. Inside the house the little wife and
her husband were given platforms to sit upon, and a splendid feast
was all ready prepared for them to eat. After they had feasted, they
got up and said good-bye to the little wife's father and mother, and
garlands of flowers were placed round their necks, and they started
for their home. When they had gone half-way, the naughty little wife
remembered that she had hung her garland on a peg and had forgotten
to bring it with her. So she and her husband went back to the sandy
island. But when they got there, there was no palace, there were no
soldiers to guard it, there were no sentries at the door, there were
no maid-servants nor slave girls. There was nothing there but just
a sandy island in the middle of a dry river-bed. And on the sand lay
the garland which the naughty little wife had forgotten. She took it
up and put it round her neck.

But her husband asked her, "What has happened to your father's
house?" The naughty little wife replied, all in tears, "As it came,
so it went. But if you promise to forgive me, I shall tell you." The
husband promised. So she told him how every Monday she had felt so
hungry and how she had cooked her breakfast, and then, on hearing her
husband's voice, had pushed it under their bed. She also told him that
the god Shiva had turned the food into gold and jewels. "Then when you
asked me," she went on, "I felt so frightened that I said they were
presents from my father and mother and the rest of my family. And
when you made me take you to my father's house, I prayed the god
Shiva to create, if only for half an hour, a house for my father on
the sandy island in the dry river-bed. And he graciously granted my
request." Then the husband forgave the naughty little wife. And she
became quite good and never told him any more stories. And they both
went home and lived happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER IX

Nagoba, the Snake-King

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived
a Brahman who had seven little daughters-in-law. In the fulness of
time the month of Shravan came and with it Nagpanchmi Day [12]. In
honour of the festival, one little daughter-in-law went to her
grandpapa's house, another went to her great grandpapa's house,
another went to her father's house, until at last only the youngest
daughter-in-law remained behind. Her father and mother were dead,
and she had no uncles and no aunts and no little brothers or
sisters. So the poor little daughter-in-law felt very sad and
sat down and cried in a corner. Then she remembered that it was
Nagpanchmi Day, and that it was a festival in honour of Nagoba, the
great snake-king. So she prayed under her breath, "Please, please,
snake-king, come and pretend that you have been sent to fetch me
to my father's house!" And the great snake-king heard the prayer
and felt quite sorry for the poor little daughter-in-law who was
crying in the corner. He assumed the guise of a Brahman and came to
the house where the little daughter-in-law was, and said that he had
been sent to fetch her to her father's house. Her father-in-law was
very much astonished. For he wondered why, if the new-comer really
was a relative of the little daughter-in-law, he had never paid him
a visit before. At last he asked the little daughter-in-law who the
new-comer was. She did not know in the least. But she was so overjoyed
that some one should have come for her that she at once answered,
"He is my mother's brother." Her father-in-law believed her and sent
her off in the care of Nagoba, the snake-king. Still disguised as a
Brahman, he took her to the entrance of his underground palace and
there he told her who he was. He then reassumed his true appearance,
and, expanding the mighty hood behind his head, he seated the little
girl on it and took her down to his splendid dwelling-house beneath
the earth. In the central hall he presented her to the snake-queen
and to all the snake-princes, and told them that in no circumstances
whatever were they to bite the little daughter-in-law.

One day the snake-queen was about to be confined. So she asked
the little daughter-in-law to sit by her side with the lamp in
her hand. The little daughter-in-law did so, and a little time
afterwards the snake-queen gave birth to a fresh litter of little
snake-princes. When the little daughter-in-law saw them all wriggling
about, she was frightened out of her wits. She let the lamp slip
out of her hands. It fell on the ground and burnt all the little
snakes' tails off. The snake-queen did her best to comfort them,
but the stumps of the little princes' tails ached so dreadfully that
it was ever so long before the snake-queen could put them off to
sleep. When the snake-king came home that evening, she told him what
had happened. And she was so cross with the little daughter-in-law,
that the snake-king had to promise that she should go back to her
father-in-law's house. A few days later, the snake-king assumed once
again the guise of a Brahman, and, loading the little daughter-in-law
with presents, took her back to her husband's home. In the course of
time the little snake-princes grew up, but their tails never grew
again. So their father, the snake-king, called one little prince,
No-tail; and the second little prince, Cut-tail; and the third little
prince, Dock-tail. And one day they asked the snake-queen how it was
that their tails had been broken off. She told them how the little
daughter-in-law had burnt them off by dropping the lamp on them.

The snake-princes, when they heard their mother's answer, were
terribly cross with the little daughter-in-law, and they vowed that
they would be revenged on her. So they found out where she lived,
and they sent a message to her house, saying that they were coming to
pay her a visit. But they really meant to bite her to death directly
they saw her. The little daughter-in-law was overjoyed when she heard
that the snake-princes were coming to visit her. For ever since the
snake-king had pretended to be her uncle, she always thought of little
No-tail and little Cut-tail and little Dock-tail as if they had been
her own cousins. Now it so happened that the very day on which they
were expected at the little daughter-in-law's house was Nagpanchmi
Day. The little daughter-in-law was sitting in the house all alone
waiting for little Prince No-tail, little Prince Cut-tail, and little
Prince Dock-tail. They were late in coming, so to pass the time she
drew pictures of Nagoba, the snake-king, on her dining-platform and on
the wall. When she had finished the pictures, she worshipped them and
offered them milk and food. Then she prayed to the great snake-king,
"Please please, King Nagoba, guard from all hurt, wherever they may
be, my little cousins No-tail and Cut-tail and Dock-tail." And last
of all she prostrated herself at full length before the pictures
which she had drawn on the wall and on her dining-platform.

In the meantime little Prince No-tail and little Prince Cut-tail and
little Prince Dock-tail had come up without the little daughter-in-law
noticing them. But when they saw the honour which she was paying
their father, King Nagoba, and heard the prayer which she had offered
on their behalf, they no longer wished to kill or bite the little
daughter-in-law. On the contrary, they made themselves known to
her and stayed all that day in the house and were as good and as
nice as possible. When night fell, they drank the milk which she
had offered to the snake-king. And in its place they put a necklace
with nine beautiful jewels in it. Before day broke they went away
quietly and returned to their father's palace under the ground. Next
morning when the little daughter-in-law woke up she saw the lovely
necklace lying where the milk had been. She gave a shout of delight,
and putting it round her neck, she ran all over the house showing it
to everybody. And every one was perfectly charmed with it. And the
snake-princes never again came to bite any one in that household. And
the little daughter-in-law and her husband and her father-in-law and
little Prince No-tail and little Prince Cut-tail and little Prince
Dock-tail, they all lived happily for ever so long afterwards.



CHAPTER X

Parwati and the Beggar-Man

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In It there lived
a Brahman. He had seven daughters, and when they had reached a
marriageable age he asked them who would arrange their marriages
and bring them handsome husbands and make their fortunes. The six
eldest daughters said, "Papa, Papa, you of course. You will arrange
our marriages and bring us handsome husbands and make our fortunes
for us." But the youngest daughter was a naughty little girl. She
got into a temper all about nothing, and she stamped her foot, and
she turned her back on her father and said, "I will arrange my own
marriage, and I will get a handsome husband for myself, and I will
make my fortune myself." The Brahman was very angry with her, and so
how do you think he punished her? He first searched about and found
six rich and handsome boys. Then he married them with great pomp and
display to his six eldest daughters. But the youngest girl he gave in
marriage to a miserable beggar-man. You never saw such a beggar-man
as he was! There was not a spot on his skin that was not black with
leprosy, and his feet and hands had rotted right off. If you had seen
him you would have said, "If that beggar-man does not die to-day
he will certainly die to-morrow. For he cannot possibly live any
longer!" When the marriage was celebrated, the little girl's mother
filled her lap with pulse and then handed her over to the beggar-man
to see what sort of fortune would be hers. But in a few days the
beggar-man died. His corpse was taken to the burning-ground, and
his little widow followed it. But when his relatives wanted to burn
the body, she forbade them and told them to go away. For she said,
"My fortune is still to come, whatever it may be." They all got round
her and tried to persuade her that there was no use in her staying by
the corpse, but she would not mind what they said. At last they were
quite tired out and went home, leaving her in the burning-ground. When
they had gone she took her husband's corpse on to her lap. Then she
prayed to the god Shiva and said:


    "My parents disown me. O why was I born
    Both as orphan and widow to live all forlorn?"


As she prayed, she put the pulse which her mother had put into her
lap grain by grain in the dead man's mouth. Then she sat there crying
until midnight. Now it happened that on that very night Shiva and
Parwati were in their chariot driving through the air over that very
place. Parwati said suddenly to her husband, "I hear a woman crying,
let us go and see what it is." The god Shiva drove his chariot down to
earth. He and Parwati got out and saw the Brahman's youngest daughter
crying. They asked her what the reason was, and she told them. Then
Parwati pitied her and said, "Your aunt has acquired great merit by
her piety and devotions. You go to her and get her to give you all
her merit and so you will bring your husband back to life." The god
Shiva and Parwati then mounted on their chariot and disappeared. Next
morning the little widow left her husband's body, went to her aunt's
house and begged her to give her all the merit which she had acquired,
and told her the cause of the request. The aunt was very good and
gave her all her own merit. The little widow then went back to the
burning-ground and with its aid brought her husband back to life. But
this time he was no longer a beggar-man black with leprosy and with
feet and hands that had rotted away. He was a beautiful young man
with well-shaped feet and a beautiful fair skin, and the little widow
took her husband back to her father's house. "Papa, Papa," she said,
"you turned me out, but the gods have brought me back, and good fortune
came to me without your bringing it." The father was too frightened
of Parwati to say anything, so he held his peace. And the little girl
and her husband, the beggar-man, lived happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER XI

Parwati and the Brahman

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
poor Brahman. When the month of Bhadrapad came round, every household
bought little images of Parwati, and the women began to walk about
the streets and sound gongs. When the poor Brahman's children saw
this they went home and said to their mother, "Mummy, Mummy, please
buy us little images of Parwati like the other little boys and girls
have." But their mother said, "What is the use of my buying images
of Parwati? If I do we shall have to make offerings, and there is
absolutely nothing in the house. You run to papa and tell him to go
into the bazaar and buy grain. If he buys grain I'll buy you images of
Parwati." The children got up and ran to their father and cried out,
"Papa, Papa, Mama says that she will buy us images of Parwati if you
will go into the bazaar and get food to offer to them." Their father
at first searched all over the house but could find no grain. And
then he looked in his purse but he could find no money with which to
go to the bazaar and buy grain. But although he tried to explain this
to his children, they would not listen to him. They screamed at him
and shouted, "Papa, Papa, Mummy says that she will buy us images of
Parwati if you will get food to offer to them." "Papa, Papa, why should
we not have images of Parwati like the other little boys and girls." At
last they bothered the poor Brahman so much that he felt worried to
death. "I love," he said, "my children as if they were made of gold,
but they will not mind what I say. They will not understand that it
is nothing but poverty which prevents my buying food and offering it
to Parwati. I might go out and beg, but when I do, no one ever gives
me anything. Death is better than a life like this." With these words
he got up and walked to the edge of the village pond and determined
to drown himself. It was dark when he started, and half-way he met
an old woman. She heard him coming and asked him who he was. He told
her all his trouble, and said that he meant to jump into the pond to
escape from his children. The woman comforted him and prevailed on him
to turn home again. He took her home. His wife came to the door with
a lamp and asked who she was. The husband did not like to say that he
had only just met her on the road, so he said to his wife, "She is my
grandmother." The wife thereupon welcomed her and invited her to come
in and stay to supper. But her heart felt as heavy as lead, for she
knew that there was nothing to eat inside the house. When the old woman
had seated herself inside the house, the Brahman's wife got up and, in
despair, went to look inside the grain-pots. She knew they were empty,
but she thought that she would first look into them once again. But,
lo and behold! when she looked this time she found the grain-pots
brimming over with grain. She called her husband, and they were both
perfectly delighted. And the wife prepared bowls full of rice-gruel,
and every one, children and all, ate the rice-gruel till the skins
on their stomachs felt quite tight. And they went to bed as happy as
possible. Next morning the old woman called to the Brahman, "My son,
my son, get me water for my bath and cook me a nice hot dinner, and
please be quick about it, and do not start making objections." The
Brahman got up and called his wife, and they got water for the old
woman's bath, and then the Brahman went out to beg. When he had gone
out before, no one had ever given him anything. But to-day every one
ran out and gave him food and molasses and copper coins. Then he went
back home in splendid spirits. His wife prepared a glorious dinner, and
the children ate so much that the skin on their stomachs felt as tight
as a kettle-drum. After breakfast the old woman said to the Brahman,
"To-morrow I want a milk-pudding for dinner." "But, Grandmamma," said
the Brahman, "where shall I get the milk from?" The old woman said,
"Don't worry about that. Just get up and hammer down as many pegs as
you can in your courtyard. Then this evening, when the cattle come
home, call to the village cows and buffaloes by name, and they will
come to you, and if you milk them you will get enough milk for my
pudding to-morrow." The Brahman did as the old woman ordered him,
and that evening he called to the cows and buffaloes by name to come
to his courtyard. And from every direction the cows and buffaloes came
running up. And behind them galloped all the little calves with their
heels in the air and their tails stuck out straight behind them. At
last the Brahman's courtyard was filled so full that no more cows or
buffaloes could enter. And he milked them all, and next day his wife
cooked a milk-pudding such as one would not see again if one lived a
thousand years. And the children ate until they were so tired of eating
that they just rolled over and went fast asleep. But that evening the
old woman said, "My son, my son, I want you to take me home." "But,
Grandmamma, Grandmamma," said the Brahman, "how can I take you home,
for I have had all this good luck only because of you. Directly you go
away my good luck will vanish." "Do not be afraid," said the old woman,
"for I am Parwati. If I bless you your good luck will never
vanish. Therefore you must come with me and see me home." But the
Brahman said, "I do not want my good luck only to continue. I want
it to increase." The old woman said, "If you come with me I shall
give you some sand. When you go back home, scatter it all over the
house and over your jars and your pots, and put it inside your boxes
and your cupboards, and scatter it all over your courtyard too, and
you will find that your good luck will never be any less than it is
now." The Brahman was satisfied with this. He worshipped the old woman
and went with her towards the tank until she suddenly disappeared. He
returned home and scattered sand all over his house and over his
jars and his pots and inside his boxes and his cupboards, and from
that day on, his good luck never left him. And his wealth increased,
and his children increased. And they all lived happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER XII

Soma, the Washerwoman

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
poor Brahman who had seven sons and seven daughters-in-law. He had also
one daughter called Gunvanti and a wife called Dhanvanti. Whenever
a mendicant Brahman came to this house, it was the custom of all
the ladies to give him alms and then prostrate themselves in front
of him. One day a Brahman came, tall as a tree and shining like the
sun. The seven daughters-in-law ran out as usual and gave him alms
and then threw themselves at full length at his feet. The Brahman
blessed them and said, "Increase of children be yours; increase of
wealth be yours; may your husbands cherish you all your lives." But
the Brahman's daughter Gunvanti was a lazy little girl, and when the
mendicant came she was still in bed. Her mother, Dhanvanti, rushed
into her room and cried, "Daughter, daughter, get up and give the
Brahman alms," The little girl jumped up in a fright and ran out and
put alms before him and prostrated herself at his feet. The mendicant
blessed her and said, "Observe the precepts of religion."

The little girl ran back to her mother. "Mother, Mother," she cried,
"Bhatji [13] did not give me the same blessing as he gave to my
sisters-in-law," Her mother said, "Go back again and give him some
more alms and see what he does," The little girl ran back, put
some more alms before the mendicant, and again prostrating herself
asked for his blessing. Once more he said, "Observe the precepts
of religion," Then Dhanvanti asked him why he gave her daughter
such a strange blessing. The mendicant replied, "Because widowhood
will come upon her immediately after her marriage," Dhanvanti threw
herself before the Brahman and grasped his feet and cried, weeping,
"Tell me how I may escape this evil; what shall I do to save my one
little girl from becoming a widow?" The Brahman pitied her and said,
"Lady, lady, do not weep; I shall give you a remedy by which to cure
this evil. Across the seven seas there is an island. In it there lives
a washerwoman called Soma. If you can fetch her to your daughter's
wedding, she will escape the evil that threatens her. When the wedding
is over, you must send Soma back with all honour to her house." With
these words the mendicant took up his wallet and went to collect alms
elsewhere. When her husband returned home Dhanvanti told him what had
happened. "Some one," she added, "must go across the seven seas, to
fetch Soma, the washerwoman." The father and mother called up their
sons and said, "Those of you who honour your parents will take your
sister and cross the seven seas to bring Soma here." But all the
sons turned to their mother and said, "All you care about is your
daughter. You do not love us the least little bit. So we shall not
cross the seven seas and bring Soma here just on her account." The
mother began to cry, and the father got very cross. He turned to his
wife and said, "From henceforth you have no sons. To me our seven sons
are as if they had never been born. But do not get frightened about
our little girl I myself shall cross the seven seas and fetch Soma, the
washerwoman." Then the youngest of the seven sons said to his father,
"Daddy, Daddy, you must not say that you have no sons when here we are,
all seven of us. I shall take my sister Gunvanti with me, and we shall
go and fetch Soma, the washerwoman." A few days later the two children
prostrated themselves before their parents and began their voyage.

In course of time they came to the seashore. But the wind was
blowing, the waves were rolling in, and the foam was splashing over
the rocks. The brother and sister could not imagine how they were to
continue their journey. There was no one near to give them food, there
was no one near to give them drink, and they could think of nothing
better than to lie down and die. But they first resolved to pray to
the god Shiva, "Please, please, God Shiva," prayed the two children,
"get us out of this terrible trouble." After praying they went and
sat under a banian tree, and all day long they had nothing to eat or
drink. Now on the very top of the banian tree was an eagle's nest,
and in it there were several little eagles. When evening came, father
eagle and mother eagle came home and began to feed their young. But
the little eagles would not eat anything at all. Mother eagle said,
"Children, children, what is the matter?" "O Mummy, Mummy," cried
the little eagles, "two strangers have come to our house, and they
are sitting under our tree, and they have had nothing to eat all
day!" Father eagle and mother eagle flew to the ground and began to
ask the boy what his trouble was. "Do not be frightened," said father
eagle; "whatever your business, I'll help you to get it done. Do not
go to bed without supper. I'll bring you some fruit. Eat some of it
yourself and give the rest to your little sister."

The boy told father eagle what had happened, and how it was that they
had to cross the seven seas. Father eagle said, "I shall carry you
both across directly you wake up to-morrow, and I shall put you down
at Soma the washerwoman's door." Then the two children felt very happy
and thanked the god Shiva. And after eating father eagle's fruit,
they lay down under the tree and fell fast asleep in no time. Next
morning father eagle and mother eagle came down the tree, and father
eagle took the boy on his back, and mother eagle took the girl on
her back, and off they flew across the seven seas. The wind blew,
and the waves rolled mountains high, and the foam splashed over the
rocks. But father eagle and mother eagle flew straight on until they
came to the door of Soma, the washerwoman. There they left the boy and
girl and went back to the tree where the little eagles were waiting
for them. The boy and girl were too frightened to walk into Soma's
house, so they hid all that day, and next morning they got up at dawn
and they swept the courtyard and neaped the floor with cow-dung. And
then, before any one could see them, they ran away and hid. And this
they did every day for a whole year.

At last Soma one day called all her children and all her little
daughters-in-law and said, "Who among you gets up so early? Who sweeps
my courtyard? Who clears my floor?" All the children and all the
little daughters-in-law said, "It is not I," "It is not I," "It is not
I." Then Soma became very curious to know who it was. So the following
night she did not go to bed. She sat up, but nothing happened until
just after dawn. Then she saw the little Brahman girl sweeping the
courtyard and her brother cleaning the floor. Soma got up and said,
"Children, who are you?" They replied, "We are Brahmans." "But I am
only a washerwoman," said Soma; "I am a low-caste woman, why do you
sweep my courtyard and neap my floor? It will be reckoned unto me
as a sin If I accept the service of Brahmans." The boy said, "This
is my sister, and a Brahman has told us that unless you come to her
wedding she will be widowed shortly after marriage. Our father and
mother told us to go and bring you back with us. So, in order to make
you pleased with us, we have been working as your servants." "Do not
work for me any more," said Soma, "I shall gladly go to your wedding,"
She then called to her daughters-in-law and said, "I am going to this
child's wedding. But if any one of our relations dies when I am away,
do not burn his body until I come back." She went with the two Brahman
children to the seashore. The wind was blowing, and the great waves
were rolling in, and the foam was splashing over the rocks. But Soma
took the boy under one arm and the girl under the other. She jumped
far up into the sky and right over the seven seas, and when she got
to the opposite shore she put the children down again. They led her to
their father's house. Their mother Dhanvanti welcomed the washerwoman
and fell at her feet to thank her for her coming. The youngest brother
then went to Ujjain, and after making inquiries brought back a boy of
suitable caste and age to be a husband for his sister. On an auspicious
day the wedding was celebrated. But as the bridegroom and bride were
throwing rice [14] over each other, the bridegroom fainted. He fell
on the ground and lay there motionless. The little bride did not know
what to do, she was so frightened. And all the grown-up people were
almost as frightened as she was. But Soma, the washerwoman, stepped
forward and said, "It is nothing, do not be afraid." She took some
water in her hand and sprinkled it over herself. Now the secret of
Soma's power was this:--

She had acquired great merit by observing every Monday the following
practices: She would get up early, bathe, dress in silence, make
various gifts to Brahmans, and then walk one hundred and eight times
round a peepul tree. But now by sprinkling water over herself she had
transferred the whole of her merit to Gunvanti. By this means the
little bride had been able to restore her husband to life, and the
wedding ceremony finished amidst the happiness of all. Soma then took
leave to go, and started on her homeward journey. When she reached the
seashore, the wind was blowing, and the great waves came rolling in,
and the spray was splashing over the rocks. But now that she had given
away all her merit to Gunvanti, she had none left by means of which she
could jump across the seven seas. She sat down forlorn by the bank of
a river. Then she got up, bathed in the water, and prayed to the god
Vishnu. Next she took one hundred and eight sand-grains in her hand,
and then walked one hundred and eight times round a peepul tree by
the river's edge. Instantly her powers returned to her, and going back
to the shore, she sprang into the heavens and over the seven seas and
alighted close to her own door. There all her little daughters-in-law
ran out to meet her and cried, "O Mother-in-law, Mother-in-law, we
have been watching for you. For while you were away your sons, your
husband, and all your sons-in-law died. But just as you told us to do,
we did not burn their corpses, but kept them in the house. And now
they have all suddenly come back to life." Soma questioned the little
daughters-in-law and learnt that her sons and husband and sons-in-law
had all died at the very moment when she gave her merit to Gunvanti,
and that they had come back to life precisely when she finished her
one-hundred-and-eighth turn round the peepul tree. And they were all so
glad to have Soma back with them again, and for ever such a long time
afterwards she and her family lived happily together. And the Brahman
in his joy at his son-in-law's recovery forgave his disobedient sons,
and they too all lived happily together ever afterwards.



CHAPTER XIII

Vasishta and the Four Queens

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there ruled
a king who had four wives. They were always quarrelling over the
housework; so, in order to get some peace at home, the king himself
divided the work between them. To the first queen he gave all the
dairy work, to the second queen he gave all the cooking, to the
third he gave the nursery, and he ordered the fourth to look after
the royal wardrobe. At first all went well. But in a little while
the first queen said to the third queen, "Why should you have charge
of the nursery? Why should you not work in the dairy?" The second
queen said to the fourth queen, "Why should I have to do all the
cooking?" The third queen asked, "Why should I have always to look
after the children?" And the fourth queen stamped her foot and said, "I
won't look after the king's clothes." And all day long they quarrelled
and screamed at each other, and the poor king was more uncomfortable
than ever. His face grew sad and careworn, and, from the time he got
up to the time he went to bed, he could think of nothing but the way
that his four queens were squabbling with each other.

One day the rishi, or sage, Vasishta [15] paid the king a visit. The
king prostrated himself before the great sage and gave him a throne
to sit upon. Vasishta looked at the king's face and saw how sad and
careworn it was. He asked the cause, and the king told him. Then
the rishi rose, and the king went with him to the palace of the
four queens. When they reached it, they called to the queens to come
out. The rishi then asked them why they quarrelled. The first queen
cried out, "Why should I have to do the dairy work?" And the second
queen cried out, "Why should I be only a cook-woman?" And the third
cried out, "Why should I have all the children to look after?" And the
fourth cried out, "Why should I have all the bother of sorting out all
the king's clothes?" The king said, "You must do these things because
I ordered you to." But the queens did not mind a word that he said,
and they all screamed together so loud that the king and the rishi
had to put their fingers in their ears to save themselves from being
deafened. For a while the rishi became absorbed in thought, and then
he turned to the first queen and said, "You have been placed in charge
of the dairy, have you not?" The first queen assented. "Then listen
to me," said Vasishta. "In a former life you were a cow, and near the
spot in the jungle where you used to graze was an altar to Shiva. And
every day at noon you used to come and stand near it and let milk
drop upon it. And, because in this way you honoured the god Shiva, you
have in this life become one of the queens of the king of Atpat. But
you did not in your former life attain to full merit.  So the god
Shiva directed the king to place you in charge of his dairy, and the
king conveyed the god's directions to you. You should therefore obey
them, and you should honour the king as if he were Shiva himself. In
this way you will attain to full merit and ascend to Shiva's heaven,
Kailas." Vasishta then blessed the first queen. She prostrated herself
before him, and, giving up all thought of quarrelling, went away and
busied herself with her dairy work.

Then Vasishta turned to the second queen and asked, "What are
you quarrelling about?" She replied, "Why should I be just a
cook-woman?" The rishi thought for a while and said, "Lady, in a
former life you were the wife of a poor Brahman, and you used to beg
your food from door to door. But every Monday you used to fast, and
whatever grain you begged that day you used to cook and offer to the
god Shiva. And he was pleased with your devotion. Therefore in this
life he made you one of the queens of Atpat. And because you cooked
for the god Shiva, he directed the king to put you in charge of his
kitchen. Therefore, obey the god's directions and give a great feast
to all in Atpat. In this way you will gain the favour of Shiva, and he
will take you with him to Kailas." Then he blessed the second queen,
and she prostrated herself and went off quite cheerfully to cook the
king's dinner.

The sage next turned to the third queen and asked, "What are you
quarrelling about?" The queen answered, "Why should I do nothing but
fiddle about the nursery?" Vasishta thought for a while and said,
"In a former life, O Queen, you were a maid of a jungle tribe. Every
Monday you used to fast yourself and offer the choicest fruits that
you picked to the god Shiva. In return for them he has made you a
queen, and he has entrusted the king's children to you. Therefore
look after them and be kind to them, and in the end he will take you
to live with him in Kailas." The rishi then blessed the third queen,
and she prostrated herself before him. Then she ran off, her face
all smiles, to play with the king's children.

Vasishta last of all turned to the fourth queen and said, "What are
you quarrelling about?" She answered, "Why should I do nothing but
look after the king's clothes?" The rishi said, "In a former life,
O Queen, you were a kite that flew high up in the heavens. Beneath
where you used to fly was an altar to Shiva, and every day at noon
you would spread your wings over it and shade it from the sun's
heat. So the god was pleased with you and in this life made you one
of the queens of Atpat. As you spread your wings over Shiva's altar,
so now a canopy hangs over your bed. And just as you served Shiva,
now do service to the king, your husband. And you will thereby gain
full merit and in the end reach Kailas." Then the rishi blessed her,
and she went off quite gaily to attend to the king's clothes.

And the four queens never quarrelled any more, but lived happily ever
afterwards with the king. And all little girls who hear this story
should try to be as good as the queens were after Vasishta had cured
them of their squabbling.



CHAPTER XIV

The Lamps and the King's Daughter-in-Law

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
king who had one little daughter-in-law. Now she was a very greedy
little girl, and one day when some sweetmeats were got ready for all
the family she went quietly and ate them all up herself. Then she
got very frightened, for she knew that, if the king knew what she
had done, he would order her to be well slapped. So, when the family
began asking where the sweetmeats were she said that the mice had
eaten them. And then every one began abusing the mice, saying what
horrid little wretches they were, and what a good thing it would be
if the cat caught and ate them up. But, when the mice heard all this,
they were very angry with the little daughter-in-law for bringing a
false charge against them, and they all met together and vowed that
they would be revenged on her. Some days later the king invited a
guest to his house, and the same night the mice went into the little
daughter-in-law's room and dragged out one of her bodices and put
it across the guest's bed. Next morning the bodice was discovered
in the stranger's bed, and the little daughter-in-law was utterly
disgraced. Her father-in-law and all her brothers-in-law scolded her
dreadfully, and at last the king drove her out of the house. Now it
so happened that it had till then always been the work of the little
daughter-in-law to look after the lamps in the king's palace. Every
morning she used to rub them well and trim the wicks. She used to light
them herself and neap the burners with sugar-candy, and on Divali [16]
Day she used to worship them and make them suitable offerings. But,
directly the little daughter-in-law was driven away, none of the
lamps were any longer cared for. On the next Divali Day the king was
returning from a hunt, and he camped under a tree. Suddenly he saw all
the lamps in his town of Atpat come and settle on its branches. One
lamp after another told what was happening in its house--when there had
been a dinner party, what there had been to eat, who had been invited,
how they themselves had been cared for, and what honours they had
received on Divali Day. After all the other lamps had told their story,
the big lamp from the king's palace began, "Brother lamps, I do not
know how to tell you. For none among you is so wretched as I am. In
former years I was the most fortunate of all the lamps in Atpat. No
other lamp had such honours paid it as I had, and this year I have
to drag out my days In unspeakable misery." All the other lamps tried
to comfort it, and asked it how it was that ill-fortune had overtaken
it. "O brother lamps, how can I tell you?" repeated the big lamp. "I
am the chief among the lamps that shine In the palace of the King of
Atpat. One day the king's little daughter-in-law ate some sweetmeats
and to save herself blamed the mice. To revenge themselves, they in
turn brought a false charge against her by putting her bodice on the
bed of one of the king's guests. So she was disgraced and driven out
of the house. And after she left ill-fortune came upon me. For every
year it was she who worshipped me and paid me honour; and wherever she
is I wish her well, and I give her my blessing." The king listened
attentively to the talk between the lamps, and thus he learnt that
his daughter-in-law was innocent. He went home and asked whether
there was any other evidence against her besides her bodice. And
when he learnt that there was none, and that no one had seen anything
happen between her and the king's guest, he sent a messenger for her
and had her brought home. And he begged her pardon for the past, and
gave her full authority over all his household; and the king lived
and ruled ever afterwards as wisely and as well as King Ramchandra
of Ayodhya. And if any one brings a false charge against any of us,
may the lamps save us as they did the king's little daughter-in-law.



CHAPTER XV

Parwati and the Priest

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there was a
temple to the god Shiva. One day when Shiva and his wife Parwati
were walking about they happened to come to this temple. They sat
down there and began to play saripat. [17] After some time Parwati
seeing a priest close by asked him who had won, she or Shiva. "Shiva,"
the priest replied. Parwati became very angry and cursed him, so that
he became a leper, and the pains which overtook him were absolutely
unendurable. One day a band of Apsaras [18] came down from heaven to
the temple. They saw that the priest who lived in it was a leper,
and they asked him the reason. He told them how Parwati had cursed
him. They replied, "Do not be afraid; do as we tell you and you will
get rid of your leprosy. Fast all next Monday, bathe that evening,
worship the god Shiva, and then get half a pound of flour and mix
it with treacle and ghee and eat it for dinner. But whatever you do,
eat no salt all day. Do this for sixteen Mondays in succession, and
on the seventeenth Monday get five pounds of flour, mix with it ghee
and treacle, and offer it to Shiva inside this temple. Then divide it
into three parts; leave one for the god, distribute a second among
the Brahmans or give it to your cows, and take the third home to
be eaten by you and your family." The Apsaras disappeared, and the
priest followed their instructions and became quite well. Some time
afterwards Shiva and Parwati came again to the temple. Parwati saw
the priest cured of his leprosy and asked him how he had got rid of
it. He told her exactly what he had done. She was very much surprised,
and thought that if she did the same she might win back her son
Kartakswami, [19] who had quarrelled with her and had run off in a
rage. On the seventeenth Monday Kartakswami suddenly appeared, and
both of them were reconciled. Later on, Kartakswami asked Parwati how
she had brought him back, and Parwati told him. Now Kartakswami had a
Brahman friend who had gone into a far-off country, and Kartakswami
met him by accident shortly afterwards. He told the Brahman how the
priest had cured himself of leprosy, and how he and Parwati had become
reconciled. So the Brahman also practised the same rites for seventeen
Mondays. He then set out for a distant country. As he travelled he
came to a town. Now it happened that in that town arrangements were
being made for the marriage of the king's daughter. Several princes
had come from far-off countries to compete for her hand, and the king
had erected a splendid pavilion for the royal betrothal. But he would
not himself choose a prince to be his daughter's husband. He ordered
that a garland should be placed on a she-elephant's trunk, and that
the prince round whose neck the she-elephant threw the garland should
be chosen to marry the king's daughter. But the she-elephant passed
by all the princes in turn, until she came to where the Brahman
stood. For he had come with the crowds of people to see the royal
betrothal. Then the she-elephant stopped and put the garland round
the Brahman's neck. The king ordered the Brahman to step forward, and
he married him to his daughter. Some years later when the princess
grew up, and she and the Brahman began to live together, she asked
her husband by what merit he had succeeded in winning her for his
wife, and he told her. And she in turn practised the same rites for
seventeen Mondays. Nine months later a beautiful baby boy was born to
her; and when he in turn grew up she told him the rites which she had
practised to obtain him. And he in turn began to perform them. On the
sixteenth Monday he set out for a journey. As he travelled in a distant
country he came to a town over which ruled a king who had no son and
only one daughter. The king had for a long time past been searching
for a beautiful and virtuous young man, resolved when he found him to
hand over to him his kingdom and marry him to his daughter. As the
Brahman's son entered the town the king saw him and noticed on him
all the marks of royal origin. So he summoned him to his house and
married him to his daughter and seated him on his own throne. Now
the next Monday was the seventeenth Monday since the Brahman's son
had begun the rites which the Apsaras had told to the priest. That
morning he got up and went to the temple and sent a message home to
his wife that she should send him five sers of flour mixed with ghee
and treacle. But the queen was too proud to do this. For she feared
that the people in the street would laugh at her if she sent her
husband five sers of flour mixed with ghee and treacle. So instead
she sent him five hundred rupees in a plate. But because the flour
and ghee and treacle were not sent, the king was unable to complete
his ceremonial, and it was all spoilt. And the god Shiva instead of
being pleased became very angry indeed. And he told the king that,
if he kept the queen as his wife, he would lose his kingdom and die
a beggar. Next day the king sent for his chief minister and told him
what had happened. At first the minister said, "The kingdom belongs
to the queen's father. If you drive her out your subjects will hate
you." But the king replied, "Yes, but not to obey the god's command
is a worse thing still." At last the minister agreed with the king,
and the order went forth that the queen should be driven out of the
city. So the queen was driven out and became quite poor and wandered
along the road. At last she came to a distant town and lodged there
with an old woman, who gave her food and drink. One day the old woman
sent the queen out to sell fruit puddings. As she went into the bazaar
a great wind came and carried off the fruit puddings. When she returned
to the old woman's house, the queen told her what had happened, and
the old woman drove her out of the house. Then she went and lodged
with an oilman, who had great jars full of oil. But one day she went
and looked inside the jars, and all the oil disappeared. So the oilman
drove her off out of the house. The queen left the town and walked
along until she came to a river with abundant water in it. But directly
her eyes fell on the water, it all flowed away and left the water-bed
quite dry. She then journeyed on until she came to a beautiful lake,
but when her glance rested on the lake, it became full of worms, and
the water began to stink. And, when the cowherds came as usual to
water their cattle, the cattle would not drink the stinking water,
and they had to go home thirsty. By chance a Gosavi, or holy man,
came that way and saw the queen, and she told him her story. The
holy man took her to his house and treated her as his own daughter,
and she did her best to serve him faithfully. But, at whatever thing
she looked, it would either disappear or become full of worms and
maggots. At last the holy man searched for the cause of this by means
of his inner knowledge. And thus he learnt that she had incurred the
sin of spoiling the worship of Shiva, which the Apsaras had first
taught the priest. Unless that sin were atoned for, her evil glance
would never be purified. So the holy man prayed to the god Shiva,
and the god was pleased with him; and when the holy man interceded
with him on the queen's behalf, the god said that he would forgive her
if she began and completed properly the rites which she had spoiled
when her husband was performing them. The queen did so, and the god's
anger vanished. Suddenly there rose in the heart of her husband, the
king, a wish to see his queen, and he sent out messengers on every
side to look for her. At last one of the messengers saw the queen in
the holy man's hermitage and went back and told the king. The king
was overjoyed, and, taking his chief minister with him, he journeyed
to the hermitage. He threw himself at the holy man's feet and then
loaded him with presents. And the holy man was pleased and said,
"O King, I have treated your wife exactly as if she had been my own
daughter. She has lived here just as if she had been in her father's
house. Now take her with you back again and once more go through the
marriage ceremony with her." The king consented, and both he and the
queen prostrated themselves before the holy man, and then they both
returned to Atpat. And they celebrated their home-coming with the
greatest splendour. And the rest of the king's reign was as happy as
possible. And we shall be just as happy if we honour Shiva like the
King of Atpat did.



CHAPTER XVI

The Rishi and the Brahman

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
Brahman. For many years he lived happily and cultivated his fields of
rice and grain. But one day his wife gave up the observances imposed
on her, and, as a result, the whole house was stained by her conduct,
and pollution hung like a black cloud over it. Her husband should
have driven her out, but he had not the heart to do so. So he, too,
incurred the blame of his wife's sin. In course of time they died,
and, as a punishment for their wickedness, the husband became in his
next life a bullock, and the wife became a dog. But the gods so far
relented as to find them a home in the house of their only son.

Now the son was a very pious man, who never failed in his religious
rites. He worshipped the gods, gave memorial honours to his dead
father, and welcomed to his house every Brahman who passed by. One
year, on the anniversary of his father's death, he told his wife
to prepare a milk-pudding in honour of the dead, and announced that
he would invite Brahmans to partake of it. The wife was as pious as
her husband and never failed to obey his commands. So she made a big
milk-pudding, and she boiled vegetables and stewed fruits. But just as
she had finished and was about to invite her husband and his Brahman
guests to begin their feast, the dog saw that a snake had entered the
grain-jar, which had not been properly shut, and that it had left its
poisonous trail all over the grain from which the milk-pudding had been
prepared. The dog at once realised that, if the Brahmans who had been
invited to the memorial feast ate the poisoned grain, they would die,
and that the sin of Brahman murder would be incurred by the host,
her son. So she suddenly rushed up and put her foot right into the
middle of the milk-pudding. The son's wife was very angry. She threw
a red-hot coal at the dog with such skill that it dropped on to the
middle of her back and burnt a big hole in it. Then the son's wife
cooked a fresh milk-pudding and fed the Brahmans. But she was so
cross with the dog that she would not give her the smallest possible
scrap. So the poor dog remained hungry all day. When night fell she
went to the bullock who had been her husband and began to howl as
loudly as she could. The bullock asked her what the matter was. She
told him how she had seen that a snake had poisoned the grain, and
how, to prevent the Brahmans dying and her son incurring the sin of
their death, she had put her paw into the middle of the milk-pudding;
how her daughter-in-law had been angry and had burnt a hole in her
back with a live coal, and how her back hurt so that she did not know
what to do. The bullock answered, "You are suffering for the pollution
with which you darkened our house in a former life, and, because I
let you remain in the house and touched you, I too am suffering, and
I have become a bullock. Only to-day my son fastened me to his plough,
tied up my mouth, and beat me, I too have, like you, had nothing to eat
all day. Thus all my son's memorial services are useless." Now the son
happened to be passing by the stable and heard this conversation. He
at once fetched the bullock some grass and the dog some food, and he
brought them both water to drink; and then he went to bed very sad at
heart. Next morning he got up early and went into a dark forest until
at last he came to the hermitage of a rishi. He prostrated himself
before the rishi, who asked him why he was so sad. The Brahman's son
said, "I am sad because my father has been born again as a bullock
and my mother as a dog. Pray tell me how I can get their release," The
rishi said, "There is only one way to help them. You must worship the
seven sages who have their home in the Great Bear." [20] And he told
the Brahman's son the ceremonies which he should observe, and how he
should worship the seven sages continually every month of Bhadrapad, or
September, for seven years. The Brahman's son obeyed the rishi, and at
the end of the seven years a fiery chariot came down from heaven. The
bullock suddenly became a handsome man, and the dog became a handsome
woman. They both seated themselves in the chariot and were carried off
to live with the sages who have their home for ever in the Great Bear.



CHAPTER XVII

The King and the Water-Goddesses

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. Over it there ruled
a king. One day he founded a new village, and close by he built a
village tank. But no matter how hard he tried he could not get it
filled with water. So he prayed to the water-goddesses to help him,
and the water-goddesses were pleased and said, "O King, O King,
sacrifice to us the eldest son of your daughter-in-law, and the
tank will fill with water." The king heard it and went home very
troubled. He was ready to sacrifice his grandson; for though he loved
the boy, yet he knew that the life of one was less than the welfare of
many. But he knew that his daughter-in-law would never agree. At last
he thought of a trick. He went up to her and said, "Daughter-in-law,
it is a long time since you went to see your parents. You had better
go and pay them a visit and leave your eldest boy behind. I shall look
after him here." The daughter-in-law consented and went to visit her
parents, leaving her son behind. The king waited for a favourable
day and then bathed and anointed his grandson. He gave a feast in
his honour and covered his body with costly jewelry. He then took
him into the middle of the pond and made him lie down on a bed and
told him not to stir. The water-goddesses were pleased, and a great
mass of water suddenly rushed into the tank, and it was filled right
up to the brink. After a time the daughter-in-law came back from her
father's house and brought her brother with her. They asked where her
son was, but they could get no information. Whenever they asked the
king, he did nothing but say how the water had come into the tank,
and what a beautiful tank it was, and how happy it would make all
the villagers. At last the daughter-in-law guessed what had happened,
and when the seventh day of the bright half of the month of Shravan,
or August, came round, she and her brother went to the edge of the
tank and began to worship the water-goddesses. She took a cucumber
leaf, and on it she placed some curds and rice. Next she mixed
with them some butter and a farthing's worth of betel-nut. Then she
told her brother to pray, "O Goddess, Mother of All, if any one of
our family is drowned in the tank please give him back to us." He
did so and then threw the offering into the lake. Then they both
turned to go home. But as she was turning homewards, she felt some
one pull her by the legs. She looked down and saw that it was her
missing son. When she saw him she dragged him with all her might to
the bank, and then she and her brother walked home with him. When
the king heard that she was coming, together with her missing son,
he wondered greatly, and going to her he fell at her feet and said,
"O my daughter, I offered your son to the water-goddesses; how has
he come back again?" She said, "I worshipped the water-goddesses
and made offerings to them. Then my son came out of the water, and
I lifted him up and drew him to the shore." The king was overjoyed
and showed the greatest favour to his daughter-in-law. And she and
her little son lived happily ever afterwards.



CHAPTER XVIII

The Lid of the Sacred Casket

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
Brahman who had two twin sons. While they were still quite young,
the twins' parents died, and their relatives stole from them all
their property and then turned them out of the house. The twins
wandered along until they came to a town. It was then noon, and
the boys were weary with walking and were tortured with hunger and
thirst. As they entered the town, a Brahman came out of his door
to throw food to the crows. He saw the two boys and called them in,
fed them, and then made them tell him their story. When he heard it
he resolved to provide for them, and he lodged them in his house and
taught them to recite the Vedas. On Lalita Panchmi Day the Brahman
began to perform certain ceremonies. His pupils asked him why he did
so. The sage replied that by doing so one could attain to wealth,
knowledge, and to the wish of one's heart. The boys begged him to
instruct them, and they quickly learnt how to worship the goddess
Parwati. Not long afterwards the Brahman provided them with wives,
and they returned to their own city, acquired wealth, and were very
happy. A year or two later the twins separated. But the elder was a
wise boy and never forgot to worship the goddess Parwati on Lalita
Panchmi Day. So he retained the riches which he had gained. But the
younger was foolish and forgot all about it, so the goddess began to
dislike him, and he lost all his money. And at last he became so poor
that he and his wife had to give up their house and go and live on
the charity of his elder brother. One day the elder brother's wife
spoke so crossly and said such nasty things to the younger twin,
that he felt that he could not stay in the house any longer. And he
remembered then that of recent years he had entirely forgotten to
worship Parwati. He felt very penitent, and he decided that somehow or
other he would win back the goddess's favour. Taking his wife with him,
he left his brother's house and journeyed to a distant country. At
last he came near a town, and, meeting a cowherd, the younger twin
asked him what its name was. The cowherd said, "The town is called
Upang." "Who is the king?" asked the younger twin. The cowherd replied,
"He also is called Upang." The wanderer then asked whether there was
any place where he and his wife could lodge. The cowherd told him
that in the town there was a temple of Parwati, and close to it
was a rest-house where the wanderer and his wife could lodge. The
cowherd directed them to the rest-house. And before lying down the
younger twin worshipped Parwati in the temple and begged her pardon
for his previous neglect. Parwati felt sorry for him, and that night
she appeared to him in a dream. She told him to go to King Upang's
palace and to beg from him the lid of the sacred casket in which
the accessories of worship were kept. He should, thereafter, always
pray to it, and in the end he would come by his heart's desire. The
younger twin woke up, and the same morning he went to King Upang's
palace and begged from him the lid of the sacred casket in which were
kept the accessories of worship. The king at first refused, but when
the younger twin told the king of his dream the king consented. The
Brahman took the lid home, worshipped it, and, just as the goddess
had foretold, he came by his heart's desire. Property and happiness
returned, and a year later his wife bore him a daughter. As the years
passed the little girl grew up. One day she took the lid of the sacred
casket and went with some playmates to play and bathe by the bank of
a river. Suddenly the corpse of a Brahman came floating by. Seeing
it, the little girl took the lid of the casket and for fun began to
splash water on it. Such was the power of the sacred lid, that the
corpse instantly became alive again and became a Brahman, tall as a
tree and beautiful as the sun. The little girl fell in love with him
on the spot and told him that he must become her husband. "But," said
the Brahman, "how shall I manage it?" The little girl said, "Come home
with me at dinner-time, take as usual water [21] in your hand, but do
not sip it. Then my daddy will ask you, 'Bhatji, Bhatji, why do you
not sip the water in your hand?' You must reply, 'I am ready to dine
if you marry me to your daughter. If you will not, I shall get up and
go away.' Then he will consent to our marriage." The Brahman agreed,
and he went home with the little girl, and everything happened as she
had planned. To prevent the Brahman from getting up without any food,
the little girl's father agreed to their marriage. When a favourable
day came they were married, and when she was old enough the little
girl went to her husband's house. As she went she carried off the
lid of the sacred casket of King Upang. But, because it had gone,
her father lost all his wealth and fell once more into the greatest
poverty. His wife went to her daughter's house and asked for it
back, but she refused to give it up. The wife was very angry and
every day began to hate her son-in-law more and more. But for him,
as she thought, the little girl would never have married and would
not have stolen the lid of the sacred casket. One day the wife met
her son-in-law on the road, and she gave him such a fearful slap in
the face that he instantly fell on the ground and became a corpse
again. His mother-in-law then-snatched from him the lid of the casket,
which he happened to have in his hand, and ran away home. There he
lay until the little girl, his wife, began to search for him. When
she found him she prayed to the goddess, and by her aid and by means
of the merit which she had acquired by worshipping the lid of the
casket while she had it, she restored her husband to life. But the
twin and his wife went on becoming poorer and poorer. And at last
they went back to his brother's house and asked him why it was that
the younger twin was always losing his wealth as fast as he gained
it. The elder brother listened to the whole story and then he said,
"I do not wonder at it. First you lost the lid of the casket, then,
in order to get it back, your wife killed a Brahman. Your only chance
now is to worship Parwati harder than ever, and perhaps in the end
you may recover your good estate." So the younger brother went home
and worshipped Parwati with greater vigour than ever. And at last
she relented and gave him her blessing. He recovered his wealth and
came by all that his heart desired. And he and his wife lived happily
ever afterwards.



CHAPTER XIX

The Brahman Wife and Her Seven Sons

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there lived a
poor Brahman who used always to perform Shradh or memorial ceremonies
to his father on the last day of the month of Shravan. When performing
these ceremonies he always invited other Brahmans to dine. But it so
happened that on every last day of the month of Shravan, [22] from the
day of his father's death onwards, his daughter-in-law gave birth to a
little boy. And just as the Brahmans had begun to enjoy their dinner,
the child would die. So all the Shradh ceremonies had to cease,
and the poor Brahmans had to be sent away feeling most dreadfully
hungry. This happened regularly for six years. But, when the seventh
little boy was born only to die just as his guests were beginning
to enjoy their dinner, the poor Brahman lost all patience. He took
the newly-born child and placed it in his daughter-in-law's lap and
then drove her out of the house and into the jungle. The poor woman
walked along until she came to a great, dark forest. In it she met the
wife of a hobgoblin, [23] who asked, "Lady, Lady, whose wife are you,
and why do you come here? Run away as quickly as you can. For, if my
husband the hobgoblin sees you, he will tear you to pieces and gobble
you up." The poor woman said she was the daughter-in-law of a Brahman,
and explained how every year she had given birth to a son on the last
day of Shravan, how it had died in the middle of the Shradh feast,
and how at last her father-in-law had put the child in her lap and
had driven her from home and into the forest. The hobgoblin's wife
repeated, "If you value your life at all, go away." The Brahman
woman began to cry, until at last the hobgoblin's wife had pity on
her and said, "Do not be afraid; walk a little way until you come to
an altar to the god Shiva, Close by is a bel [24] tree; climb into it
and hide among the branches. To-night the serpent-maidens from Patala
and the wood-nymphs, together with a train of seven demon Asuras,
[25] will come and worship at the altar. After making their offerings
to the god, they will call out, 'Is there any uninvited guest present
to whom we can make a gift?' You must then call out in reply, 'Yes,
I am here.' They will see you and question you, and you must tell them
all your story." The poor Brahman woman agreed. She walked on until
she came to the god Shiva's altar. She climbed into the branches of
the bel tree. She remained there until midnight came. Suddenly the
serpent-maidens from Patala and the wood-nymphs, accompanied by a
train of seven demon Asuras, came and worshipped at the altar. After
making offerings to the god they called out, "Is there any uninvited
guest present to whom we can make a gift?" The Brahman woman at once
climbed down the bel tree and called out in answer, "Yes, I am here,"
The serpent-maidens from Patala and the wood-nymphs, greatly surprised,
asked her who she was, and she told them all her story. Then the
serpent-maidens of Patala and the wood-nymphs ordered their train
of demon Asuras to go and search for the seven sons of the Brahman
woman. The seven demon Asuras spurred their horses and rode off in all
directions. In a little time the giant captain of the demon guards
rode up carrying in his arms the body of a little boy of six. Then
another rode up carrying the body of a little boy of five. And four
others rode up carrying a little boy of four, a little boy of three,
a little boy of two, and a little boy only one year old. Last of
all the seventh demon Asura rode up with a newly-born baby boy. The
demons placed the bodies in front of the serpent-maidens from Patala
and of the wood-nymphs. And first of all the little boy of six came to
life and got up and ran to his mother. Next the little boy of five,
and then the little boy of four, and then the little boy of three
came to life and ran to their mother. Then the little boy of two
came to life and got up, but he could only walk to his mother. Next
the little one-year-old boy came to life, but he could not get up,
so he lay on his back and kicked up his legs. And last of all the
newly-born baby came to life, but he could not even kick up his
legs. And they were all delighted to see their mother, and she was
overjoyed to have all her sons again. But the serpent-maidens from
Patala and the wood-nymphs warned her that she must pray to the
sixty-four Yoginis, the attendants who wait on Durga, the Goddess
of Death, or else her children would be snatched from her again. And
they told her to pray her hardest, for her prayer had to travel down
to the depths of Hell. So the Brahman woman prayed her hardest to
the sixty-four Yoginis, and then she prostrated herself before the
serpent-maidens from Patala, and the wood-nymphs, and their train of
demon Asuras. And then she took the little one-year-old boy on her hip,
and the newly-born baby boy in her arms, and she walked with her other
five sons to the village. When the villagers saw her coming they ran
and said to the Brahman, "Bhatji, Bhatji, your daughter-in-law is
coming back home." And the Brahman became very angry and vowed that
he would drive her away again. So he watched for her coming. But
first of all he saw walking towards his house a little boy of six,
and then a little boy of five, and then a little boy of four, and
then two other little boys of three and two. Last of all he saw his
daughter-in-law with a one-year-old boy on her hip and a newly-born
baby in her arms. He rose and fetched a cauldron of water and two
handfuls of rice from his house. And he waved his hands filled with
rice round the heads of his daughter-in-law and of all her children,
and last of all he washed their feet. In this way he welcomed back to
his house his grandchildren and their mother. And he made her tell
him all her story; and she, and her children, and the Brahman spent
the rest of their lives in great peace and perfect happiness.



CHAPTER XX

The Golden Temple

Once upon a time there was a town called Atpat. In it there reigned a
king who had four daughters-in-law. He loved three of them very dearly,
but the fourth, who was an ugly little girl, he did not like at all. To
the three daughters-in-law he gave nice food and fine clothes. But
to the ugly little daughter-in-law he gave nothing but scraps from
his table and thick, coarse clothes to wear. He would not even let her
sleep inside the house, but made her sleep in the stable and look after
the cows. The poor ugly daughter-in-law grew so unhappy that, when the
first Monday in Shravan [26] came, she ran out of the palace, and out
of the town, and then away as fast as her fat little legs would carry
her. At last she went and hid herself in the woods. Now it so happened
that that very day a band of serpent-maidens [27] had come up from
Patala. After wandering through the forest and bathing in the running
streams, they had joined a bevy of wood-nymphs and were coming in her
direction. At first she was too terrified to say a single word. But at
last she asked, "Ladies, ladies, where are you going?" "To the temple
of Shiva," they replied, "to worship the god. For by doing that, one
wins the love of one's husband, one obtains children, and one comes by
the wish of one's heart." When the ugly daughter-in-law heard that by
doing what the serpent-maidens and the wood-nymphs were about to do
she could win love for herself, she at once thought that in this way
she, too, might win the love of her father-in-law. So she told the
serpent-maidens of Patala and the wood-nymphs that she would go with
them. They went deeper and deeper into the forest until at last they
came to a temple of the god Shiva. There the serpent-maidens and the
wood-nymphs offered to the god rice, betel-nut, incense, flowers, and
the leaves of the bel tree. The ugly little daughter-in-law did just
as they did. And when she had finished she cried out, "O God Shiva,
please, please vouchsafe my prayer also, and make my father-in-law
and my mother-in-law, my brothers-in-law and my sisters-in-law like
me as much as they now dislike me." That evening she went home and
fasted, and all the scraps which they threw to her from the king's
table she gave to her favourite cow. And then she sat by herself and
prayed to the god Shiva. The following Monday she once more ran out of
the palace and out of the town and into the woods as fast as her fat
little legs would carry her. There she met again the serpent-maidens
of Patala and the bevy of wood-nymphs and went with them to the
temple of Shiva in the distant heart of the forest. The first time the
serpent-maidens and the wood-nymphs had given her the incense and the
flowers, the rice and the betel-nut, and the leaves of the bel tree,
with which to perform her worship. But they had told her that the
next time she must bring them herself. So when she ran away on the
second Monday in Shravan she brought with her incense and flowers,
rice and betel-nut and bel-tree leaves, and after offering them and
some sesamums to the god she once more prayed, "O God Shiva, please,
please grant my prayer and make my father-in-law and my mother-in-law,
my brothers-in-law and my sisters-in-law like me as much as they now
dislike me." Then she went home and fasted, and giving all her dinner
to her favourite cow she sat by herself and prayed to Shiva. That
evening the king asked her who the god was whom she was honouring,
and where he lived. The ugly little daughter-in-law replied, "Afar
off my god lives, and the roads to him are hard, and the paths to him
are full of thorns. Where snakes abound and where tigers lie in wait,
there is his temple." The third Monday in Shravan, the ugly little
daughter-in-law again started from the palace with her flowers and
incense, her betel-nut and bel leaves, her rice and sesamum, in order
to meet the serpent-maidens of Patala and the bevy of wood-nymphs, and
with them to worship the god in the hidden depths of the forest. This
time the king and her other male relatives followed her and said
to her, "Ugly little daughter-in-law, take us with you and show us
your god." But the temple of Shiva was ever so far from the king's
palace. The ugly daughter-in-law did not mind, for she was used to
cruel treatment. She had also walked to the temple twice before, and
her feet had got as hard as two little stones. But the king and his
relatives were tired to death; and their feet swelled up to the size
of an elephant's, and they became as full of thorns as the back of a
porcupine. And they muttered to each other, "How on earth does that
ugly little daughter-in-law manage to walk as she does through the
heart of the forest?" The ugly daughter-in-law at last felt sorry for
them. She prayed to the god Shiva to build a temple near at hand. The
god consented, and, with the help of the serpent-maidens of Patala
and of the wood-nymphs, he created suddenly a beautiful temple all of
pure, yellow gold. Its pillars were studded with jewels, and the jars
in it were all of crystal. In the middle there rose from the ground
an altar to the god Shiva. And last of all the god revealed himself
to the king and his companions in all his glory and splendour. For
a moment only they saw him; and then he vanished. The king and his
companions stared, too astonished to move or speak. But the ugly
little daughter-in-law prostrated herself and offered to the god
flowers and incense. Then she cried out, "O God Shiva, please, please
vouchsafe my prayer and make my father-in-law and my mother-in-law,
my brothers-in-law and my sisters-in-law like me as much as they now
dislike me." When the king heard her prayer his heart softened to her,
and he spoke kindly to her and gave her jewelry and trinkets. In a
little while he took off his turban and, placing it on a peg, walked
out to look at a lovely lake which, unnoticed by any one before,
now stretched out close by the temple. And behind him strolled out
his companions. But when they had gone out of sight, the beautiful
golden temple by the lake vanished for ever. After looking at the
lake the king came back to fetch his turban which he had left in
the temple. But he could not find the beautiful temple all of pure,
yellow gold, with its jewel-studded pillars and its crystal jars. The
king asked the little daughter-in-law the cause. She said nothing,
but straightway walked deeper into the forest. And the king and his
companions, although weary to death, followed her. At last they came to
the temple where she had worshipped, together with the serpent-maidens
from Patala and the bevy of wood-nymphs. It was a tiny temple,
and inside it there was a rough altar. At the foot of the altar lay
the flowers which the ugly daughter-in-law had offered to the god,
and close by on a peg hung the turban left by the king. Again the
king asked his daughter-in-law the meaning of what had happened. She
replied, "This temple that you see is my own poor little temple. But,
because of my prayers, the god Shiva showed himself to you in the
beautiful temple, all of pure, yellow gold, with its jewel-studded
pillars and its crystal jars." When the king heard her reply, he grew
more pleased than ever with the daughter-in-law whom formerly he had
so disliked. And because the god had revealed himself at her prayer,
the king, to do her honour, sent for his royal palanquin and had her
carried home in state. And the ugly little daughter-in-law became out
of the four the king's favourite. And he was so much nicer to her than
he was to his other three daughters-in-law that they became as jealous
as cats. But the king and the ugly little daughter-in-law did not mind
them the least little bit. And they both lived happily ever afterwards.



NOTES

[1] For an account of the birth of Kartakswami see The Tale of the
Tulsi Plants p. 93.

[2] In India days of the week have the same mysterious connexion
with the astral bodies that they have in Europe. Aditwar or Raviwar
is sun's day (Sunday); Somwar is moon's day (Monday); Mangalwar is
Mars' day (mardi); Budhwar is Mercury's day (mercredi); Brihaspatiwar
is the day of Diespiter or Jupiter (jeudi); Shukrawar is Venus' day
(vendredi); Shaniwar is Saturn's day (Saturday).

[3] His bad actions in a former life.

[4] All these stories take place in Atpat town. This literally means
"City Splendid." But in the tales it is simply a fabulous city.

[5] Although Tuesday is really the day of Mars, Mangal, this tale
by a popular error connects the day with Mangalgauri or Parwati,
Shiva's wife.

[6] Budh is Mercury; Brahaspati is Jupiter.

[7] For serpent-maidens of Patala see note to Story XX.

[8] Mahalaxmi is always worshipped in this way. And it is a common
practice for anyone who wants anything to blow on a pot and then wish
for it.

[9] Kolhapur is the chief seat of the worship of Mahalaxmi.

[10] Ashwin corresponds approximately with October.

[11] A kind of draughts.

[12] Nagpanchmi Day falls on Shravan Sud 5, i.e. the 5th day of the
bright half of Shravan.

[13] Bhatji is the name by which a mendicant Brahman is addressed.

[14] This is called the akshataropan.

[15] Vasishta was the family priest of King Dasaratha, father of
Ramchandra. After death he became one of the stars in the constellation
of the Great Bear.

[16] Divali is the feast of lamps in the month of Kartih.

[17] Saripat is a kind of draughts.

[18] Apsaras are attendants on the gods.

[19] Kartakswami was really Parwati's step-son (see Preface).

[20] The Indians do not associate the Great Bear constellation with a
bear, but they believe it to be the habitation of seven rishis. The
seven rishis vary in different works. In the Mahabharat the names
given are Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulatya, and Vasishta.

[21] Aposhani. This is the water which a Brahman sips from his hand
before and after his meal.

[22] Shravan corresponds roughly with August. The death of the child
nullified all the virtue of the Shradh feast, which had at once to
be stopped.

[23] Zhoting is really the unquiet ghost of a Musulman, but hobgoblin
is probably a sufficiently close translation.

[24] A tree sacred to Shiva.

[25] The Asuras, who are now reckoned petty demons, had once upon
a time a much higher position. They are the same as Ahura-Magda,
the Jupiter of the Iranians. The latter, curiously enough,
degraded the Devas or Hindu Gods to the subordinate place of
demons. (Cf. Rawlinson's Bactria, page 21.)

[26] Shravan = August.

[27] Nag-kanya. These are the maidens of the race of the Nagas, who
are said to have sprung from Kadru, wife of Kasyapa. One of them,
Ulupi, married the hero Arjuna. They live in Patala, the lowest of
the seven underground regions.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Deccan Nursery Tales, by Charles Augustus Kincaid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECCAN NURSERY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 11167.txt or 11167.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/1/6/11167/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Distributed
Proofreaders Team from scans of the Million Books Project.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
