The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction
       Volume 14, No. 379, Saturday, July 4, 1829.

Author: Various

Release Date: February 23, 2004 [EBook #11233]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 379 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

No. 379.] SATURDAY, JULY 4, 1829. [PRICE  2d.

       *       *       *       *       *

MILAN CATHEDRAL

[Illustration: MILAN CATHEDRAL.]


"Show the motley-minded gentleman in;"--the old friend with a new
face, or, in plain words, THE MIRROR _in a new type_. Tasteful reader,
examine the symmetry, the sharp cut and finish of this our new fount of
type, and tell us whether it accords not with the beauty, pungency, and
polish of the notings and selections of this our first sheet. For some
days this type has been glittering in the printing-office boxes, like
nestling fire-flies, and these pages at first resembled so many pools or
tanks of molten metal, or the windows of a fine old mansion--Hatfield
House for instance,--lit up by the refulgent rays of a rising sun.
The sight "inspires us, and fires us;" and we count upon _new_ letter
bringing us _new_ friends, and thus commence our Fourteenth Volume
with _new_ hopes and invigorating prospects. But what subject can
be more appropriate for such a commencement, than so splendid a
triumph of art as

MILAN CATHEDRAL;

situate almost in the centre, and occupying part of the great square
of the city. It is of Gothic architecture, and its materials are white
marble. In magnitude this edifice yields to few in the universe.
Inferior only to the Vatican, it equals in length, and in breadth
surpasses, the cathedral of Florence and St. Paul's; in the interior
elevation it yields to both; in exterior it exceeds both; in fretwork,
carving, and statues, it goes beyond all churches in the world, St.
Peter's itself not excepted. Its double aisles, its clustered pillars,
its lofty arches; the lustre of its walls; its numberless niches all
filled with marble figures, give it an appearance novel even in Italy,
and singularly majestic. The admirer of English Gothic will observe
one peculiarity, which is, that in the cathedral of Milan there is no
screen, and that the chancel is entirely open, and separated from the
nave only by its elevation.

The pillars of the cathedral of Milan are more than ninety feet in
height, and about eight in diameter. The dimensions of the church
at large are as follow:--In length four hundred and ninety feet, in
breadth two hundred and ninety-eight, in interior elevation under the
dome two hundred and fifty-eight, and four hundred in exterior, that
is to the summit of the tower. The pavement is formed of marble of
different colours, disposed in various patterns and figures. The number
of niches is great, and every niche has its statue, which, with those
placed on the ballustrade of the roof, are reported to amount to more
than four thousand. Many among them are said to be of great merit. Over
the dome rises a tower or spire, or rather obelisk, for its singular
shape renders it difficult to ascertain its appellation, which, whatever
may be its intrinsic merit, adds little either to the beauty or to the
magnificence of the structure which it surmounts. This obelisk was
erected about the middle of the last century, contrary to the opinion
of the best architects. Though misplaced, its form is not in itself
inelegant, while its architecture and mechanism are extremely ingenious,
and deserve minute examination. In ascending the traveller will observe,
that the roof of the church is covered with blocks of marble, connected
together by a cement, that has not only its hardness and durability, but
its colour, so that the eye scarcely perceives the juncture, and the
whole roof appears one immense piece of white shining marble. The view
from the summit is extensive and even novel, as it includes not only the
city and the rich plain of Milan, intersected with rivers and canals,
covered with gardens, orchards, vineyards, and groves, and thickly
studded with villages and towns; but it extends to the grand frame of
this picture, and takes in the neighbouring Alps, forming a magnificent
semicircle and uniting their bleak ridges with the milder and more
distant Apennines.

The traveller, says Eustace, will regret as he descends, that instead of
heaping this useless and cumbersome quarry upon the dome, the trustees
of the edifice did not employ the money expended upon it in erecting a
front, (for that essential part is still wanting,) corresponding with
the style and stateliness of this superb temple. A front has indeed been
begun, but in a taste so dissimilar to that of the main building, and
made up of such a medley of Roman orders and Gothic decorations, that
the total suspension of such a work might be considered as an advantage,
if a more appropriate portal were to be erected in its place. But
unfortunately the funds destined for the completion and repair of this
cathedral are now swallowed up in the general confiscation. Had it been
finished, and the western front built in a style corresponding with the
other parts, the admirers of the Gothic style would have possessed one
specimen perfect in its kind, and accompanied with all the advantages
of the best materials, set off by a fine climate.

In materials, the cathedral of Milan surpasses all the churches of the
universe, the noblest of which are only lined and coated with marble,
while this is entirely built, paved, vaulted, and roofed with the same
substance, and that of the whitest and most resplendent kind. The most
remarkable object in the interior of this church is the subterranean
chapel, in which the body of St. Charles Borromeo reposes. It is
immediately under the dome, in form octangular, and lined with silver,
divided into panels representing the different actions of the life of
the saint. The body is in a shrine of rock crystal, on, or rather behind
the altar; it is stretched at full length, drest in pontifical robes,
with the crosier and mitre. The face is exposed, very improperly,
because much disfigured by decay, a deformity increased and rendered
more hideous by its contrast with the splendour of the vestments which
cover the body, and by the pale ghastly light that gleams from the
aperture above. The inscription over this chapel or mausoleum, was
dictated by St. Charles himself, and breathes that modesty and piety
which so peculiarly marked his character. It is as follows:

  CAROLUS CARDINALIS
  TITULI S. PRAXEDIS
  ARCHIEP. MEDIOLAN.
  FREQUENTIORIBUS
  CLERI POPULIQ. AC
  DEVOTI FAEMINEI SEXUS
  PRECIBUS SE COMMENDATUM
  CUPIENS HOC LOCO SIBI
  MONUMENTUM VIVENS ELEGIT.


Of the statues crowded in and around this edifice many are esteemed, and
some admired. Of the latter, that of St. Bartholomew is the first; it
stands in the church, and represents the apostle as holding his own
skin, which had been drawn off like drapery over his shoulders. The play
of the muscles is represented with an accuracy, that rather disgusts and
terrifies than pleases the spectator.[1] The exterior of the chancel is
lined with marble divided into panels, each of which has its _basso
relievo_; the interior is wainscoted, and carved in a very masterly
style. The whole of the chancel was erected by St. Charles Borromeo.

    [1] The following lines are inscribed on its pedestal, in Latin,
        and in English:--

          Lest at the sculptor doubtfully you guess,
          'Tis Marc Agrati, not Praxiteles.

        This statue is reckoned worth its weight in gold.


In describing this magnificent cathedral, we have availed ourselves of
abridging the description in Eustace's "Classical Tour," a work of high
authority and sterling value on all subjects connected with the Fine
Arts.

       *       *       *       *       *


RUSTIC AMUSEMENTS.

(_To the Editor of the Mirror_.)


Three years ago you gave a pleasing illustration of "_the Amusements
of May_," and at the same time lamented the decrease of village
festivity and rural merriment, which in days langsyne cheered the honest
hearts and lightened the daily toil of our rustic ancestors. From the
sentiments you express on that occasion, I am led to fancy that it will
afford you pleasure to hear that the song, the dance, and innocent
revelry are not quite forgotten in some part of our land, and that the
sweet and smiling spring is not suffered to make his lovely appearance
without one welcome shout from the sons and daughters of our happy
island; and, therefore, I will recount to you (and by your permission
to the readers of the MIRROR) a village fete which I lately witnessed
and enjoyed. On the 9th inst. (Whit-Tuesday), after a few miles' walk,
I arrived in the village of Shillingston (_Dorsetshire_), whose
inhabitants annually dedicate this day to those pastimes which (as one
of your correspondents has observed) seem a sort of first offering to
gentle skies, and are consecrated by the smiles of the tender year.
Attracted by musical sounds, and following my ears instead of my nose,
I soon found my way to the vicarage-house, where the company were just
arriving in procession, preceded by a pink and white silken banner,
while a pipe and tabor regulated their march. Next after the music
were four men each bearing a large garland of flowers, and after them
followed the merry lads and smiling lasses in good order and arrayed
in their holiday kirtles. The vicar's house stands on a fine lawn
commanding a most enchanting view. On this verdant carpet, after a
promenade and general salute to their worthy pastor and his numerous
guests, dancing took place; for the time all distinctions were laid
aside, and the greatest gentry in the neighbourhood, taking the hand of
their more humble neighbours, led them through the mazy dance with a
feeling of kindness, friendship, and good humour such as I have seldom
witnessed. Two or three hours of as beautiful an evening as ever zephyr
kissed were thus spent, after which, drawing up before the house "the
King" was given, with three times three; next came "God save the King,"
and then "_Hurrah for the Bonnets o' Blue_" led the party off in
the order they came to witness the ceremony of "dressing" the May-Pole.
About five hundred yards brought us to the elevated object on which was
placed, with all due solemnity, the before-mentioned garlands, and the
pole being considered fully dressed, we all adjourned to a large barn,
where dancing was kept up with great spirit, until night drew her sable
curtain over the scene, and the company retired with light hearts and
weary feet to their peaceful homes.

Such, sir, is the Dorsetshire way of hailing the return of gentle skies
and genial seasons; a custom of the olden time, which is productive of
good feeling among all classes, and is at present conducted with good
order and respectability.

_Sturminster_.

RURIS.

       *       *       *       *       *




Old Poets.

       *       *       *       *       *


CUPID'S ARROWS.


  At Venus' entreaty for Cupid, her son,
  These arrows by Vulcan were cunningly done:
  The first is Love, as here you may behold
  His feathers, head, and body, are of gold.
  The second shaft is Hate, a foe to Love,
  And bitter are his torments for to prove.
  The third is Hope, from whence our comfort springs,
  His feathers are pull'd from Fortune's wings.
  Fourth, Jealousy in basest minds doth dwell,
  This metal Vulcan's Cyclops sent from Hell.

G. PEELE.

       *       *       *       *       *


MIND.


  It is the mind that maketh good or ill,
  That makes a wretch, or happy, rich or poor,
  For some that have abundance at their will,
  Have not enough but want in greatest store,
  Another that hath little asks no more,
  But, in that little is both rich and wise.

SPENSER.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WORLD.


  The first and riper world of men and skill,
  Yields to our later time for three inventions,
  Miraculously we write, we sail, we kill,
  As neither ancient scroll nor story mentions.
  _Print_. The first hath opened learning, old concealed
  And obscure arts restored to the light.
  _Loadstone_. The second hidden countries hath revealed,
  And sends Christ's Gospel to each living wight.
  These we commend, but oh! what needeth more.
  _Guns_. To teach Death more skill than he had before.

J. BASTARD.

       *       *       *       *       *


KINGS.


  Kings are the Gods' vicegerents on the earth
  The Gods have power, Kings from that power have might,
  Kings should excell in virtue and in birth;
  Gods punish wrongs, and Kings should maintain right,
  They be the suns from which we borrow light.
  And they as Kings, should still in justice strive
  With Gods, from whom their beings they derive.

DRAYTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMPANY.


  Remain upright yet some will quarrel pike,
  And common bruit will deem them all alike.
  For look, how your companions you elect
  For good or ill, so shall you be suspect.

T. HUDSON.

       *       *       *       *       *


POESIE.


  All art is learned by art, this art alone
  It is a heavenly gift, no flesh nor bone
  Can praise the honey we from _Pind_ distil,
  Except with holy fire his breast we fill.
  From that spring flows, that men of special chose
  Consum'd in learning and perfect in prose;
  For to make verse in vain does travel take,
  When as a prentice fairer words will make.

KING OF SCOTS.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWELVE FOUL FAULTS.


  A wise man living like a drone, an old man not devout,
  Youth disobedient, rich men that are charity without,
  A shameless woman, vicious lords, a poor man proudly stout,
  Contentious Christians, pastors that their functions do neglect,
  A wicked king, no discipline, no laws men to direct,
  Are twelve the foulest faults that most commonwealths infect.

W. WARNER.

       *       *       *       *       *


RIVERS.


  Fair _Danubie_ is praised for being wide.
    _Nilus_ commended for the seven-fold head;
  _Euphrates_ for the swiftness of the tide,
    And for the garden whence his course is led,
    And banks of _Rhine_ with vines o'erspread.
  Take _Loire_ and _Po_, yet all may not compare
  With English _Thames_ for buildings rare.

STORER.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Naturalist.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUADRUPEDS AND BIRDS FEEDING ON SHELL-FISH.


It is nothing surprising that the different species of walrus,
inhabitants of the ocean, should feed partly on shell-fish, but perhaps
you would not expect to find among their enemies animals strictly
terrestrial. Yet the oran otang and the preacher monkey often descend to
the sea to devour what shell-fish they may find strewed upon the shores.
The former, according to Carreri Gemelli, feed in particular upon a
large species of oyster, and fearful of inserting their paws between the
open valves, lest the oyster should close and crush them, they first
place a tolerably large stone within the shell, and then drag out their
victim with safety. The latter are no less ingenious. Dampier saw
several of them take up oysters from the beach, lay them on a stone, and
beat them with another till they demolished the shells. Wafer observed
the monkeys in the island of Gorgonia to proceed in a similar manner;
and those of the Cape of Good Hope, if we are to credit La Loubere,
perpetually amuse themselves by transporting shells from the shore to
the tops of mountains, with the intention undoubtedly of devouring them
at leisure. Even the fox, when pressed by hunger, will deign to eat
muscles and other bivalves; and the racoon, whose fur is esteemed by
hatters next in value to that of the beaver, when near the shore lives
much on them, more particularly on oysters. We are told that it will
watch the opening of the shells, dexterously put in its paw, and tear
out the contents. Not, however, without danger, for sometimes, we are
assured, by a sudden closure, the oyster will catch the thief, and
detain him until he is drowned by the return of the tide. The story,
I regret to say, appears somewhat apocryphal.

These are amusing facts; the following, to the epicure at least, may
be equally interesting. In some parts of England it is a prevalent and
probably a correct opinion, that the shelled-snails contribute much
to the fattening of their sheep. On the hill above Whitsand Bay in
Cornwall, and in the south of Devonshire, the _Bulimus acutus_ and
the _Helix virgata_, which are found there in vast profusion, are
considered to have this good effect; and it is indeed impossible that
the sheep can browse on the short grass of the places just mentioned,
without devouring a prodigious quantity of them, especially in the
night, or after rain, when the Bulimi and Helices ascend the stunted
blades. "The sweetest mutton," says Borlase, "is reckoned to be that
of the smallest sheep, which feed on the commons where the sands are
scarce covered with the green sod, and the grass exceedingly short; such
are the towens or sand hillocks in Piran Sand, Gwythien, Philac, and
Senangreen, near the Land's End, and elsewhere in like situations. From
these sands come forth snails of the turbinated kind, but of different
species, and all sizes from the adult to the smallest just from the egg;
these spread themselves over the plains early in the morning, and,
whilst they are in quest of their own food among the dews, yield a most
fattening nourishment to the sheep." (_Hist. of Cornwall_.)

Among birds the shell-fish have many enemies. Several of the duck and
gull tribes, as you might anticipate, derive at least a portion of their
subsistence from them. The pied oyster-catcher receives its name from
the circumstance of feeding on oysters and limpets, and its bill is so
well adapted to the purpose of forcing asunder the valves of the one,
and of raising the other from the rock, that "the Author of Nature,"
as Derham says, "seems to have framed it purely for that use." Several
kinds of crows likewise prey upon shell-fish, and the manner in which
they force the strong hold of their victims is very remarkable. A friend
of Dr. Darwin's saw above a hundred crows on the northern coast of
Ireland, at once, preying upon muscles. Each crow took a muscle up in
the air twenty or forty yards high, and let it fall on the stones, and
thus broke the shell. Many authorities might be adduced in corroboration
of this statement. In Southern Africa so many of the Testacea are
consumed by these and other birds, as to have given rise to an opinion
that the marine shells found buried in the distant plains, or in the
sides of the mountains, have been carried there by their agency, and
not, as generally supposed, by eruptions of the sea. Mr. Barrow, who
is of this opinion, tells us, in confirmation of it, that "there is
scarcely a sheltered cavern in the sides of the mountains that arise
immediately from the sea, where living shell-fish may not be found any
day of the year. Crows even, and vultures, as well as aquatic birds,
detach the shell-fish from the rocks, and mount with them into the air:
shells thus carried are said to be frequently found on the very summit
even of the Table Mountain. In one cavern at the point of Mussel Bay,"
he adds, "I disturbed some thousands of birds, and found as many
thousands of living shell-fish scattered on the surface of a heap of
shells, that for aught I know, would have filled as many thousand
wagons." The story, therefore, of the ancient philosopher whose bald
pate one of these unlucky birds mistook for a stone, and dropped a
shell upon it, thereby killing at once both, is not so tramontane as
to stumble all belief.

Land shells furnish a few birds with part of their sustenance, and the
principal of these are two well known songsters, the blackbird and the
thrush. They,

                     ----"whose notes
  Nice finger'd Art must emulate in vain."


depend in great measure, when winter has destroyed their summer food,
on the more common species of Helices (snails.) These they break very
dexterously by reiterated strokes against some stone; and it is not
uncommon to find a great quantity of fragments of shells together, as
if brought to one particulur stone for this very purpose.--_Loudon's
Magazine_.




Notes of a Reader

       *       *       *       *       *


SUSSEX COTTAGES.


We have been delighted with the following admirable sketch of English
comfort from the pen of Mr. Cobbett:

"I never had, that I recollect, a more pleasant journey or ride, than
this into Sussex. The weather was pleasant, the elder-trees in full
bloom, and they make a fine show; the woods just in their greatest
beauty; the grass-fields generally uncut; and the little gardens of the
labourers full of flowers; the roses and honeysuckles perfuming the air
at every cottage-door. Throughout all England these cottages and gardens
are the most interesting objects that the country presents, and they are
particularly so in Kent and Sussex. This part of these counties have the
great blessing of numerous woods: these furnish fuel, nice sweet fuel,
for the heating of ovens and for all other purposes: they afford
materials for the making of pretty pigsties, hurdles, and dead fences of
various sorts; they afford materials for making little cow-sheds; for
the sticking of peas and beans in the gardens; and for giving to every
thing a neat and substantial appearance. These gardens, and the look of
the cottages, the little flower-gardens, which you every where see, and
the beautiful hedges of thorn and of privet; these are the objects to
delight the eyes, to gladden the heart, and to fill it with gratitude
to God, and with love for the people; and, as far as my observation has
gone, they are objects to be seen in no other country in the world.
The cattle in Sussex are of a pale red colour, and very fine. I used to
think that the Devonshire were the handsomest cows and oxen, but I have
changed my mind; those of Sussex, of which I never took so much notice
before, are handsomer as well as larger; and the oxen are almost
universally used as working cattle.

"Throughout this county I did not observe, in my late ride, one single
instance of want of neatness about a poor man's house. It is the
same with regard to the middle ranks: all is neat and beautiful, and
particularly the hedges, of which I saw the handsomest white thorn hedge
at Seddlescomb, that ever I saw in my life. It formed the inclosure of
a garden in front of a pretty good house. It was about five feet high,
about fifteen inches through; it came close to the ground, and it was
sloped a little towards the top on each side, leaving a flat about four
inches wide on the top of all. It had just been clipped; and it was as
perpendicular and as smooth as a wall: I put my eye and looked along
the sides of the several lines near the top, and if it had been built
of stone, it could not have been truer. I lament that I did not ask
the name of the owner, for it does him infinite credit. Those who see
nothing but the nasty slovenly places in which labourers live, round
London, know nothing of England. The fruit-trees are all kept in the
nicest order; every bit of paling or wall is made use of, for the
training of some sort or other. At _Lamberhurst_, which is one of
the most beautiful villages that man ever sat his eyes on, I saw what
I never saw before; namely, a _gooseberry tree trained against a
house_. The house was one of those ancient buildings, consisting of
a frame of oak wood, the internal filled up with brick, plastered over.
The tree had been planted at the foot of one of the perpendicular pieces
of wood; from the stem which, mounted up this piece of wood, were taken
side limbs to run along the horizontal pieces. There were two windows,
round the frame of each of which the limbs had been trained. The height
of the highest shoot was about ten feet from the ground, and the
horizontal shoots on each side were from eight to ten feet in length.
The tree had been judiciously pruned, and all the limbs were full of
very large gooseberries, considering the age of the fruit. This is only
one instance out of thousands that I saw of extraordinary pains taken
with the gardens."

       *       *       *       *       *


A WINTER'S NIGHT.


  How beautiful this night! The balmiest sigh
  Which vernal Zephyrs breathe in evening's ear,
  Were discord to the speaking quietude
  That wraps this moveless scene. Heaven's ebon vault,
  Studded with stars unutterably bright,
  Through which the moon's unclouded grandeur rolls,
  Seems like a canopy which Love had spread
  To curtain her sleeping world. Yon gentle hills,
  Robed in a garment of untrodden snow;
  Yon darksome walls, whence icicles depend
  So stainless, that their white and glittering spears
  Tinge not the moon's pure beam; yon castled steep,
  Whose banner hangeth o'er the time-worn tower
  So idly, that wrapt Fancy deemeth it
  A metaphor of Peace--all form a scene
  Where musing Solitude might love to lift
  Her soul above this sphere of earthliness;
  Where silence undisturbed might watch alone
  So cold, so bright, so still.

P.B. SHELLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *


HACKNEY COACHES.


Nothing in nature or art can be so abominable as those vehicles at this
hour. We are quite satisfied that, except an Englishman, who will endure
any thing, no native of any climate under the sky would endure a London
hackney coach; that an Ashantee gentleman would scoff at it; and that
an aboriginal of New South Wales would refuse to be inhumed within its
shattered and infinite squalidness. It is true, that the vehicle has its
merits, if variety of uses can establish them. The hackney coach conveys
alike the living and the dead. It carries the dying man to the hospital,
and when doctors and tax-gatherers can tantalize no more, it carries
him to Surgeons' Hall, and qualifies him to assist the "march of mind"
by the section of body. If the midnight thief find his plunder too
ponderous for his hands, the hackney coach offers its services, and is
one of the most expert conveyances. Its other employments are many, and
equally meritorious, and doubtless society would find a vacuum in its
loss. Yet we cordially wish that the Maberley brain were set at work
upon this subject, and some substitute contrived. The French have
led the way, and that too by the most obvious and simple arrangement
possible. The "_Omnibus_,"--for they still have Latin enough in
France for the name of this travelling collection of all sorts of human
beings--the Omnibus is a long coach, carrying fifteen or eighteen
people, all inside. For two-pence halfpenny it carries the individual
the length of the Boulevard, or the whole diameter of Paris. Of those
carriages there were about half-a-dozen some months ago, and they have
been augmented since; their profits were said to have repaid the outlay
within the first year: the proprietors, among whom is Lafitte, the
banker, are making a large revenue out of Parisian sous, and speculation
is still alive.--_Monthly Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRANKLIN'S GRAVE.


Captain Basil Hall, in his _Travels in North America_, just
published, says, "On the 12th of December, we made a pilgrimage to the
tomb of Franklin--dear old Franklin! It consists of a large marble slab,
laid flat on the ground, with nothing carved upon it but these words:--

  BENJAMIN AND DEBORAH
  FRANKLIN.
  1790.

Franklin, it will be recollected, wrote a humorous epitaph for himself;
but his good taste and good sense showed him how unsuitable to his
living character it would have been to jest in such a place. After all,
his literary works, scientific fame, and his undoubted patriotism,
form his best epitaph. Still, it may be thought, he might have been
distinguished in his own land by a more honourable resting-place than
the obscure corner of an obscure burying-ground, where his bones lie
indiscriminately along with those of ordinary mortals; and his tomb,
already wellnigh hid in the rubbish, may soon be altogether lost. One
little circumstance, however, about this spot is very striking. No
regular path has been made to the grave, which lies considerably out of
the road; but the frequent tread of visiters having pressed down the
rank grass which grows in such places, the way to the tombstone is
readily found without any guide."

       *       *       *       *       *


AN INDIAN SULTANA IN PARIS.


It is known to very few even in France that an Indian Sultana, a
descendant of Tamerlane, named Aline of Eldir, has been living in Paris,
poor and forgotten, for above forty years. This heiress to a great
kingdom was stolen almost out of her cradle, and deserted by the robbers
on the coast of France. She was presented to the princesses of the
old court, and conceived a particular attachment for the Princess de
Lamballe; but when, at the age of only nine or ten years, her beauty
had attracted too much notice, and nothing but a _lettre de cachet_
could secure her from the persecutions of an exalted personage, she
exchanged a convent for a prison. The revolution set Aline at liberty.
At the time of the Egyptian campaign, the man who was destined to rule
France, and almost all Europe, and who had probably thus early turned
his attention to India, is said to have thought of the heiress of
Tamerlane, and to have formed the plan of restoring the illustrious
stranger to her native land. Josephine interested herself on this
occasion for the Sultana; but this had no influence upon her condition.
Unhappy, surrounded only by a few pious nuns, and urged by her
confessor, she renounced the religion of Mahomet, and became a
Christian. At length, in December, 1818, an Indian Sheik, named Goolam,
arrived in Paris, with instructions to claim the Princess Aline from the
Court of France. The Envoy sought out the Sultana: he informed her, that
her relations were desirous of her return; that she should be reinstated
in the rank which was her right, and again behold the bright sun and the
beautiful face of her own Asia, upon the sole condition that she would
forsake Christ for Mahomet. No persuasions, however, could prevail upon
the convert to comply with this requisition; Goolam went back to India
without accomplishing the object of his mission, which produced no
improvement in her straitened circumstances. Two years afterwards, she
learned that an Indian Prince had landed in England with a splendid
retinue, including three females, but that he had been obliged by the
English government to embark again immediately for India. Aline had no
doubt that this event had some connexion with her history, but she
heard no more of the matter.

These particulars are chiefly extracted from the preface to the books
of the Princess, written by the Marquess de Fortia. This nobleman
generously took upon himself the charge of supporting Aline, who has
now attained the age of sixty years in a foreign land.--_Court
Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MAKING PUNCH.


(_From the Noctes--Blackwood_.)

_Shepherd_.--I hae mony a time thocht it took as muckle natural
genius to mak a jug of punch as an epic poem, sic as Paradise Lost, or
even Queen Hynde hersell.

_Odoherty_.--More, my friend, more. I think an ingenious comparison
between these works of intellect could be easily made by a man of a
metaphysical turn of mind.

_North_.--A more interesting consideration would be, the effect
produced upon the national character, by the mere circumstance of the
modes of preparing the different beverages of different countries. Much
of the acknowledged inferiority of the inhabitants of wine countries,
arises from the circumstance of having their liquor prepared to their
hand. There is no stretch of imagination in pouring wine ready made from
carafe, or barochio, or flask, into a glass--the operation is merely
mechanical; whereas, among us punch drinkers, the necessity of a nightly
manufacture of a most intricate kind, calls forth habits of industry and
forethought--induces a taste for chemical experiment--improves us in
hygrometry, and many other sciences--to say nothing of the geographical
reflections drawn forth by the pressure of the lemon, or the colonial
questions, which press upon every meditative mind on the appearance of
white sugar.


LION-EATING AND HANGING.


_North_.--When I was at Timbuctoo--

_Shepherd (aside.)_--A lang yarn is beginning the noo--

_Moses Edrehi_.--Sind sie geweson, sare, dans I'Afrique?

_North_.--Many years--I was Sultan of Bello for a long period,
until dethroned by an act of the grossest injustice; but I intend to
expose the traitorous conspirators to the indignation of an outraged
world.

_Tickler (aside to Shepherd.)_--He's raving.

_Shepherd (to Tickler.)_--Dementit.

_Odoherty (to both.)_--Mad as a hatter. Hand me a segar.

_Moses Edrehi_.--Yo suis of Madoc.

_North (aside.)_--Zounds! _(to Edrehi)_ I never chanced to
pass that way--the emperor and I were not on good terms.

_Moses Edrehi_.--Then, sare, you was good luck to no pass, for the
emperor was a man ver disagreeable ven no gut humours. Gott keep ush! He
hat lions in cage--and him gab peoples zu de lions--dey roarsh--oh,
mucho, mucho!--and eats de poor peoples--Gott keep ush! a ver
disagreeable man dat emperor.

_Shepherd_.--Nae doot--it canna be a pleasant thing to be gobbled
by a lion. Oh, sirs, imagine yoursell daundering out to Canaan, to take
your kail wi' our frien' James, and as ye're passing the Links, out
jumps a lion, and at you!

_Odoherty_.--The Links--oh! James, you are no Polyglott.

_Tickler_.--I don't wish to insinuate that I should like to be
eaten, either by lion or shepherd, but I confess that I consider that
the new drop would be a worse fate than either.

_North_.--Quite mistaken--the drop's a trifle.

_Moses Edrehi_.--Ja whoel, Milord.

_Shepherd_.--As to being hangit, why, that's a matter that happens
to mony a deacent man, and it's but a spurl or tway, and a gaspin
gurble, an' ae stour heave, and a's ower; ye're dead ere a body's weel
certified that the board's awa' from behind you--and the night-cap's a
great blessing, baith to you and the company. The gilliteen again, I'm
tauld its just perfectly ridiculous how soon that does it's turn. Up ye
come, and tway chiels ram your head into a shottle in a door like, and
your hands are clasped ahint ye, and swee gangs the door, and you upset
headforemost, and in below the axe, and hangie just taps you on the neck
to see that it's in the richt nick, and whirr, whirr, whirr, touch the
spring, and down comes the thundering edge, loaded with at least a
hunder weight o' lead--your head's aff like a sybo--Tuts, that's
naething--onybody might mak up their mind to be justified on the
gilliteen.

_Odoherty_.--The old Dutch way--the broadsword--is, after all, the
best; by much the easiest and the genteelest. You are seated in a most
comfortable arm-chair with a silk handkerchief over your eyes--they read
a prayer if you are so inclined--you call for a glass of wine, or a cup
of coffee--an iced cream--a dram--any thing you please, in fact, and
your desires are instantly complied with--you put the cup to the lip,
and just at that moment swap comes the whistling sabre.

_Shepherd_.--Preserve us! keep your hand to yoursell, Captain.

_Odoherty_.--Sweep he comes--the basket is ready, they put a clean
towel over it--pack off the cold meat to the hospital--scrub the
scaffold--take it to pieces--all within five minutes.

_Shepherd_.--That's capital. In fact a' these are civilized
exits--but oh! man, man, to think of a lion on the Burntsfield
Links--what would your gowfers say to that, Mr. Tickler?

_Tickler_.--A rum customer certainly.

_Shepherd_.--Oh! the een, the red, fiery, fixit, unwinkin' een, I
think I see them--and the laigh, deep, dour growl, like the purring o'
ten hundred cats--and the muckle white sharp teeth girnin' and
grundin'--and the lang rough tongue, and the yirnest slaver running
outour the chaps o' the brute--and the cauld shiver---minutes may
be--and than the loup like lightning, and your back-bane broken wi' a
thud, like a rotten rash--and then the creature begins to lick your face
wi' his tongue, and sniffle and snort over owre you, and now a snap at
your nose, and than a rive out o' your breast, and then a crunch at your
knee--and you're a' the time quite sensible, particularly sensible.

_Odoherty_.--Give him a dig in the muzzle, and he'll tip you the
_coup-de-grace_.

_North_.--What a vivid imagination the Shepherd has--well,
cowardice is an inspiring principle.

       *       *       *       *       *


HEAD WAGER.


The following is a story from a MS., copied by Gaillard, in his Life of
Francis I.:--

Duprat said in one of the conversations with the emperor's minister,
that he would consent to lose his head if his sovereign had aided Robert
de la Mark against Charles. The Spanish chancellor claimed du Prat's
head as forfeited, for, he said he had in his possession letters which
proved Francis's connivance with Robert de la Mark. "My head is my own
yet," replied Du Prat, "for I have the originals of the letters you
allude to, and they in no manner justify the scorn you would put upon
them." "If I had won your head," replied the imperial chancellor, "you
might keep it still. I protest I would rather have a pig's head, for
that would be more eatable." _Monthly Mag._

       *       *       *       *       *




The Novelist.

       *       *       *       *       *


FAIR FANARIOTE.


In consequence of the numerous revolutions that have accompanied the
fall of the Greek empire in Byzantium, most of the inhabitants of
Fanari, near Constantinople, boast of being descendants of the dethroned
imperial families; a circumstance which is probable enough, and which
nobody takes the trouble to dispute, any more than the alleged nobility
of the Castilian peasantry, or the absurd genealogies of certain great
families.

In a retired street in Pera, (one of the suburbs of Constantinople,) a
descendant of the Cantacuzenes followed the humble calling of a butcher;
but, in spite of industry and activity, he had great difficulty in
earning a sufficiency to pay his way, and maintain his wife and his only
daughter, Sophia. The latter had just entered her fourteenth year, and
her growing beauty was the admiration of the whole neighbourhood.

Fate, or, if you please so to call it, Providence, ordained that the
poor butcher should suffer repeated losses, which reduced him to a
condition bordering on beggary. His wife unfolded her distressed
circumstances to a Greek, one of her relations, who was Dragoman to the
French embassy, and who, in his turn, related the story to the Marquess
de Vauban, the ambassador. This nobleman became interested for the
unfortunate family, and especially for Sophia, whom the officious
Dragoman described as being likely to fall into the snares that were
laid for her, and to become an inmate of the haram of some Pasha, or
even of a Turk of inferior rank. Prompted by pity, curiosity, or perhaps
by some other motive, the ambassador paid a visit to the distressed
family. He saw Sophia, was charmed by her beauty and intelligence, and
he proposed that her parents should place her under his care, and allow
him to convey her to France. The misery to which the poor people
were reduced, may perhaps palliate the shame of acceding to this
extraordinary proposition; but, be this as it may, they consented
to surrender up their daughter for the sum of 1,500 piastres, and Sophia
was that same day conducted to the ambassador's palace. She found in the
Marquess de Vauban a kind and liberal benefactor. He engaged masters to
instruct her in every branch of education; and elegant accomplishments,
added to her natural charms, rendered her an object of irresistible
attraction.

In the course of a few months the ambassador was called home, and he set
out, accompanied by his Oriental treasure, to travel to France by land.
To diminish as far as possible the fatigue of the long journey, they
proceeded by short stages, and having passed through European Turkey,
they arrived at Kaminieck in Podolia, which is the first fortress
belonging to Russia. Here the Marquess determined to rest for a short
time, before undertaking the remainder of his tedious journey.

Count de Witt, a descendant of the Grand Pensionary of Holland, who was
governor of the place, received his noble visiter with every mark of
attention. The Count, however, no sooner beheld Sophia, than he became
deeply enamoured of her; and on learning the equivocal situation in
which she stood, being neither a slave nor a mistress, but, as it were,
a piece of merchandize purchased for 1,500 piastres, he wound up his
declaration of love by an offer of marriage. The Count was a handsome
man, scarcely thirty years of age, a lieutenant-general in the Russian
service, and enjoying the high favour of his sovereign Catherine II.
The fair Greek, as may well be imagined, did not reject this favour
of fortune, but accepted the offer of her suitor without hesitation.

It was easy to foresee that the Marquis de Vauban would not be very
willing to part with a prize which he regarded as lawfully acquired,
and to which he attached no small value. The Count therefore found it
advisable to resort to stratagem. Accordingly, his Excellency having one
day taken a ride beyond the ramparts, the draw-bridges were raised,
and the lovers repaired to church, where their hands were joined by a
_papa_. When the Marquess appeared at the gates of the fortress and
demanded admittance, a messenger was sent out to inform him of what had
happened; and, to complete the denouement of the comedy, the marriage
contract was exhibited to him in due form.

To save Sophia from the reproaches which her precipitancy, it may
perhaps be said her ingratitude, would have fully justified, the Count
directed the ambassador's suite to pack up their baggage, and join his
Excellency _extra muros_. The poor Marquess soon discovered that
it was quite useless to stay where he was, for the purpose of venting
threats and complaints; and he had no hope that the Court of France
would think it worth while to go to war, for the sake of avenging his
affront. He therefore prudently took a hint from one of the French
poets, who says:--

  Le bruit est pour le fat, la plainte pour le sot,
  L'honnete homme trompe, s'eloigne, et ne dit mot;"


and he set off, doubtless with the secret determination never again to
traffic in merchandize which possesses no value when it can be either
bought or sold.

About two years after his marriage, the Count de Witt obtained leave of
absence, and, accompanied by his wife, he visited the different courts
of Europe. Sophia's beauty, which derived piquancy from a certain
Oriental languishment of manner, was every where the theme of
admiration. The Prince de Ligne, who saw her at the Court of France,
mentions her in his Memoirs, in terms of eulogy, which I cannot think
exaggerated; for when I knew her at Tulczin, though she was then upwards
of forty, her charms retained all their lustre, and she outshone the
young beauties of the court, amidst whom she appeared like Calypso
surrounded by her nymphs.

I now arrive at the second period of Sophia's life, which forms a sequel
perfectly in unison with the commencement. Count Felix Patocka, at the
commencement of the troubles in Poland, raised a considerable party by
the influence of his rank and vast fortune. During a temporary absence
from the Court of Poland, he made a tour through Italy, and on his
return, he met the Count and Countess de Witt at Hamburgh, when he fell
deeply in love with Sophia. Not to weary you with the details of the
romance, I will come to the _denouement_ at once.

Nothing is so easy as to obtain a divorce in Poland. The law extends
so far on this point, that I knew a gentleman, M. Wortrel, who had no
less than four wives, all living, and bearing his name. Count Patocka,
therefore, availing himself of this advantage, and having previously
made every necessary arrangement, one morning called on Count de Witt,
and, without further ceremony, said--"Count, I love your wife, and
cannot live without her. I know that I am not indifferent to her;
and I might immediately carry her off; but I wish to owe my happiness
to you, and to retain for ever a grateful sense of your generosity.
Here are two papers: one is an act of divorce, which only wants your
signature, for you see the Countess has already affixed hers to it;--the
other is a bond for two millions of florins, payable at my banker's, in
this city. We may, therefore, settle the business amicably or otherwise,
just as you please." The husband doubtless thought of his adventure at
the fortress of Kaminieck, and, like the French ambassador, he resigned
himself to his fate, and signed the paper. The fair Sophia became, the
same day, Countess Patocka; and to the charms of beauty and talent, were
now added the attractions of a fortune, the extent of which was at that
time unequalled in Europe.--_Court Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *




Retrospective Gleanings.

       *       *       *       *


JOHN LOCKE.


Lord King has just done the state of literature some service, by the
publication of the _Life of John Locke_: with Extracts from his
Journals, &c. In this task his lordship has drawn largely on some
valuable papers of Locke, preserved by their having gone into the
possession of Sir Peter King, the ancestor of Lord King, his near
relation and sole executor. Among these treasures are Locke's
correspondence, a journal of his travels in France and Holland, his
common-place book, and many miscellaneous papers; all of which have been
preserved in the same scrutoire in which they had been deposited by
their author, and which was probably removed to Oakham, (Lord King's
seat,) in 1710. From the latter portion of Lord King's valuable work,
we select a few notes, illustrative of Manners and Customs in

ENGLAND, 1679.

The sports of England, which, perhaps, a curious stranger would be glad
to see, are horse-racing, hawking, and hunting; bowling,--at Marebone
and Putney he may see several persons of quality bowling, two or three
times a week all the summer; wrestling, in Lincoln's Inne Field every
evening all the summer; bear and bull-baiting, and sometimes prizes,
at the Bear-Garden; shooting in the long-bow and stob-ball, in Tothil
Fields; cudgel-playing, in several places in the country; and hurling,
in Cornwall. _London_.--See the East India House, and their
magazines; the Custom House; the Thames, by water, from London Bridge
to Deptford; and the King's Yard at Deptford; the sawing-windmill;
Tradescant's garden and closet; Sir James Morland's closet and
water-works; the iron mills at Wandsworth, four miles above London, upon
the Thames; or rather those in Sussex; Paradise by Hatton Garden; the
glass-house at the Savoy, and at Vauxhall. Eat fish in Fish Street,
especially lobsters, Colchester oysters, and a fresh cod's head. The
veal and beef are excellent good in London; the mutton better in several
counties in England. A venison pasty and a chine of beef are good
every where; and so are crammed capons and fat chickens. Railes and
heathpolts, ruffs, and reeves, are excellent meat wherever they can be
met with. Puddings of several sorts, and creams of several fashions,
both excellent; but they are seldom to be found, at least in their
perfection, at common eating-houses. Mango and saio are two sorts of
sauces brought from the East Indies. Bermuda oranges and potatoes,
both exceeding good in their kind. Chedder and Cheshire cheese.
Men excellent in their arts. Mr. Cox, in Long Acre, for all sorts
of dioptical glasses. Mr. Opheel, near the Savoy, for all sorts of
machines. Mr. ----, for a new invention he has, and teaches to copy all
sorts of pictures, plans, or to take prospects of places. The King's
gunsmith, at the Yard by Whitehall. Mr. Not, in the Pall Mall, for
binding of books. The Fire-eater. At an iron-monger's, near the
May-pole, in the Strand, is to be found a great variety of iron
instruments, and utensils of all kinds. At Bristol see the Hot-well;
St. George's Cave, where the Bristol diamonds are found; Ratcliff
Church; and at Kingwood, the coal-pits. Taste there Milford oysters,
marrow-puddings, cock-ale, metheglin, white and red-muggets, elvers,
sherry, sack (which, with sugar, is called Bristol milk,) and some
other wines, which, perhaps you will not drink so good at London. At
Gloucester observe the whispering place in the cathedral. At Oxford see
all the colleges, and their libraries; the schools and public library,
and the physic-garden. Buy there knives and gloves, especially white
kid-skin; and the cuts of all the colleges graved by Loggins. If you go
into the North, see the Peak in Derbyshire, described by Hobbes, in a
Latin poem, called "Mirabilia Pecci." Home-made drinks of England are
beer and ale, strong and small; those of most note, that are to be sold,
are Lambeth ale, Margaret ale, and Derby ale; Herefordshire cider,
perry, mede. There are also several sorts of compounded ales, as
cock-ale, wormwood-ale, lemon-ale, scurvygrass-ale, college-ale, &c.
These are to be had at Hercules Pillars, near the Temple; at the
Trumpet, and other houses in Sheer Lane, Bell Alley, and, as I remember,
at the English Tavern, near Charing Cross. Foreign drinks to be found in
England are all sorts of Spanish, Greek, Italian, Rhenish, and other
wines, which are to be got up and down at several taverns. Coffe, the,
and chocolate, at coffeehouses. Mum at the mum houses and other places;
and molly, a drink of Barbadoes, by chance at some Barbadoes merchants'.
Punch, a compounded drink, on board some West India ships; and Turkish
sherbet amongst the merchants. Manufactures of cloth that will keep out
rain; flanel, knives, locks and keys; scabbards for swords; several
things wrought in steel, as little boxes, heads for canes, boots,
riding-whips, Rippon spurs, saddles, &c. At Nottingham dwells a man who
makes fans, hatbands, necklaces, and other things of glass, drawn out
into very small threads."

       *       *       *       *       *




SPIRIT OF THE
Public Journals.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW MAGAZINE.


Mr. Sharpe, the proprietor of the "Anniversary," has just published the
first number of "The Three Chapters," which is one of the most splendid
Magazines ever produced in this or any other country. It has a charming
print by H. Rolls, from Wilkie's Hymn of the Calabrian Shepherds to the
Virgin, which alone is worth the price charged for the number. Southey,
A. Cunningham, L.E.L. and Hook, shine in the poetry and romance, one of
the "Three Chapters," from which we have just room to give the
following:--


EPITAPH IN BUTLEIGH CHURCH.

BY ROBERT SOUTHEY.


  Divided far by death were they, whose names,
  In honour here united, as in birth,
  This monumental verse records. They drew
  In Dorset's healthy vales their natal breath,
  And from these shores beheld the ocean first,
  Whereon, in early youth, with one accord
  They chose their way of fortune; to that course
  By Hood and Bridport's bright example drawn,
  Their kinsmen, children of this place, and sons
  Of one, who in his faithful ministry
  Inculcated, within these hallowed walls,
  The truths, in mercy to mankind revealed.
  Worthy were these three brethren each to add
  New honours to the already honour'd name;
  But Arthur, in the morning of his day,
  Perished amid the Caribbean sea,
  When the Pomona, by a hurricane
  Whirl'd, riven and overwhelmed, with all her crew
  Into the deep went down. A longer date
  To Alexander was assign'd, for hope
  For fair ambition, and for fond regret,
  Alas, how short! for duty, for desert,
  Sufficing; and, while Time preserves the roll
  Of Britain's naval feats, for good report.
  A boy, with Cook he rounded the great globe;
  A youth, in many a celebrated fight
  With Rodney had his part; and having reach'd
  Life's middle stage, engaging ship to ship,
  When the French Hercules, a gallant foe,
  Struck to the British Mars his three-striped flag,
  He fell, in the moment of his victory.
  Here his remains in sure and certain hope
  Are laid, until the hour when earth and sea
  Shall render up their dead. One brother yet
  Survived, with Keppel and with Rodney train'd
  In battles, with the Lord of Nile approved,
  Ere in command he worthily upheld
  Old England's high prerogative. In the east,
  The west, the Baltic, and the midland seas,
  Yea, wheresoever hostile fleets have plough'd
  The ensanguined deep, his thunders have been heard,
  His flag in brave defiance hath been seen,
  And bravest enemies at Sir Samuel's name
  Felt fatal presage in their inmost heart,
  Of unavertable defeat foredoom'd.
  Thus in the path of glory he rode on,
  Victorious alway, adding praise to praise;
  Till full of honours, not of years, beneath
  The venom of the infected clime he sunk,
  On Coromandel's coast, completing there
  His service, only when his life was spent.

  To the three brethren, Alexander's son
  (Sole scion he in whom their line survived,)
  With English feeling, and the deeper sense
  Of filial duty, consecrates this tomb.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOVE.

A BALLAD, BY THE ETTRICK SHEPHERD.


  O, Love's a bitter thing to bide,
    The lad that drees it's to be pitied;
  It blinds to a' the warld beside,
    And makes a body dilde and ditied;
  It lies sae sair at my breast bane,
    My heart is melting saft an' safter;
  To dee outright I wad be fain,
    Wer't no for fear what may be after.

  I dinna ken what course to steer,
    I'm sae to dool an' daftness driven,
  For are so lovely, sweet, and dear,
    Sure never breath'd the breeze o' heaven;
  O there's a soul beams in her ee,
    Ae blink o't maks are's spirit gladder,
  And ay the mair she geeks at me,
    It pits me aye in love the madder.

  Love winna heal, it winna thole,
    You canna shun't even when you fear it;
  An' O, this sickness o' the soul,
    'Tis past the power of man to bear it!
  And yet to mak o' her a wife,
    I couldna square it wi' my duty,
  I'd like to see her a' her life
    Remain a virgin in her beauty;

  As pure as bonny as she's now,
    The walks of human life adorning;
  As blithe as bird upon the bough,
    As sweet as breeze of summer morning.
  Love paints the earth, it paints the sky,
    An' tints each lovely hue of Nature,
  And makes to the enchanted eye
    An angel of a mortal creature.

_Blackwood's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *




Spirit of Discovery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Regent's Park_.

It is much to be regretted that those who first designed the plantations
of the Regent's Park seem to have had little or no taste for, or
knowledge of, hardy trees and shrubs; otherwise, this park might have
been the first arboretum in the world. Instead of the (about) 50 sorts
of trees and shrubs which it now exhibits, there might have been all the
3,000 sorts, now so admirably displaying their buds and leaves, and some
of them their flowers, in the arboretum of Messrs. Loddiges at Hackney.
A walk round that arboretum, at this season, is one of the greatest
treats which a botanist can enjoy, and a drive round the Regent's Park
might have been just as interesting. It is not yet too late to supply
this defect, and the expense to government would be a mere bagatelle.
The Zoological Society in the mean time, might receive contributions
of herbaceous plants, and be at the expense of planting and naming
them.--_London's Mag_.


_Zoological Society_.

A catalogue of the members has been published, which includes 1,291
names, besides corresponding members. The museum in Bruton Street has
received, and is daily receiving, valuable additions, as is the garden
in the Regent's Park. The extent of this garden has been, in consequence
of the various donations and purchases, considerably increased, and
several neat and appropriate structures are now erecting for the abode
of different specimens. It is a gratifying circumstance that these
specimens are, for the most part, clearly and distinctly named, with
the native country of the animal added. We could wish to see a greater
variety of trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants introduced, and equally
clear names and geographical indications placed at them also. Why
should it not, as far as practicable, be a botanic garden as well
as a zoological garden?--_Ibid_.


_Galvanism_.

Mr. Becquerel has discovered that the temperature of a conducting wire
communicating with the two poles of a pile, increases from each of its
extremities, and constantly reaches its maximum in the middle of the
wire.--_Brewster's Journal._


_Alloyed Iron Plate_.

A manufacture of prepared iron has been practised, and the substance
produced used to a considerable degree in Paris. This has been to
prepare iron in large plates, and other forms, so that it will not rust.
This has been effected by coating it with an alloy of tin and much lead,
so as to form an imitation of tin plate. Trials have been made, and
proved favourable; it resists the action of certain fluids that would
rapidly corrode iron alone; it can be prepared of any size, and at a
low price. Its use in the manufacture of sugarpans and boilers, in the
construction of roofs and gutters, is expected to be very considerable.
--_Bull. d'Encouragement._


_Saline Lake of Loonar in Berar._

This curious lake is contained in a sort of cauldron of rocks amidst
a pleasing landscape, and is of course the object of superstition. The
taste of the water is uncommonly brackish. Mr. Alexander, who describes
it, found by a rough analysis that 100 parts contain

  Muriate of Soda      20 parts,
  Muriate of Lime      10 parts,
  Muriate of Magnesia   6 parts,


The principal purpose to which the sediment of the water is applied is
cleansing the shawls of Cachmere. It is also used as an ingredient in
the alkaline cake of the Musselmans.--_Trans. Lit. Soc. Madras._

       *       *       *       *       *




The Selector;
AND
LITERARY NOTICES OF
_NEW WORKS_.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ILLUSTRIOUS SWINDLER.


[Here is a whole-length of a fine, slashing French thief, from the third
volume of Vidocq, the policeman's Memoirs, of which more anon:--]

Winter was only twenty-six, a handsome brown fellow, with arched
eyebrows, long lashes, prominent nose, and rakish air. Winter had,
moreover, that good carriage, and peculiar look, which belongs to an
officer of light cavalry, and he, therefore, assumed a military costume,
which best displayed the graces of his person. One day he was an hussar,
the next a lancer, and then again in some fancy uniform. At will he was
chief of a squadron, commandant, aide-de-camp, colonel, &c.; and to
command more consideration, he did not fail to give himself a
respectable parentage; he was by turns the son of the valiant Lasalle,
of the gallant Winter, colonel of the grenadiers of the imperial
horse-guard; nephew of the general Comte de Lagrange, and cousin-german
to Rapp; in fact, there was no name which he did not borrow, no
illustrious family to which he did not belong. Born of parents in a
decent situation of life, Winter had received an education sufficiently
brilliant to enable him to aspire to all these metamorphoses; the
elegance of his manner, and a most gentlemanly appearance, completed
the illusion.

Few men had made a better debut than Winter. Thrown early into the
career of arms, he obtained very rapid promotion; but when an officer he
soon lost the esteem of his superiors; who, to punish his misconduct,
sent him to the Isle of Re, to one of the colonial battalions. There
he so conducted himself as to inspire a belief that he had entirely
reformed. But no sooner was he raised a step, than committing some fresh
peccadillo, he was compelled to desert in order to avoid punishment.
He came thence to Paris, where his exploits as swindler and pickpocket
procured him the unenviable distinction of being pointed out to the
police as one of the most skilful in his twofold profession.

Winter, who was what is termed a _downy one_, plucked a multitude
of _gulpins_ even in the most elevated classes of society. He
visited princes, dukes, the sons of ancient senators, and it was on
them or the ladies of their circle that he made the experiments of his
misapplied talents. The females, particularly, however squeamish they
were, were never sufficiently so to prevent themselves from being
plundered by him. For several months the police were on the look out for
this seducing young man, who, changing his dress and abode incessantly,
escaped from their clutch at the moment when they thought they had him
securely, when I received orders to commence the chase after him, to
attempt his capture.

Winter was one of those Lovelaces who never deceive a woman without
robbing her. I thought that amongst his victims I could find at least
one, who, from a spirit of revenge, would be disposed to put me on the
scent of this monster. By dint of searching, I thought I had met with a
willing auxiliary, but as these Ariadnes, however ill used or forsaken
they may be, yet shrink from the immolation of their betrayer, I
determined to accost the damsel I met with cautiously. It was necessary,
before I ventured my bark, to take soundings, and I took care not to
manifest any hostility towards Winter, and not to alarm that residue of
tenderness, which, despite of ill usage, always remains in a sensitive
heart. I made my appearance in the character of almoner of the regiment
of which he was thought to command, and as such introduced to the
ci-devant mistress of the pretended colonel. The costume, the language,
the manner I assumed were in perfect unison with the character I was
about to play, and I obtained to my wish the confidence of the fair
forsaken one, who gave me unwittingly all the information I required.
She pointed out to me her favoured rival, who, already ill-treated by
Winter, had still the weakness to see him, and could not forbear making
fresh sacrifices for him.

I became acquainted with this charming lady, and to obtain favour in her
eyes, announced myself as a friend of her lover's family. The relatives
of the young giddy pate had empowered me to pay his debts; and if she
could contrive an interview with him for me, she might rely on being
satisfied with the result of the first. Madame ------ was not sorry to
have an opportunity of repairing the dilapidations made on her property,
and one morning sent me a note, stating that she was going to dine
with her lover the next day at the Boulevard du Temple, at La Galiote.
At four o'clock I went, disguised as a messenger, and stationed myself
at the door of the restaurant's; and after two hours' watch, I saw a
colonel of hussars approach. It was Winter, attended by two servants.
I went up to him, and offered to take care of the horses, which proffer
was accepted. Winter alighted, he could not escape me, but his eyes met
mine, and with one jump he flung himself on his horse, spurred him, and
disappeared.

I thought I had him, and my disappointment was great; but I did not
despair of catching my gentleman. Some time afterwards I learnt that
he was to be at the Cafe Hardi, in the Boulevard des Italiens. I went
thither with some of my agents, and when he arrived all was so well
arranged, that he had only to get into a hackney coach, of which I paid
the fare. Led before a commissary of police, he asserted that he was
not Winter; but, despite the insignia of the rank he had conferred on
himself, and the long string of orders hanging on his breast, he was
properly and officially identified as the individual mentioned in the
warrant which I had for his apprehension.

Winter was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment, and would now be at
liberty but for a forgery which he committed while at Bicetre, which,
bringing on him a fresh sentence of eight years at the galleys, he was
conducted to the Bagne at the expiration of his original sentence, and
is there at present.

This adventurer does not want wit: he is, I am told, the author of a
vast many songs, much in fashion with the galley slaves, who consider
him us their Anacreon.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANCIENT TYRE.


The Tyrians, although not so early celebrated either in sacred or
profane history, had yet attained greater renown than their Sidonian
kinsmen. It is useless to conjecture at what period or under what
circumstances these eastern colonists had quitted the shores of the
Persian gulf, and fixed their seat on the narrow belt between the
mountains of Lebanon and the sea. Probably at first they were only
factories, established for connecting the trade between the eastern and
western world. If so, their origin must be sought among the natives
to the east of the Assyrians, as that race of industrious cultivators
possessed no shipping, and was hostile to commerce. The colonists
took root on this shore, became prosperous and wealthy, covered the
Mediterranean with their fleets, and its shores with their factories.
Tyre in the course of time became the dominant city, and under her
supremacy were founded the Phoenician colonies in Greece, Sicily,
Africa, and Spain. The wealth of her merchant princes had often tempted
the cupidity of the despots of Asia. Salmanassar, the Assyrian conqueror
of Israel, directed his attacks against Tyre, and continued them for
five years, but was finally compelled to raise the siege. Nabuchadonosor
was more persevering, and succeeded in capturing the city, after a siege
that lasted thirteen years. The old town, situated on the continent was
never rebuilt; but a new Tyre rose from its ruins. This occupied the
area of a small island, described by Pliny as two miles and a half in
circumference. On this confined space a large population existed, and
remedied the want of extent by raising story upon story, on the plan
followed by the ancient inhabitants of Edinburgh. It was separated from
the main land by an armlet of the sea, about half a mile in breadth
and about eighteen feet deep. The city was encircled by walls and
fortifications of great strength and height, and scarcely pregnable
even if accessible.

_Family Library, No. 3._

       *       *       *       *       *


SIR WILLIAM DEVEREUX,

_A Portrait--by the Author of Pelham._


My uncle did as his ancestors had done before him; and, cheap as the
dignity had grown, went up to court to be knighted by Charles II. He was
so delighted with what he saw of the metropolis, that he foreswore all
intention of leaving it, took to Sedley and champagne, flirted with Nell
Gwynne, lost double the value of his brother's portion at one sitting to
the chivalrous Grammont, wrote a comedy corrected by Etherege, and took
a wife recommended by Rochester. The wife brought him a child six months
after marriage, and the infant was born on the same day the comedy was
acted. Luckily for the honour of the house, my uncle shared the fate of
Plimneus, king of Sicyon, and all the offspring he ever had (that is to
say, the child and the play,) "died as soon as they were born." My uncle
was now only at a loss to know what to do with his wife, that remaining
treasure, whose readiness to oblige him had been so miraculously
evinced. She saved him the trouble of long cogitation,--an exercise
of intellect to which he was never too ardently inclined. There was
a gentleman of the court celebrated for his sedateness and solemnity;
my aunt was piqued into emulating Orpheus, and six weeks after her
confinement she put this rock into motion,--they eloped. Poor gentleman!
it must have been a severe trial of patience to a man never known before
to transgress the very slowest of all possible walks, to have had two
events of the most rapid nature happen to him in the same week. Scarcely
had he recovered the shock of being ran away with by my aunt, before,
terminating for ever his vagrancies, he was ran through by my uncle.
The wits made an epigram upon the event; and my uncle, who was as bold
as a lion at the point of a sword, was, to speak frankly, terribly
disconcerted by the point of a jest. He retired to the country in a
fit of disgust and gout. Here his own _bon naturel_ rose from the
layers of art which had long oppressed it, and he solaced himself by
righteously governing domains worthy of a prince, for the mortifications
he had experienced in the dishonourable career of a courtier. Hitherto I
have spoken somewhat slightingly of my uncle; and in his dissipation he
deserved it, for he was both too honest and too simple to shine in that
galaxy of prostitute genius of which Charles II. was the centre. But in
retirement he was no longer the same person, and I do not think that
the elements of human nature could have furnished forth a more amiable
character than Sir William Devereux, presiding at Christmas over the
merriment of his great hall. Good old man! his very defects were what we
loved best in him; vanity was so mingled with good nature that it became
graceful, and we reverenced one the most, while we most smiled at the
other. One peculiarity had he, which the age he had lived in, and his
domestic history, rendered natural enough, viz. an exceeding distaste
to the matrimonial state: early marriages were misery; imprudent
marriages idiotism; and marriage at the best he was wont to say, with
a kindling eye and a heightened colour, marriage at the best--was the
devil. Yet it must not be supposed that Sir William Devereux was an
ungallant man. On the contrary, never did the _beau sexe_ have a
humbler or more devoted servant. As nothing in his estimation was less
becoming to a wise man than matrimony, so nothing was more ornamental
than flirtation. He had the old man's weakness, garrulity, and he told
the wittiest stories in the world, without omitting any thing in them
but the point. This omission did not arise from the want either of
memory or of humour, but solely from a deficiency in the malice natural
to all jesters. He could not persuade his lips to repeat a sarcasm
hurting even the dead or the ungrateful; and when he came to the drop
of gall which should have given zest to the story, the milk of human
kindness broke its barrier despite himself, and washed it away. He was a
fine wreck, a little prematurely broken by dissipation, but not perhaps
the less interesting on that account; tall, and somewhat of the jovial
old English girth, with a face where good nature and good living mingled
their smiles and glow. He wore the garb of twenty years back, and was
curiously particular in the choice of his silk stockings. He was not a
little vain of his leg, and a compliment on that score was always sure
of a gracious reception.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Gatherer.


  A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.

SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lord Sundon was one of the commissioners of the treasury in the reign of
George II. The celebrated Bob Doddington was a colleague of the noble
lord, and was always complaining of his slowness of comprehension.
One day that lord Sundon laughed at something which Doddington had said,
Winnington, another member of the board, said to him, in a whisper,
"You are very ungrateful: you see lord Sundon takes your joke." "No,
no," replied Doddington, "he is laughing now at what I said last board
day."--_Monthly Mag_.

       *       *       *       *       *


STINGING MISTAKE.


A certain person, who shall be nameless, filled the situation of
Plumian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford. He was a great stickler
for decorum, and all due respect to his office. One day he received a
letter by the post, directed to himself, as the _Plumbian_ Professor.
He shook with indignation. What an insult! _Plumbian_ professor!
Leaden professor! Was it meant to insinuate that there was any thing
of a leaden quality in his lectures or writings! While thus irate, a
friend of the professor happened to drop in. He showed him the letter,
and expatiated upon the indignity of the superscription. His friend
endeavoured to convince him that it must be merely a slip of the pen.
In vain. The professor would not be pacified. "Well," said his friend,
"at any rate, it is evident the _b_ has stung you."--_Ibid_.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Irish barrister had the failing of Goldsmith, in an eminent degree:
that of believing he could do every thing better than any other person.
This propensity exhibited itself ludicrously enough on one occasion,
when a violent influenza prevailed in Dublin. A friend who happened to
meet him, mentioned a particular acquaintance, and observed that he had
had the influenza very bad. "Bad!" exclaimed the other, "I don't know
how bad _he_ has had it, but I am sure I have had it quite as bad
as he, or any one else."--"Not quite, I think," replied his friend, "for
poor Mr. Gillicuddy is dead."--"Well," rejoined our tenacious optimist,
"and what of that? _I_ could have died too, if I had liked
it."--_Ibid_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATE SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, BART.

THE SUPPLEMENT, containing Title, Preface, and Index to Vol. xiii. and
a fine Steel-plate

PORTRAIT OF SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, BART.

With a copious Memoir of his interesting Life and Discoveries, Notices
of his Literary Works, &c. is now Publishing.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIMBIRD'S EDITION OF THE
_Following Novels is already Published_:

                                         s.    d.
  Mackenzie's Man of Feeling             0     6
  Paul and Virginia                      0     6
  The Castle of Otranto                  0     6
  Almoran and Hamet                      0     6
  Elizabeth, or the Exiles of Siberia    0     6
  The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne     0     6
  Rasselas                               0     8
  The Old English Baron                  0     8
  Nature and Art                         0     8
  Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield         0    10
  Sicilian Romance                       1     0
  The Man of the World                   1     0
  A Simple Story                         1     4
  Joseph Andrews                         1     6
  Humphry Clinker                        1     8
  The Romance of the Forest              1     8
  The Italian                            2     0
  Zeluco, by Dr. Moore                   2     6
  Edward, by Dr. Moore                   2     6
  Roderick Random                        2     6
  The Mysteries of Udolpho               3     6
  Peregrine Pickle                       4     6






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 379 ***

***** This file should be named 11233.txt or 11233.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/2/3/11233/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


