The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.12.01, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries 1849.12.01

Author: Various

Release Date: March 19, 2004 [EBook #11636]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.12.01 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library
of Early Journals.





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--Captain Cuttle.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5]
Saturday, December 1, 1849.
[Price Threepence.  Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

NOTES:--
  Lord Chatham--Queen Charlotte, Original Letter respecting
  Cibber's Apology
  Ancient Tapestry, by J.R. Planche
  Travelling in England
  Prison Discipline and Execution of Justice
  Medal of the Pretender, by Edw. Hawkins
  John Aubrey, by J. Britton
  Inedited Song by Suckling
  White Gloves at Maiden Assizes, by William J. Thomas
  Adversaria--Don Quixote--Dr. Dove
  Inscription on Church Plate
  Anecdotes of Books, by Joseph Hunter
  Queries answered, No. 3.--Flemish Account
  Answer to Minor Queries:--Richard Greene, &c.

QUERIES:--
  Sanuto's Doges of Venice
  MSS. of Sir Roger Twysden
  Minor Queries:--Honnore Pelle--Bust of Sir Walter Raleigh, &c.

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c.
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted
  Notices to Correspondents
  Advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


LORD CHATHAM--QUEEN CHARLOTTE.


    _Original Letter, written on the Resignation of Mr. Pitt, in
    1761--Public Feeling on the Subject, and Changes at Court in
    consequence--First Impressions of Queen Charlotte._

[The following valuable original letter is now published for the first
time. It will be found to be of very considerable historical curiosity
and interest. The resignation of the Great Commoner in 1761, and his
acceptance at the same time of a pension and a peerage for his family,
were events which astonished his admirers as much as any thing else in
his wonderful career. Even now, after the recent publication of all the
letters relating to these transactions, it is difficult to put any
construction on Mr. Pitt's conduct which is consistent with the
high-spirited independence which one desires to believe to have been a
leading feature of his character. There may have been great subtlety in
the way in which he was tempted; that may be admitted even by the
stoutest defenders of the character of George III; but nothing can
excuse the eager, rapturous gratitude with which the glittering bait was
caught. The whole circumstances are related in the _Chatham
Correspondence_, ii. 146, coupled with Adolphus's _Hist. of England._

A kind judgment upon them may be read in Lord Mahon's _Hist. of
England_, iv. 365, and one more severe--perhaps, more just--in Lord
Brougham's _Historical Sketches_, in the article on Lord Chatham. See
also the _Pictorial History of the Reign of George III_, i. 13. After
consulting all these authorities the reader will still find new facts,
and a vivid picture of the public feeling, in the following letter.]


Dear Robinson,--I am much obliged to you for both your letters,
particularly the last, in which I look upon the freedom of your
expostulations as the strongest mark of your friendship, and allow you
to charge me with any thing that possibly can be brought against one
upon such an occasion, except forgetfulness of you. I left town soon
after receiving your first letter, and was moving about from place to
place, till the coronation brought me to town again, and has fixed me
here for the winter; however I do not urge my unsettled situation during
the summer as any excuse for my silence, but aim to lay it upon
downright indolence, which I was ashamed of before I received your
second letter, and have been angry with myself for it since; however, as
often as you'll do me the pleasure, and a very sincere one it is I
assure you, of letting me hear how you do, you may depend upon the
utmost punctuality for the future, and I undertake very seriously to
answer every letter you shall write me within a fortnight.

The ensuing winter may possibly produce many things to amaze you; it has
opened with one that I am sure will; I mean Mr. Pitt's resignation, who
delivered up the seals to the King last Monday. The reason commonly
given for this extraordinary step is a resolution taken in Council
contrary to Mr. Pitt's opinion, concerning our conduct towards the
Spaniards, who upon the breaking off of the negotiations with France and
our sending Mr. Bussy away, have, it is said, made some declarations to
our Court which Mr. Pitt was for having the King treat in a very
different manner from that which the rest of the Cabinet advised; for
they are said to have been all against Mr. Pitt's opinion, except Lord
Temple. The effect of this resignation you'll easily imagine. It has
opened all the mouths of all the news-presses in England, and, from our
boasted unanimity and confidence in the Government, we seem to be
falling apace into division and distrust; in the meantime Mr. Pitt seems
to have entered, on this occasion, upon a new mode of resignation, at
least for him, for he goes to Court, where he is much taken notice of by
the King, and treated with great respect by everybody else, and has
said, according to common report, that he intends only to tell a plain
story, which I suppose we are to have in the House of Commons. People,
as you may imagine, are very impatient for his own account of a matter
about which they know so little at present, and which puts public
curiosity to the rack.

Fresh matter for patriots and politicians! Since writing the former part
of this letter, I have been at the coffee-house, and bring you back
verbatim, a very curious article of the _Gazette_. "St. James's, Oct. 9.
The Right Hon. William Pitt having resigned the Seals into the King's
hands, his Majesty was this day pleased to appoint the Earl of Egremont
to be one of his principal Secretaries of State, and in consideration of
the great and important services of the said Mr. Pitt, his Majesty has
been graciously pleased to direct that a warrant be prepared for
granting to the Lady Hester Pitt, his wife, a Barony of Great Britain,
by the name, style and title of Baroness of Chatham to herself, and of
Baron of Chatham to her heirs male; and also to confer upon the said
William Pitt, Esq. an annuity of 3000_l_. sterling during his own life,
that of Lady Hester Pitt, and that of their son John Pitt, Esq!"

A report of this matter got about the day before, and most unfortunately
all the newspapers contradicted it as a scandalous report, set on foot
with a design to tarnish the lustre of a certain great character. This
was the style of the morning and evening papers of Saturday, and of
those who converse upon their authority; so that upon the coming in of
the _Gazette_ about ten o'clock at night, it was really diverting to see
the effect it had upon most people's countenances at Dick's Coffee
House, where I was; it occasioned a dead silence, and I think every body
went away without giving their opinions of the matter, except Dr.
Collier, who has always called Mr. Pitt all the rogues he can set his
mouth on. It appears at present a most unaccountable proceeding in every
part of it, for he seems to have forfeited his popularity, on which his
consequence depended, for a consideration which he might have commanded
at any time; and yet he does not make an absolute retreat, for in that
case one should think he would have taken the peerage himself.

Lord Temple has resigned the Privy Seal, which is commonly said to be
intended for Lord Hardwycke; some comfort to him for the loss of his
wife, who died a few weeks ago. So that we seem to be left in the same
hands out of which Mr. Pitt gloried in having delivered us; for, as you
have probably heard before this time, Mr. Legge was removed from his
place in the spring, for having refused to support any longer our German
measures, as has been commonly said and not contradicted that I know of.
Every body agrees that he was quite tired of his place, as is generally
said on account of the coolness between him and Mr. Pitt, the old
quarrel with the Duke of Newcastle, and some pique between him and Lord
Bute on account of the Hampshire election. People were much diverted
with the answer he is said to have made to the Duke of Newcastle when he
went to demand the seal of his office. He compared his retirement to
Elysium, and told the Duke he thought he might assure their common
friends there, that they should not be long without the honour of his
Grace's company; however, he seems to be out in his guess, for the
Newcastle junta, strengthened by the Duke of Bedford, who has joined
them, seems to be in all its glory again. This appeared in the Church
promotions the other day, for Dr. Young was translated, the master of
Bennet made a bishop, and Mr. York dean: however, as you will probably
be glad of a more particular account of our Church promotions, I am to
tell you that the scene opened soon after the King's accession with the
promotion of Dr. Squire to the Bishoprick of St. David's, upon the death
of Ellis. Some circumstances of this affair inclined people to think
that the old ecclesiastical shop was quite shut up; for the Duke of
Newcastle expressed great dissatisfaction at Squire's promotion, and
even desired Bishop Young to tell every body that he had no hand in it.
Young answered, that he need not give himself that trouble, for Dr.
Squire had told every body so already, which is generally said to be
very true: for he did not content himself with saying how much he was
obliged to Lord Bute, but seemed to be afraid lest it should be thought
he was obliged to any body else. What an excellent courtier! The next
vacancy was made by Hoadly, upon which Thomas was translated from
Salisbury to Winchester, Drummond from St. Asaph to Salisbury, Newcome
from Llandaff to St. Asaph, and that exemplary divine Dr. Ewer made
Bishop of Llandaff. These were hardly settled when Sherlock and Gilbert
dropt almost together. Drummond has left Salisbury for York, Thomas is
translated from Lincoln to Salisbury, Green made Bishop of Lincoln, and
succeeded in his deanery by Mr. York: Hayter is translated from Norwich
to London, Young from Bristol to Norwich, and Newton is made Bishop of
Bristol; and I must not forget to tell you, that, among several new
chaplains, Beadon is one. This leads me naturally to Lord Bute, who,
though the professed favourite of the King, has hitherto escaped the
popular clamour pretty well: the immense fortune that is come into his
family by the death of old Wortley Montague has added much to his
consequence, and made him be looked upon as more of an Englishman, at
least they can no longer call him a poor Scot.

His wife was created a peeress of Great Britain at the same time that
Mr. Spencer, Mr. Doddington, Sir Richard Grosvenor, Sir Nat. Curzen, Sir
Thomas Robinson, and Sir William Irby were created peers. He has married
his eldest daughter to Sir James Lowther and is himself, from being
Groom of the Stole, become Secretary of State--Lord Holderness being
removed with very little ceremony indeed, but with a pension, to make
room for him. He and Mr. Pitt together have made good courtiers of the
Tories; Lords Oxford, Litchfield, and Bruce, being supernumerary lords,
and Norbonne Berkeley, Northey, and I think George Pitt, supernumerary
Grooms of the Bedchamber. Sir Francis Dashwood is Treasurer of the
Chamber, in the room of Charles Townshend, who was made Secretary at War
upon Lord Barrington's succeeding Mr. Legge as Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Lord Talbot, who is in high favour, is Steward of the
Household, and with his usual spirit has executed a scheme of economy,
which, though much laughed at at first, is now much commended. They made
room for him upon Lord Bute's being made Secretary, at which time Lord
Huntingdon was made Groom of the Stole, and succeeded as Master of the
Horse by the Duke Rutland, who was before Steward of the Household. Thus
have I concluded this series of removals, which was first begun, after
the old King's death, by Lord Bute's being Groom of the Stole in the
room of Lord Rochford, who has a pension, and Lord Huntingdon's being
made Master of the Horse instead of Lord Gower, who was made Master of
the Wardrobe in the room of Sir Thomas Robinson, who has his peerage for
a recompense; and written you a long letter, which may perhaps be no
better for you upon the whole than an old newspaper. However, I was
determined your curiosity should be no sufferer by my long silence if I
could help it.

I must not conclude without saying something of our new Queen. She seems
to me to behave with equal propriety and civility, though the common
people are quite exasperated at her not being handsome, and the people
at Court laugh at her courtesies. All our friends are well, and have had
nothing happen to them that I know of which requires particular mention.
Gisborne either has or will write to you very soon. Convince me, dear
Robinson, by writing soon that you forgive my long silence, and believe
me to be, with the sincerest regard for you and yours, your most
affectionate friend,

G. CRUCH.[1]

Mrs. Wilson's, Lancaster Court,
Oct'r. 12th.

(Addressed)

To
The Ho'd Mr. Will'm Robinson
_Recomende a Messieurs Tierney & Merry_[2]
_a Naples_.

(Memorandum indorsed)
_Ring just rec'd that of 22't Sept.
16th Oct'r. 1761_.

    [Footnote 1: The name is not easy to be made out; but as far as it
    is determinable by comparison of hand-writing, it is "Cruch." The
    letter passed through the post-office.]

    [Footnote 2: The part printed in _italics_ was added by some other
    person than the writer of the letter.]

       *       *       *       *       *


CHARACTERS OF ACTORS IN CIBBER'S APOLOGY.


Reverting to a Query in your Second Number, p. 29, your correspondent
DRAMATICUS may rest assured that Colley Cibber's characters of actors
and actresses (his contemporaries and immediate predecessors) _first_
appeared in his _Apology_, 4to. 1740, and were transferred _verbatim_,
as far as I have been able to consult them, to the subsequent editions
of that very entertaining and excellent work. If Colley Cibber were not
a first-rate dramatist, he was a first-rate critic upon performers; and
I am disposed to place his abilities as a play-wright much higher than
the usual estimate.

Probably the doubt of your correspondent arose from the fact, not
hitherto at all noticed, that these characters no sooner made their
appearance, than they were pirated, and pirated work may have been taken
for the original. It is a scarce tract, and bears the following
title--_The Theatrical Lives and Characters of the following celebrated
Actors;_ and then follow sixteen names, beginning with Betterton, and
ending with Mrs. Butler, and we are also told that _A General History of
the Stage during their time_ is included. The whole of this, with
certain omissions, principally of classical quotations, is taken from
Cibber's _Apology_, and it professed to be "Printed for J. Miller, in
Fleet Street, and sold at the pamphlet shops," without date. The whole
is nothing but an impudent plagiarism, and it is crowned and topped by a
scrap purporting to be from Shakespeare, but merely the invention of the
compiler. In truth, it is the only original morsel in the whole seventy
pages. At the end of the character of Betterton, the following is
subjoined, and it induces a Query, whether any such work, real or
pretended, as regards Betterton, is in existence?

"N.B. The author of this work has, since he began it, had a very curious
manuscript of Mr. Betterton's communicated to him, containing the whole
duty of a Player; interspersed with directions for young Actors, as to
the management of the voice, carriage of the body, &c. &c., reckoned the
best piece that has ever been wrote on the subject," p. 22.

This "best piece" on the subject is promised in the course of the
volume, but it is not found in it. Did it appear anywhere else and in
any other shape? As the Query of DRAMATICUS is now answered, perhaps he
may be able to reply to this question from

T.J.L.

I should have sent this note sooner, had I not waited to see if any body
else would answer the Query of DRAMATICUS, and perhaps afford some
additional information.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANCIENT TAPESTRY.


Sir,--I believe I can answer a Query in your Third Number, by N.,
respecting the whereabouts of a piece of ancient tapestry formerly in
the possession of Mr. Yarnold, of Great St. Helen's, London, described,
upon no satisfactory authority, as "the Plantagenet Tapestry." It is at
present the property of Thos. Baylis, Esq., of Colby House, Kensington.
A portion of it has been engraved as representing Richard III, &c.; but
it is difficult to say what originated that opinion. The subject is a
crowned female seated by a fountain, and apparently threatening two male
personages with a rod or slight sceptre, which she has raised in her
_left_ hand, her arm being stayed by another female standing behind her.
This has been said to represent Elizabeth of York driving out Richard
III, which, I need scarcely say, she did not do. There are nineteen
other figures, male and female, looking on or in conversation, all
attired in the costume of the close of the 15th century, but without the
least appearance of indicating any historical personage. It is probably
an allegorical subject, such as we find in the tapestry of the same date
under the gallery of Wolsey's Hall at Hampton Court, and in that of
Nancy published by Mons. Juninal.

I believe one of the seven pieces of "the siege of Troy," mentioned in
Query, No. 3, or an eighth piece unmentioned, is now in the possession
of Mr. Pratt, of Bond Street, who bought it of Mr. Yarnold's widow.

I may add that the tapestry in St. Mary's Hall, Coventry, contains,
undoubtedly, representations of King Henry VI, Queen Margaret, and
Cardinal Beaufort. It is engraved in Mr. Shaw's second volume of
_Dresses and Decorations_; but the date therein assigned to it (_before_
1447) is erroneous, the costume being, like that in the tapestries above
mentioned, of the _very end_ of the 15th century.

J.R. PLANCHE.

Brompton, Nov. 20. 1849.

[To this Note, so obligingly communicated by Mr. Planche, we may add,
that the tapestry in question was exhibited to the Society of
Antiquaries at their opening meeting on the 22nd ultimo.]

       *       *       *       *       *


TRAVELLING IN ENGLAND.


Mr. Editor,--Your No. 3. has just fallen into my hands, with the
wonderful account of Schultz's journey of fifty miles in six hours, a
hundred years ago. I am inclined to think the explanation consists in a
misprint. The distances are given in figures, and not in words at
length, if we may trust your correspondent's note on p. 35. May not a 1
have "dropped" before the 6, so that the true lection will be, "dass wir
auf dem ganzen Wege kaum 16 Stunden gefahren sind"? This time
corresponds with the time of return, on which he set out in the evening
(at 8?) of one day and arrived at noon the next. It was also most likely
that the spring carriages of fifteen years later date should go much
faster than the old springless vehicles. Any one who has corrected
proofs will appreciate the "dropping" of a single type, and may be ready
to admit it on such circumstantial evidence.

I may remark that 1749 was still Old Style in England; but the German
Schultz, in dating his expedition on _Sunday_, 10 Aug. 1749, has used
the _New Style_, then prevalent in Germany. Sunday, 10 Aug. 1749, O.S.,
was on Thursday, 31 July, 1749, N.S. The York coach-bill cited on the
same page is in O.S.

Is not "_Staets_-Kutsche," in the same communication, a misprint?

A.J.E.

G.G. has perhaps a little overrated the import of the passage he quotes
from Schultz's travels. "_Dass wir kaum 6 Stunden gefahren sind_"--even
supposing there is no misprint of a 6 for an 8 or 9, which is quite
possible--will not, I apprehend, bear the meaning he collects from the
words, viz. that _the journey occupied no more than six hours_, or less
even than so much.

In the first place, I believe it will be allowed by those familiar with
German idioms, that the phrase _kaum 6 Stunden_, is not to be rendered
as though it meant _no more or less than 6_; but rather thus: "but
little more than 6;"--the "_little more_," in this indefinite form of
expression, being a very uncertain quantity, it may be an hour or so.

Then he says merely that they "kaum 6 Stunden _gefahren_ sind," which
may mean that the time _actually spent in motion_ did not exceed the
number of hours indicated, whatever that may be; and not that the
journey itself, "_including stoppages_," took up no more. Had he meant
to say this, I imagine he would have used a totally different phrase: e.
g. _dass wir binnen kaum mehr als 6 Stunden nach London schoen gekommen
sind;_ or something like these words.

Making these allowances, the report is conceivably true, even of a
period a century old, as regards the rate of day-travelling on the high
road to Norwich, still at that time a place of much business with
London. The second journey of the Pastor on the same road was, it seems,
_by night_: but what perhaps is of more consequence to explain is the
apparent difference between it and the other. It appears that in the
second instance we are told _when_ he arrived at his journey's end; in
the former, nothing beyond the number of hours he was actually moving,
may have been communicated to us.

V.

         *       *       *       *       *


Mr. Editor,--I close copies of advertisements which appear in some old
newspapers in my possession, and which in some degree illustrate the
history of travelling, and in themselves show, I imagine, the advance
made between 1739 and 1767, since I consider that "The Old Constant
Froom Flying Waggon," of the former date, was the parent of "The Frome
Stage Machine" of the latter.

I notice in the Sherborne paper all public stage conveyances are
designated as _machines_.

Copies of advertisements in _The Daily Advertiser_ of the 9th April,
1739:--

    "For Bath.

    A good Coach and able Horses will set out from the Black Swan Inn,
    in Holborn, on Wednesday or Thursday.

    Enquire of William Maud."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Exeter Flying Stage Coach in Three Days, and Dorchester and
    Blandford in two days.

    Go from the Saracen's Head Inn, in Friday Street, London, every
    Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and from the New Inn, in Exeter,
    every Tuesday and Thursday, perform'd by

    JOAN PAYNE,

    JOHN SANDERSON,

    THOMAS BURY.

    _Note_.--Once a week there is an entire Dorchester and Blandford
    Coach from Dorchester on Mondays, and from London on Fridays.

    The stage begins _Flying_ on Monday next, the 16th instant."

       *       *       *       *       *

"The old standing constant Froom Flying Waggon in Three days

Sets out with goods and Passengers from Froom for London, every Monday,
by One o'clock in the morning, and will be at the King's Arms Inn, at
Holborn Bridge, the Wednesday following by Twelve o'clock at Noon; from
whence it will set out on Thursday morning, by One o'clock, for
Amesbury, Shrewton, Chittern, Heytesbury, Warminster, Froom, and all
other places adjacent, and will continue allowing each passenger
fourteen pounds, and be at Froom, on Saturday by twelve at noon.

If any Passengers have Occasion to go from either of the aforesaid
Places they shall be supplied with able Horses and a Guide by Joseph
Clavey; the Proprietor of the said Flying Waggon. The Waggon calls at
the White Bear in Piccadilly coming in and going out.

_Note_.--Attendance is constantly given at the King's Arms, Holborn
Bridge aforesaid, to take in Goods and Passengers' names; but no Money,
Plate, Bank Notes, or Jewels will be insured unless delivered as such,
perform'd by

JOSEPH CLAYEY.

N.B. His other Waggons keep their Stages as usual."


From Cruttwell's _Sherborne, Shaftesbury, and Dorchester Journal_, or
_Yeovil, Taunton, and Bridgewater Chronicle_, of Friday, February 6th,
12th, and 20th, 1767.

    "Taunton Flying Machine,

    Hung on Steel Springs, in Two Days

    Sets out from the Saracen's Head Inn in Friday Street, London, and
    Taunton, every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, at Three o'clock in the
    morning: and returns every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, lays at
    the Antelope in Salisbury, going Up and Down; To carry Six inside
    Passengers, each to pay

                            L    s.  d.
    To Taunton              1   16   0
       Ilminster            1   14   0
       Yeovil               1    8   0
       Sherborne            1    6   0
       Shaftesbury          1    4   0

    Outside Passengers and Children in the Lap, Half-Fare as above, each
    Inside Passenger allowed Fourteen Pounds Luggage; all above, to
    Taunton Two-pence per Pound and so in Proportion to any Part of the
    road.

    _Note_. No Money, Plate, Jewels, or Writings, will be accounted for
    if Lost, unless Entered as such, and Paid for accordingly.

    Performed by {JOHN WHITMASH, THOMAS LILEY.}"


From the same Paper of Friday, April 17th, 24th, and May 1st, 1767:--

"Frome, 1767.

  The Proprietors of the
  FROME STAGE MACHINE

    In Order to make it more agreeable to their Friends in the West,
    have engaged to set out Post Chaises from the Christopher Inn, in
    Wells, every Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday Evenings, at Five
    o'clock, to stop at the George Inn, at Shepton Mallet, and set out
    from thence at a Quarter past Six, to carry Passengers and Parcels
    to Frome, to be forwarded from thence to London in the One Day
    Flying Machine, which began on Sunday the 12th of April, 1767; Also
    a Chaise from Frome every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday Evenings
    to Shepton and Wells, as soon as the Coach arrives from London, if
    any Passengers, &c. go down, at the following Prices:--from Wells to
    Frome Four Shillings, from Shepton Three Shillings, small parcels
    from Wells to Frome 6d. each, from Shepton 4d., large ditto a
    Halfpenny per Pound from each place. All Passengers who intend
    taking the Advantage of this method of travelling, are desired to
    take their Places at the above Inns in Wells and Shepton as follows:
    viz. those who intend going on Sunday enter the Tuesday before
    going, those who go on Tuesday enter the Thursday before, and for
    Thursday the Sunday before, that proper notice may be given at Frome
    to secure the places: If at any time more than three Passengers an
    extra Chaise to be provided.

    Fare to and from London L1 8s. 0d. Trowbridge, L1 6s. 0d. Devizes L1
    2s. 6d. One half to be paid at Booking, the other at entering the
    machine. Inside passengers allowed 10lb. wt., all above Three
    Half-pence per pound from Frome as usual. The Coach will set out
    from the Crown Inn in Frome, at Ten o'clock in the evening of every
    Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday; and from the Bull Inn in Holborne,
    London, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday Evening, at the same
    Hour.--Books are kept, Places taken, and Parcels received, at the
    Christopher in Wells, the George in Shepton, the Crown in Frome, the
    Woolpack in Trowbridge, and the Bull in Holborne, London; calls
    going in and coming out, at the White Bear Inn, Piccadilly, and the
    new White Horse Cellar.

    Perform'd by R. MESSETER, at the Crown, at Thatcham, and J.
    HITCHCOCK, at the Catherine Wheel, Beckhampton.

    "N.B. No Jewels, Plate, Money, Writings, or other things of Value,
    will be paid for if lost, unless enter'd as such, and paid for
    accordingly."

With regard to G.G.'s Query as to the time occupied in the journey of
Schultz from Colchester to London, do not the circumstances sufficiently
prove that by some means _six_ must have been written for _sixteen?_
Sixteen hours would give a rate of travelling nearer the average of
those days, and was about the time occupied on the return to Colchester.
For if we allow a due time after twelve for dinner, settling accounts,
and going to the inn whence the "Staets-Kutsche" started, and for
partaking of the meal there provided, we shall very easily get to seven
or eight in the evening; _sixteen_ hours after that time would be
"towards noon" in the following day.

A.D.M

      *      *      *      *      *


PRISON DISCIPLINE AND EXECUTION OF JUSTICE.


Sir,--I am glad that you devote some part of your columns to the good
work of bringing forward facts and anecdotes which, though not generally
known, your readers individually may have happened to notice, and which
illustrate the manners of our ancestors. I dare say few of your
correspondents have met with the _London Magazine_ for the year of 1741.
An imperfect copy fell into my hands when a lad; ever since which time I
have been in a state of great wonderment at the story contained in the
leaf which I enclose. I need hardly say that the _italics_ are mine; and
perhaps they are hardly necessary. Yours, &c., BETA.

    "TUESDAY, 21 [June].

    "A very extraordinary Affair happen'd at the County Gaol in
    Hertford, where four Highwaymen, very stout lusty Fellows, viz.
    Theophilus Dean, Charles Cox (alias Bacon-Face), James Smith, and
    Luke Humphrys, lay under Sentence of Death, pass'd on them the last
    Assizes, and were intended to have been executed the following Day;
    Mr. Oxenton, the Gaoler, _who keeps an Inn opposite to the Prison_,
    went into the Gaol about four a Clock in the Morning, as was his
    Custom, attended by three Men, to see if all was safe, and, having
    lock'd the outward Door, sent _one_ of his Men down to the Dungeon,
    where the four Felons had found means to disengage themselves from
    the Pillar and Chain to which they had been lock'd down, and one of
    them, viz. Bacon-Face, had got off both his Hand-Cuffs and Fetters;
    on opening the Door, they disabled the Man and all rush'd out; then
    coming up Stairs they met the Gaoler and his other two Men, of whom
    they demanded the Keys, threatening to murder them if their request
    was not immediately comply'd with: they then forced his men into the
    Yard beyond the Hatchway, and a Battle ensu'd, in which the Gaoler
    behav'd so manfully, tho' he had but one Man to assist him, that he
    maintain'd the Possession of his Keys till he was heard by his Wife,
    then in Bed, to call out for Assistance, who _fortunately having
    another Key to the Gaol_, ran to rescue him; the Fellows saw her
    coming and demanded her Key, threatening to murder her if she
    offer'd to assist her Husband: By this Time the Neighbourhood was
    alarm'd, and several Persons got to the Gaol Door, when Mrs.
    Oxenton, notwithstanding their Threats, at the utmost Hazard of her
    Life, open'd the same and caught hold of her Husband, who was almost
    spent, and with the Assistance of some Persons, got him out and
    lock'd the Door without suffering the Fellows to escape: They
    continued cursing and swearing that they would murder the first Man
    that attempted to enter the Gaol. In the mean Time Robert Hadsley,
    Esq., High-Sheriff, who lives about a Mile from the Town, was sent
    for, and came immediately; he parley'd with them some Time to no
    Purpose, then order'd Fire-Arms to be brought, and, in case they
    would not submit, to shoot at them, which these Desparadoes refusing
    to do, they accordingly fired on them, and Theophilus Dean receiving
    a Shot in the Groin, dropt; then they surrender'd, and the Sheriff
    instantly caus'd Bacon-Face _to be hang'd on the Arch of the Sign
    Iron belonging to the Gaoler's House_, in the Sight of his
    Companions and great Numbers of People; the other three were
    directly put into a Cart and carried to the usual Place of
    Execution, and there hang'd before seven a Clock that
    Morning."--_Lond. Mag._ July, 1741, p. 360.

      *      *      *      *      *


SATIRICAL MEDAL OF THE PRETENDER.


I am well acquainted with the medal described by Mr. Nightingale, and
can confirm his statement of the difficulties which numismatists have
experienced in attempting to explain the circumstances alluded to by
the lobster which is the badge of "the order of the pretended Prince of
Wales," and upon which, on the other side of the medal, Father Petre is
represented as riding with the young prince in his arms. Upon other
medals also the Jesuit appears carrying the prince, who is decorated, or
amusing himself, with a windmill. There is likewise a medal on which a
Jesuit is represented concealed within a closet or alter, and raising
or pushing up through the top the young prince to the view of the
people, while Truth is opening the door and exposing the imposition.
Similar representations of the Jesuit's interference occur upon
caricatures and satirical prints executed in Holland. Upon one,
entitled, "Arlequin sur l'Hippogryphe, a la croisade Lojoliste," the
lobster, on which the Jesuit is mounted, carries a book in each claw;
the young prince's head is decorated with a windmill. All these intimate
the influence of Father Petre upon the proceedings of James II, and of
the Jesuits in general in the imposition, as was by many supposed, of
the pretended prince. The imputation upon the legitimacy of the young
child was occasioned in a great degree, and almost justified, by the
pilgrimages and superstitious fooleries of his grandmother, increased by
his mother's choosing St. Francis Xavier as one of her ecclesiastical
patrons, and with her family attributing the birth of the prince to his
miraculous interference. This may have provoked the opposers of popery
to take every means of satirising the Jesuits; and the following
circumstances related in the _Life of Xavier_ probably suggested the
idea of making the lobster one of the symbols of the superstitions and
impositions of the Jesuits, and a means of discrediting the birth of the
prince by ridiculing the community by whose impositions they asserted
the fraud to have been contrived and executed.

The account is given by a Portuguese, called Fausto Rodriguez, who was a
witness of the fact, has deposed it upon oath, and whose juridical
testimony is in the process of the Saint's canonization.

    "'We were at sea,' says Rodriguez, 'Father Francis, John Raposo, and
    myself, when there arose a tempest which alarmed all the mariners.
    Then the Father drew from his bosom a little crucifix, which he
    always carried about him, and leaning over deck, intended to have
    dipt it into the sea; but the crucifix dropt out of his hand, and
    was carried off by the waves. This loss very sensibly afflicted him,
    and he concealed not his sorrow from us. The next morning we landed
    on the Island of Baranura; from the time when the crucifix was lost,
    to that of our landing, it was near twenty-four hours, during which
    we were in perpetual danger. Being on shore, Father Francis and I
    walked along by the sea-side, towards the town of Tamalo, and had
    already walked about 500 paces, when both of us beheld, arising out
    of the sea, a crab fish, which carried betwixt his claws the same
    crucifix raised on high. I saw the crab fish come directly to the
    Father, by whose side I was, and stopped before him. The Father,
    falling on his knees, took his crucifix, after which the crab-fish
    returned into the sea. But the Father still continuing in the same
    humble posture, hugging and kissing the crucifix, was half an hour
    praying with his hands across his breast, and myself joining with
    him in thanksgiving to God for so evident a miracle; after which we
    arose and continued on our way.' Thus you have the relation of
    Rodriguez."--Dryden's _Life of St. Francis Xavier_, book iii.

EDW. HAWKINS.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN AUBREY.


As the biographer and editor of that amiable and zealous antiquary JOHN
AUBREY, I noticed with peculiar interest the statement of your
correspondent, that the date of your first publication coincided with
the anniversary of his birthday; but, unhappily, the coincidence is
imaginary. Your correspondent has, on that point, adopted a careless
reading of the first chapter of Aubrey's _Miscellanies_, whereby the 3rd
of November, the birthday of the Duke of York, afterwards James the
Second, has been frequently stated as that of the antiquary himself. See
my _Memoir of Aubrey_, 4to. 1845, p. 123. In the same volume, p. 13,
will be found an engraving of the horoscope of his nativity, from a
sketch in his own hand. So far as his authority is of any value, that
curious sketch proves incontestably that "the Native" was born at 14
minutes and 49 seconds past 17 o'clock (astronomical time) on the 11_th
of March_, 1625-6; that is, at 14 minutes and 49 seconds past 5 o'clock
A.M. on the 12_th of March_, instead of the 3rd of November.

Few things can be more mortifying to a biographer, or an antiquary, than
the perpetuation of an error which he has successfully laboured to
correct. It is an evil, however, to which he is often subjected, and
which your valuable publication will go far to remedy. In the present
case it is, doubtless, to be ascribed to the peculiar nature of my
_Memoir of Aubrey_, of which but a limited number of copies were printed
for the _Wiltshire Topographical Society_. The time and labour which I
bestowed upon the work, the interesting character of its contents, and
the approbation of able and impartial public critics, justify me in
saying that it deserves a far more extensive circulation.

After this allusion to John Aubrey, I think I cannot better evince my
sympathy with your exertions than by requesting the insertion of a Query
respecting one of his manuscripts. I allude to his _Monumenta
Brittanica_, in four folio volumes--a dissertation on Avebury,
Stonehenge, and other stone circles, barrows, and similar Druidical
monuments--which has disappeared within the last thirty years.
Fortunately a large portion of its contents has been preserved, in
extracts made by Mr. Hutchins, the historian of Dorsetshire, and by the
late Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart.; but the manuscript certainly
contained much more of great local interest, and some matters which were
worthy of publication. In the Memoir already mentioned, p. 87, the
history of the manuscript down to the time of its disappearance is
fully traced. Referring such of your readers as may feel interested in
the subject to that volume, and reserving for the future numbers a long
list of other interesting Queries which are now before me, it will
gratify me to obtain, through your medium, any information respecting
the MS. referred to. I remain, Sir, yours truly,

JOHN BRITTON.

[Our modesty has compelled us to omit from this letter a warm eulogium
on our undertaking, well as we know the value of Mr. Britton's testimony
to our usefulness, and much as we esteem it.]

       *       *       *       *       *


INEDITED SONG BY SIR JOHN SUCKLING.


I do not remember to have seen the following verses in print or even in
MS. before I accidentally met with them in a small quarto MS. Collection
of English Poetry, in the hand-writing of the time of Charles I. They
are much in Suckling's manner; and in the MS. are described as--

_Sir John Suckling's Verses_.

  I am confirm'd a woman can
  Love this, or that, or any other man:
  This day she's melting hot,
  To-morrow swears she knows you not;
  If she but a new object find,
  Then straight she's of another mind;
    Then hang me, Ladies, at your door,
    If e'er I doat upon you more.

  Yet still I'll love the fairsome (why?--
  For nothing but to please my eye);
  And so the fat and soft-skinned dame
  I'll flatter to appease my flame;
  For she that's musical I'll long,
  When I am sad, to sing a song;
    Then hang me, Ladies, at your door,
    If e'er I doat upon you more.

  I'll give my fancy leave to range
  Through every where to find out change;
  The black, the brown, the fair shall be
  But objects of variety.
  I'll court you all to serve my turn,
  But with such flames as shall not burn;
    Then hang me, Ladies, at your door,
    If e'er I doat upon you more.

A.D.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHITE GLOVES AT A MAIDEN ASSIZE.


The practice of giving white gloves to judges at maiden assizes is one
of the few relics of that symbolism so observable in the early laws of
this as of all other countries; and its origin is doubtless to be found
in the fact of the hand being, in the early Germanic law, a symbol of
power. By the hand property was delivered over or reclaimed, hand joined
in hand to strike a bargain and to celebrate espousals, &c. That this
symbolism should sometimes be transferred from the hand to the glove
(the _hand-schuh_ of the Germans) is but natural, and it is in this
transfer that we shall find the origin of the white gloves in question.
At a maiden assize no criminal has been called upon to plead, or to use
the words of Blackstone, "called upon by name to hold up his hand;" in
short, no guilty hand has been held up, and, therefore, after the rising
of the court our judges (instead of receiving, as they did in Germany,
an entertainment at which the bread, the glasses, the food, the
linen--every thing, in short--was white) have been accustomed to receive
a pair of white gloves. The Spaniards have a proverb, "_white hands
never offend_;" but in their gallantry they use it only in reference to
the softer sex; the Teutonic races, however, would seem to have embodied
the idea, and to have extended its application.

WILLIAM J. THOMS.

A LIMB OF THE LAW, to a portion of whose Query, in No. 2. (p. 29.), the
above is intended as a reply, may consult, on the symbolism of the Hand
and Glove, _Grimm Deutsches Rechtsaltherthuemer_, pp. 137. and 152, and
on the symbolical use of white in judicial proceedings, and the after
feastings consequent thereon, pp. 137. 381. and 869. of the same learned
work.

[On this subject we have received a communication from F.G.S., referring
to Brand's _Popular Antiquities_, vol. ii. p. 79, ed. 1841, for a
passage from Fuller's _Mixed Contemplations_, London, 1660, which proves
the existence of the practice at the time; and to another in Clavell's
_Recantation of an Ill-led Life_, London, 1634, to show that prisoners,
who received pardon after condemnation, were accustomed to present
gloves to the judges:--

    "Those pardoned men who taste their prince's loves, (As married to
    new life) do give you gloves."]


Mr. Editor,--"Anciently it was prohibited the Judges to wear gloves on
the bench; and at present in the stables of most princes it is not safe
going in without pulling off the gloves."--Chambers' _Cyclopaedia_, A.D.
MDCCXLI.

Was the presentation of the gloves a sign that the Judge was not
required to sit upon the Bench--their colour significant that there
would be no occasion for capital punishment? Embroidered gloves
were introduced about the year 1580 into England.

Or were gloves proscribed as the remembrances of the gauntlet cast down
as a challenge? "This is the form of a trial by battle; a trial which
the tenant or defendant in a writ of right has it in his election at
this day to demand, and which was the only decision of such writ of
right after the Conquest, till Henry II, by consent of Parliament,
introduced the _Grand Assise_, a peculiar species of trial by
jury."--Blackstone, _Commentaries_, vol. iii. p. 340. Perhaps after all
it was only an allusion to the white hand of Justice, as seems probably
from the expression _Maiden_-Assize.

Yours, &c. M.W.

Nov. 17. 1849.

P.S. Perhaps the "Lady-bird" in Suffolk derives its episcopal title,
alluded to by LEGOUR, from appearing in June, in which month falls the
Festival of St. Barnabas.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVERSARIA.


_Don Quixote._

Sir,--Have the following contradictions in Cervantes' account of
Sancho's ass "Dapple" ever been noticed or accounted for?

In _Don Quixote_, Part. I. chap. 23, we find Dapple's abduction at
night by Gines de Passamonte; only a few lines afterwards, lo! Sancho is
seated on her back, sideways, like a woman, eating his breakfast. In
spite of which, chap. 25. proves that she is still missing. Sancho
tacitly admits the fact, by invoking "blessings on the head of the man
who had saved him the trouble of unharnessing her." Chap. 30. contains
her rescue from Passamonte.

MELANION.


_Doctor Dove, of Doncaster_.

The names of "_Doctor Dove, of Doncaster_," and his steed "_Nobbs_,"
must be familiar to all the admirers, in another word, to all the
readers, of Southey's _Doctor_.

Many years ago there was published at Canterbury a periodical work
called _The Kentish Register_. In the No. for September, 1793, there is
a ludicrous letter, signed "Agricola," addressed to Sir John Sinclair,
then President of the Royal Agricultural Society; and in that letter
there is frequent mention made of "Doctor _Dobbs, of Doncaster_, and
_his horse Nobbs_." This coincidence appears to be too remarkable to
have been merely accidental; and it seems probably that, in the course
of his multifarious reading, Southey had met with the work in question,
had been struck with the comical absurdity of these names, and had
unconsciously retained them in his memory.

P.C.S.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


INSCRIPTION ON ANCIENT CHURCH PLATE.

Mr. Editor,--Herewith I have the pleasure of sending you a tracing of
the legend round a representation of St. Christopher, in a latten dish
belonging to a friend of mine, and apparently very similar to the
alms-basins described by CLERICUS in No. 3.

The upper line--"In Frid gichwart der," written from right to left, is
no doubt to be read thus: _Derin Frid gichwart_. The lower line contains
the same words transposed, with the variation of "gehwart" for
"gichwart." The words "gehwart" and "gichwart" being no doubt blunders
of an illiterate artist.

In Modern German the lines would be:--

    Darin Frieden gewarte--_Therein peace await, or look for_. Gewarte
    darin Frieden--_Await, or look for, therein peace_.

In allusion, perhaps, to the eucharist of alms, to hold one or the other
of which the dish seems to have been intended.

.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTES OF BOOKS.


_MS. of English Gesta Romanorum_.

Your work, which has so promising a commencement, may be regarded as, in
one department, a depository of anecdotes of books. Under this head I
should be disposed to place Notes of former possessors of curious or
important volumes: and, as a contribution of this kind, I transmit a
Note on the former possessors of the MS. of the _Gesta Romanorum_ in
English, which was presented to the British Museum in 1832, by the Rev.
W.D. Conybeare, now Dean of Llandaff, and has been printed at the
expense of a member of Roxburgh Club. It is No. 9066 of the MSS. call
Additional.

Looking at it some years ago, when I had some slight intention of
attacking the various MSS. of the _Gesta_ in the Museum, I observed the
names of Gervase Lee and Edward Lee, written on a fly-leaf, in the way
in which persons usually inscribe their names in books belonging to
them; and it immediately occurred to me that these could be no other
Lees than members of the family of Lee of Southwell, in Nottinghamshire,
who claimed to descent from a kinsman of Edward Lee, who was Archbishop
of York in the reign of Henry VIII, and who is so unmercifully handled
by Erasmus. The name of Gervase was much used by this family of Lee, and
as there was in it an Edward Lee who had curious books in the time of
Charles II, about whose reign the names appears to have been written,
there can, I think, be little reasonable doubt that this most curious
MS. formed a part of his library, and of his grandfather or father,
Gervase Lee, before him.

Edward Lee, who seems to have been the last of the name who lived in the
neighbourhood of Southwell, died on the 23rd of April, 1712, aged 76.

That he possessed rare books I collect from this: that the author of
_Grammatica Reformata_, 12mo. 1683, namely John Twells, Master of the
Free School at Newark, says, in his preface, that he owed the
opportunity of perusing _Matthew of Westminster_ "to the kindness of
that learned patron of learning, Edward Lee, of Norwell, Esquire."

And now, having given you a Note, I will add a Query, and ask, Can any
one inform me what became of this library, or who were the
representatives and heirs of Edward Lee, through whom this MS. may have
passed to Mr. Conybeare, or give me any further particulars respecting
this Edward Lee?

A person who asks a question in such a publication as yours ought to
endeavour to answer one. I add therefore that Mr. Thorpe--no mean
authority on such a point--in his _Catalogue_ for 1834, No. 1234, says
the E.F. in the title-page of _The Life of King Edward II_, represents
"E. Falkland:" but he does not tell us who E. Falkland was, and it is
questionable whether there was any person so named living at the time
when the book in question was written. There was no Edward Lord Falkland
before the reign of William III. Also, in answer to Dr. Maitland's Query
respecting the fate of Bindley's copy of _Borde's Dyetary of Health_,
1567, in a priced copy of the Catalogue now before me, the name of Rodd
stands as the purchaser for eleven shillings.

JOSEPH HUNTER.

Nov. 26. 1849

       *       *       *       *       *



QUERIES ANSWERED, NO. 3.


_A Flemish Account, &c._

The readiness with which we adopt a _current saying_, though unaware of
its source and therefore somewhat uncertain as to the proper mode of
applying it, is curiously exemplified by the outstanding query on the
origin and primary signification of the phrase _A Flemish account_.

I have consulted, in search of it, dictionaries of various dates, the
glossaries of our dramatic annotators, and the best collections of
proverbs and proverbial sayings--but without success.

The _saying_ casts no reproach on the Flemings. It always means, I
believe that the sum to be received turns out less than had been
expected. It is a commercial joke, and admits of explanation by
reference to the early commercial transactions between the English and
the Flemings.

I rely on the authority of _The merchants mappe of commerce_, by Lewes
Roberts, London, 1638, folio, chap. 179:--

    In Antwerp, which _gave rule in trade_ to most other cities, the
    accounts were kept in _livres, sols, and deniers_; which they termed
    pounds, shillings, and pence _of grosses_. Now the _livre_ was equal
    only to twelve shillings sterling, so that while the Antwerp
    merchant stated a balance of 1l. 13s. 4d., the London merchant would
    receive only 1l.--which he might fairly call _A Flemish account!_

The same instructive author furnishes me with a passage in illustration
of a recent question on the _three golden balls_, which seem to require
additional research. It occurs in chap. 181:--

    "This citie [Bruges] hath an eminent market in place with a publicke
    house for the meeting of all _marchants_, at noone and evening:
    which house was called the _Burse_, of the houses of the _extinct
    families Bursa_, bearing _three purses for their armes_, ingraven
    upon their houses, from whence these meeting places to this day are
    called _Burses_ in many countries, which in _London_ wee know by the
    name of the _Royall Exchange_ and of _Britaines Burse_."

BOLTON CORNEY.

I think it probably that the expression "Flemish Account" may have been
derived from the fact that the Flemish ell measures only three quarters
of our yard, while the English ell measures five quarters, and that
thence the epithet Flemish was adopted as denoting something
_deficient_.

Q.Q.

When commerce was young, the Flemings were the great merchants of
Western Europe; but these worthies were notorious, when furnishing their
accounts current, for always having the balance at the right side (for
themselves), and hence arose the term. I am not at this moment able to
say where this information is to be had, but have met it somewhere.

JUNIOR.

I wonder that some better scholar than myself should not have explained
the phrase "Flemish account;" but though I cannot quote authority for
the precise expression, I may show whence it is derived. To _flem_, in
old Scotch (and in old English too, I believe), is to "run away;" in
modern slang, to "make oneself scarce," "to levant." _Flemen_ is an
outcast, an outlaw. It is easy to understand the application of the word
to accounts. Your querist should consult some of the old dictionaries.

SCOTUS.

There is an old story that a Count of Flanders once gave an
entertainment to some Flemish merchants, but that the seats on which
they sat were without cushions. These "princes of the earth" thereupon
folded up their costly velvet cloaks, and used them accordingly. When
reminded, on their departure, of having left their cloaks behind, they
replied, that when asked to a feast they were not in the habit of
carrying away with them the chair cushions. Could this have originated
the expression "Flemish account?" In this case the proud merchants gave
such an account of a valuable article in their possession, as made it
out to be quite worthless to the owner.

MUSAFIR.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANSWERS TO MINOR QUERIES.


_Richard Greene, Apothecary._

Mr. Richard Green, the subject of H.T.E.'s Query (No. 3. p. 43.), was
an apothecary at Lichfield, and related to Dr. Johnson. He had a
considerable collection of antiquities, &c., called "Green's Museum,"
which was sold, after his death, for a thousand pounds. See Boswell's
_Johnson_, Croker's edition, vol. v. p. 194.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Form of Petition._

Sir,--In reply to B. in your third number, who requests information as
to the meaning of the "&c." at the foot of a petition, I fear I must
say, that at the present day, it means nothing at all. In former times
it had a meaning. I send you a few instances from the _Chancery Records_
of the year 1611. These petitions to Sir E. Phillips or Phelips, M.R.,
end thus:--

    "And he and his wife and six children shall dailie praie for your
    Worship's health and happines!

    "And shee shall accordinge to her bounden duetie pray for your good
    Worship in health and happinesse longe to continewe!

    "And both your said supliants and their children shal be bound
    dailie to praie for your Worship's health and happines with increase
    of honour!"

These instances are taken at random from amongst many others. The
_formula_, slightly varied, is the same in all. The modern form was,
however, even at that early date, creeping in, for I see a petition to
L.C. Ellesmere, of the same year, has

    "And he shall dailie, praie, &c."

This will probably suffice to answer B.'s Query.

CECIL MONRO.

Registrar's Office, Court of Chancery,
Nov. 20. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Greene of Greensnorton._

Sir Thomas Greene, of Greensnorton, Co. Northampton, Knt. died 30 Nov.
1506--22 Hen. VII. By Jane, daughter of Sir John Fogge, Knt., he left
issue two daughters and coheirs:

_Ann, the eldest_, aet. 17, at her father's death, was wife of Nicholas
Vaux, Lord Vaux, of Harrowden, who died in 1556, now represented by
George Mostyn, Baron Vaux, and Robert Henry, Earl of Pembroke, and
Edward Bourchier Hartopp, Esq.

_Matilda, the youngest_, was aged 14 at her father's death, and married
Sir Thomas Parr, by whom she had William Marquess of Northampton (who
died s.p. 1571); Anne, wife of William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke (now
represented by Robert Henry, Earl of Pembroke); and Catherine, Queen
Consort of King Henry VIII. The assumption of arms, by Richard Green,
the Apothecary, in 1770, will afford no ground for presuming his descent
from the Greensnorton family.

G.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cottle's Life of Coleridge, when reviewed in the Times._

The _Times_ review of Joseph Cottle's _Reminiscences of Coleridge and
Southey_, appeared Nov. 3. 1847; and on the following day, Mr. Thomas
Holcroft complained by letter of a misrepresentation of his father by
Mr. Cottle.

*

       *       *       *       *       *

_Times, Herald, Chronicle, &c., when first established._

We are enabled, by the courtesy of several correspondents, to furnish
some reply to the Query of D. (No. 1 p. 7)

_The Times_ first appeared under that title on the 1st January, 1788,
but bore the Number 941, it being a continuation, under a new name, of
the _Universal Register_, of which 940 numbers had been published.--_The
Morning Chronicle_ must have commenced in 1769, as a correspondent,
F.B., writes to tell us that he possesses No. 242. dated Monday, 12th
March, 1770. See further Nichol's _Literary Anecdotes_, i. 303; and for
_Morning Advertiser_, established in 1794, the same volume, p.290.
Another correspondent writes:--During 1849 the _Morning Chronicle_ has
completed its 81st year; next in seniority stands the _Morning Post_, at
77; and the _Morning Herald_, at 65. _The Times_ in the numbering of its
days, is in its 64th year, but has not really reached its grand
climacteric, for its three years of infancy passed under the name of
_The Universal Register_, it having only received its present
appellation in the opening of 1788. _The Morning Advertiser_ is wearing
away its 54th year.

_The Public Ledger_, commenced in 1759, or 1760, is however, the oldest
Daily Paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dorne the Bookseller--Henno Rusticus, etc._

Sir,--In answer to W. in page 12. of No. 1, I beg to suggest that
Dormer, written Domr in the MS.--a common abbreviation--may be the name
of the Oxford bookseller, and _Henno Rusticus_ may be _Homo rusticus_,
"the country gentleman." The hand-writing of this MS. is so small and
illegible in some places, that it requires an Oedipus to decipher it;
and the public will have much reason to thank those lynx-eyed
antiquaries who have taken great pains to render it intelligible. "The
_Sige_ of the End," is of course properly explained to be "the Signe of
the End."

J.I.

       *       *       *       *       *


SANUTO'S DOGES OF VENICE.


Sir,--The high value of your Journal as a repertory of interesting
literary information, which without it might be lost to the world, is
becoming daily more apparent from the number and character of your
correspondents. You have my best wishes for its success.

The communication of Sir FREDERICK MADDEN respecting the singular and
obvious error in Marin Sanuto's _Lives of the Doges of Venice_, has
renewed in me a desire for information which I have hitherto been unable
to obtain; and I will, therefore, with your permission, put it here as a
_Query_.

Who was the _foreigner_ who gave to the world the very interesting book
respecting _Sanuto_ under the following title?--_Ragguagli sulla Vita e
sulle Opere di Marin Sanuto, &c. Intitolati dall' amicizia di_ _uno
Straniere al nobile Jacopo Vicenzo Foscarini.--Opera divise in tre
perti_, Venezia, 1837-8. in 8vo.

The able writer has noticed that the very mutilated and incorrect manner
in which Muratori has printed all that he has given of Sanuto, and
especially _Le Vite de' Dogi_, of which the original copy still remains
inedited in the Estensian Library at Modena. There can be no doubt that
some ignorant or indolent transcriber made the mistake of _iudeo_ for
_richo_, so satisfactorily and happily elucidated by SIR FREDERICK
MADDEN. How much it is to be regretted that the _Diary_ of Sanuto, so
remarkable for it simplicity and ingenuous truthful air, should still
remain inedited. It relates to an epoch among the most interesting of
Modern History, and the extracts given in the _Ragguagli_ only make us
wish for more.

From this Diary it appears that the Valori were among the most
distinguished citizens of a state which could boast that its merchants
were princes. The palace they inhabited is no known by the name of the
Altoviti, its more recent owners, and many of the tombs of the Valori
are to be found in the church of St. Proculus. Macchiavelli mentions
Bartolomeo Valori among the _Cittadini d' autorita_, and, according to
Nardi, he was Gonfaloniere in the first two months of the years 1402,
1408, and 1420. He was also one of the Platonic Academy that Ficino
assembled around him. In this Diary of Sanuto will be found many minute
and interesting details respecting Savonarola, and the relation of the
tragical death of Francisco Valor, who had also been several times
Gontaloniere, and whom Savonarola, in his confession, said it was his
intention to have made perpetual Dictator.

I would have given a specimen of this very interesting diary, but that I
scrupled to occupy space which your correspondents enable you to fill so
effectively, for I fully subscribe to the dictum of the
_Ragguagliatore_, "Il Sanuto si presenta come la Scott degli Storiei,
compincendosi come Sir Walter delle giostre, delle feste, e delle
narrazioni piacevole e di dolce pieta.

S.W.S.

Mickleham, Nov. 23, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


MSS. OF ROGER TWYSDEN.


Sir,--An answer to the following "Query" would be most interesting to
myself, and, perhaps, not altogether without its value to the literary
world.

Among Sir Roger Twysden's MSS. I have a letter from him to his son at
Oxford, requesting his intercession with the University for the loan of
the MS. of Walter Mapes "_de nugis curialium_," in order that he might
prepare it for publication. He instances the liberality of the
Archbishop of Canterbury in having lent him from Lambeth the _Epistles
of Amselm and Becket_; and adds, that, by being permitted to retain
these MSS. in his hands for some years, he had now prepared them for the
press.

I cannot learn that they were ever printed, and among the voluminous MS.
remains of Sir Roger now in my hands, I cannot find the smallest trace
of them. Can any one your readers inform me what became of this
collection, which, by Sir Roger's statement, was finished and completely
ready for the press?

To this "Query" I may as well add a "Note," which may be interesting to
some of your readers.

In Sir Roger's MS. Journal of his persecutions by the Parliament, he
states:

    "It is sayd King Charles subscribed the byll for taking away the
    votes of Bishops, in y't very house where Christian religion was
    first preached,--viz. St. Augustines by Canterbury."

LAMBERT B. LARKING.

Ryarsh Vicarage, Nov. 17.

       *       *       *       *       *


MINOR QUERIES.



_Honnore Pelle_.

Who was "Honnore Pell, 1684"? My reason for asking this is, I have a
marble bust of Charles II. of colossal size, most splendidly sculptured,
with the long curling hair and full court dress of the period, and the
execution and workmanship of which would do honour to any sculptor of
the past or present time. On the stump of the arm are the name and date
which I have given above, and I have in vain looked into biographical
works.

W.L.

_Bust of Sir Walter Raleigh_.

Is there an authentic bust of Sir Walter Raleigh in existence? and if
so, where is it to be found?

J.B.

_Motto of University of Cambridge_.

From what author, "chapter and verse," comes the motto of the University
of Cambridge, HINC LUCEM ET POCULA SAGRA? It is used as a quotation in
Leighton on St. Peter's Epistle, but in the last edition the learned
editor does not give a reference.

J.J.S.

_Family of Giles of Worcestershire_.

Can you tell me any thing of a family named "_Giles_," whose crest was a
horse's head? They were connected with Worcestershire.

*

_Passage from an Old Play._

Can any of your many readers oblige me by informing me where the
following very striking passage can be found? I have seen the lines
quoted as from an "Old Play;" but a tolerable extensive knowledge of old
plays, and a diligent search, have not hitherto enabled me to find
them:--

  "Call you the city gay, its revels joyous?
  They may be so to you, for you are young,

  Belike and happy. She was young in years,
  But often in mid-spring will blighting winds
  Do autumn's work; and there is grief at heart
  Can do the work of years, can pale the cheek,
  And cloud the brow, and sober down the spirit.
  This gewgaw scene hath fewer charms for her
  Than for the crone, that numbering sixty winters,
  Pronounceth it all folly.--Marvel not
  'Tis left thus willingly."

C.A.H.

Athenaeum Club, Nov. 17, 1849.


_Dalton's Doubting's Downfall._

About thirty years ago the following appeared in Lackington and Co.'s
book catalogue: "Dalton (Edward) Doubting's Downfall, 1_s._ 6_d._"
Application was made, when other books were ordered, three several
times; in each case the answer was "_sold_." Since that date inquiries
have been instituted from time to time, in the usual quarters, but
always unsuccessfully. No clue can be given as to the size or date, but
from the quaintness of the title it is presumed to be about the period
of the Commonwealth.

Should any of your readers procure this work, the liberal price of
20_s._ if a book, or 10_s._ if a pamphlet, will be paid for it through
your medium, by

G.


_Authors of Old Plays._

Query the authors of the following plays?--

1. The Tragedy of Nero newly written. London, printed by Aug. Mathewes
for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his shoppe in Saint Dunstane's
Churchyard in Fleete Street. 1633.

2. Sicily and Naples, or the Fatall Vnion, a Tragaedy. By S H. A B e C.
Ex. Oxford: printed by William Turner, 1640.

3. Emilia. London: printed for the author, 1672.

4. Sir Gyles Goose-Cappe Knight, a comedy lately acted with great
applause at the private House in Salisbury Court. London: printed for
Hugh Perry, and are to be sold by Roger Ball, at the Golden Anchor in
the Strand, neere Temple Barre, 1636.

I have given the title-pages in full, omitting a Latin motto which
adorns the title-page of the M.A. of Exeter College.

Q.D.


_Periwinkle--a Mocking Emblem._

Can any of your readers, learned in the language of flowers, inform me
why, when Sir W. Fraser (the last of Wallace's adherents) was led in
triumph through the streets of London, with his legs tied under his
horse's belly--"a garland of Periwinkle was in mockery placed upon his
head?" See Tytler's _History of Scotland_, cap. 3.

MELANION.


_Wives of Ecclesiastics._

Sir,--In looking over some ancient charters a few days ago, I met with
one dated 22 Edw. III, by which "Willielmus de Bolton clericus et
Goditha uxor ejus," release a claim to certain lands. If William de
Bolton was an ecclesiastic, as I suppose, how is it that his wife is
openly mentioned?

I shall be must obliged to any of your readers for an explanation.

A SUBSCRIBER.


_Whelps._

Sir,--In Howell's _Letters_, Sect. 5. p. 9. the following
words occur:--

    "At the return of this fleet two of the _Whelps_ were cast away, and
    three ships more."

I should feel obliged to any of your correspondents who may be able to
favour me with an explanation of the word _Whelps_ in this passage.

J.J.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.


J.J.S. informs us, with reference to a Note in No. 2. (p. 21.), "that an
account of Anglesey Abbey, in Cambridgeshire, is ready, and will be
published ere long."

Our attention has been directed to the Prospectus of a series of
"Cottage Prints from Sacred Subjects, intended chiefly for distribution
among the poor," which will be so produced as to form a set of
illustrations to the Bible; "although it is chiefly contemplated that
the Prints, protected by a small frame, should find their way into the
homes of the poor, and decorate their walls." The Editors, the Rev. H.
J. Rose and Rev. J.W. Burgon, well observe: "We shall in vain preach
reverence to the ear on Sundays, if the eyes may be familiarised with
what is irreverent for the six days following. On the other hand, we
shall surely be supplying ourselves with a powerful aid, if we may
direct the eye to forms of purity and beauty; and accustom our village
children, (who are now our hope,) from infancy, to look daily on what is
holy, and pure, and good."--Subscribers of one guinea in advance are
promised, in the course of the year, at least fifty such engravings as
the four which accompany the Prospectus.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson commenced on Thursday a nine days' Sale of
the "Curious, rare, and valuable Library of a well-known Collector,
deceased;" also another Collection, including--

Theology; Spanish, English, and other Chronicles: Specimens of the Early
Typography of English and Foreign Printers; a very complete Series of
the Productions of the Family of Aldus; rare editions of the Classics;
numerous interesting and important Spanish Books; a very extensive
Collection of Works relating to the Discovery, History, Natural
History, Language, Literature, and Government of America and it
Dependencies, Mexico, the East and West Indies, &c. Voyages, Travels,
and Itineraries: Fine Books of Prints; Botanical Works; Natural History
and Philosophy; Works containing Specimens of Early Engraving,
Wood-cuts, and Emblems; a most interesting Collection of English Poetry,
Plays, and Works illustrative of the History and Progress of the English
Language and Literature, including a perfectly unique Collection of the
Works of Daniel De Foe; several hundred rare Tracts, particularly an
extensive Series relating to Charles I. and his Contemporaries, others
of a Local and Personal Character, Biographies, rare Histories of
remarkable Characters, Facetiae, and an unusually large assemblage of
curious and rare Articles in almost every Class of Literature; a few
MSS. &c.


Among the Lots deserving attention in the course of the coming week, are
Nos. 1323 to 1375, a large collection of publications relative to
America; Nos. 1612 to 1620, relating to Canada.

    1574 Barros (Joan, de) Decades da Asia. Decada 1, 2. Lisboa,
    1552-53; Decada 3, _ib_. 1563; Decada 4, Madrid, 1615; Couto,
    Decada 4, 5, 6, Lisboa, 1602-16; Decada 8, 9, 10. _ib_.
    1736--together 8 vols. morocco

    Nearly all the copies of the 6th Decade were destroyed by fire, and
    the few that are to be met with are generally, if not always,
    deficient in some leaves. The title-page to this copy (as in Mr.
    Grenville's) is supplied by the title to the 4th Decade, and a few
    leaves are wanting. For the rarity of this work, see _Bibliotheca
    Grenvilliana_, vol. i. p. 60.

And, lastly, Lot 1701; which contains a matchless series, in 154 vols.,
of the Works of Daniel De Foe, whom Coleridge was inclined to rank
higher than Addison for his humour and as a writer of racy vigorous
English.

The Lot is thus described:--

    "THIS MATCHLESS SERIES of the Works of this distinguished Author was
    formed with unwearied diligence by his Biographer, the late Mr.
    Walter Wilson, during the greater portion of his life.

    "The numbers to 208 refer to the Catalogue of the Works as published
    in his _Life of Defoe_, 3 vols. 1830; those following have been
    discovered by Mr. Wilson since the period of the publication. This
    Collection is rendered still further to complete by the addition of
    upwards of forty pieces by a recent possessor. The extreme
    difficulty of forming such a collection as the present is very
    apparent when we compare its voluminous contents with those very few
    collections which, during the last fifty years, have on the
    dispersion of celebrated libraries occurred for sale."

We have this week received a most important and valuable

    "Catalogue of Bibles and Biblical Literature, containing the best
    works, ancient and modern, on the Criticism, Interpretation, and
    Illustration of Holy Scripture, and including such of the Fathers
    and Ecclesiastical Writers as have treated on these subjects,
    _classified_ with Analytical Table of Contents and Alphabetical
    Indexes of Subjects and Authors, &c. on Sale, by C.J. Stewart, 11.
    King William St., West Strand."

Mr. Stewart explains that in addition to what are "strictly regarded as
Biblical, there will be found in it the works of those Fathers, Mediaeval
and more recent Writers, who treat upon subjects connected with
Scripture, each accompanied with an enumeration of such portions of his
works; and under heads (more especially extensive under commentators)
references are given to these writers, so as to afford a condensed view
of authorities or sources of information." Mr. Stewart states also that
he has other Catalogues in preparation,--we presume in continuation of
the present one, and exhibiting the same system of arrangement,--and if
so, we feel that the series will be of the greatest value to all
theological students.

Collectors of Autographs and Engraved Portraits will thank us for
directing their attention to a

    "Catalogue of Books, Prints, Manuscripts, and Autograph Letters;
    being a part of the Stock of Horatio Rodd, brother and successor to
    the late Thomas Rodd, No. 23. Little Newport Street,"

in which they will find many interesting Autographs and curious
Portraits.

We have also received

"A List of Secondhand Books on Sale by George Honnor, 304. Strand;" and

"A Catalogue of Books. Ancient and Modern, on Sale, by W. Pedder, 12.
Holywell St. Part VI. 1849."

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES



WANTED TO PURCHASE.

THE WOMEN'S PETITION AGAINST COFFEE. 8vo. 1674.
JOB'S LAMENTATION FOR HIS CHILDREN. 1750.
HARROD'S SEVENOAKE, A POEM. 4to. 1753.
BURNEY'S TREATISE ON MUSIC (not his HISTORY).
GRAY'S ELEGY (PROFESSOR YOUNG OF GLASGOW'S CRITICISM OF).
LIFE OF HON. ROBERT PRICE, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
London. 1734.
FLORES BERNARDI.
RHONORUM PROVINCIATUM CIVITATUMQUE NOMINA LATINA (CORONELLI,
POTIUS ALPHONSUS LASOR A VAREA),  Fol. 2 Vols.
  Venet, 1716.  Or the 2nd Vol. only.
BUDDEN'S DISCOURSE FOR PARENTS' HONOUR AND AUTHORITIE.
8vo. 1616.
THE TWO WOLVES IN LAMB'S SKINS, OR OLD ELI'S LAMENTATION
  OVER HIS TWO SONS. 8vo. 1716.
AVERELL'S FOUR NOTABLE HISTORIES, ETC. 4to. 1590.
NATURE, A POEM. Folio. 1736.
BARNEFIELD'S PLOWMAN'S COMPLAINT. 4to. 1580.
GILL'S INSTRUCTIONS FOR CHILDREN, in Verse. 1709.
JERMIN'S FATHER'S INSTITUTION OF HIS CHILD.  1658.
SOUTHEY'S COWPER. Vols. X. XII. XIII. XIV.
CAIRN'S EDITION OF GOLDSMITH'S MISCELLANEOUS WORKS, Edinburgh.
1801. Vol. III.
COOPER'S (C.P.) ACCOUNT OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PUBLIC
  RECORDS. 8vo. 1832.--The First Volume of.
LIVY.--Vol. I. of Crevier's Edition, 6 vols. 4to. Paris, 1739.
OGILBY'S BRITANNIA. Folio, 1675. Vol. II.
SWIFT'S WORKS.
ADAMS' MORAL TALES, London.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF DR. JOHNSON. Published in 1805.


*.* Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_,
to be sent to Mr. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


_The matter is generally understood with regard to the management of
periodical works, that it is hardly necessary for the Editor to say that
_HE CANNOT UNDERTAKE TO RETURN MANUSCRIPTS_; but on one point he wishes
to offer a few words of explanation to his correspondents in general,
and particularly to those who do not enable him to communicate with them
except in print. They will see, on a very little reflection, that it is
plainly his interest to take all he can get, and make the most and the
best of everything; and therefore he begs them to take for granted that
their communications are received, and appreciated, even if the
succeeding Number bears no proof of it. He is convinced that the want of
specific acknowledgement will only be felt by those who have no idea of
the labour and difficulty attendant on the hurried management of such a
work, and of the impossibility of sometimes giving an explanation, when
there really is one which would quite satisfy the writer, for the delay
or non-insertion of his communication. Correspondents in such cases have
no reason, and if they understood an editor's position they would feel
that they have no right, to consider themselves undervalued; but nothing
short of personal experience in editorship would explain to them the
perplexities and evil consequences arising from an opposite course._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.--_J.W.M.----Anglo-Cambrian----
J.A.G.----J.F.M.----J. Britton.----T.W.----J.S.----F.E.M.----A.G.----W.
Williams----W. Figg.----L. ** B.----E.V.---- L.B.L.----H.G. (Milford),
whose suggestion will not be lost sight of.----G.M.----S.A.A.----Trin.
Coll. Dubl.----J.W. Burrows.----S.A.----A.F.---- W.
Robson.----J.S.B.----Wicamicus----C.B.---- D.----H. Andrews.----R.
Snow.----C.W.G. ----Naso.----Scotus.----Rev. F.M.

Answers to Queries respecting Rev. T. Reman, Katherine Pegg, &c. in our
next.

Will _MUSARUM STUDIOSUS_ enable us to communicate with him directly?

_PHILO_ is thanked for his proposed endeavours to enlarge our
circulation. We trust all our friends and correspondents will follow
_PHILO's_ example by bringing _NOTES AND QUERIES_ under the notice of
such of their friends as take an interest in literary pursuits. For it
is obvious that they will extend the usefulness of our Paper, in
proportion as they increase its circulation.

We have received many complaints of a difficulty in procuring our paper.
Every Bookseller and Newsvender will supply it _if ordered_, and
gentlemen residing in the country may be supplied regularly with the
Stamped Edition, by giving their orders direct to the publisher, _MR.
GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street_, accompanied by a Post Office order for
a quarter (4s. 4d.). All communications should be addressed _To the
Editor of "_NOTES AND QUERIES_," 186. Fleet Street.

A neat Case for holding a Year's Numbers (52) of _NOTES AND QUERIES_ is
preparing, in consequence of the suggestion of several Subscribers, and
will very soon be ready._

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight Days' Sale of highly interesting British Historical Portraits,
forming the second portion of the very important and valuable Stock of
Prints, the property of Messrs. W. and G. Smith, the long-established,
well-known, and eminent print-sellers of Lisle-street, having retired
from business.

MESSRS. S. LEIGH SOTHEBY and Co., auctioneers of literary property and
works illustrative of the fine arts will SELL by AUCTION, at their
House, 3. Wellington Street, Strand, on Monday, December 3. and seven
following days, (Sunday excepted), at 1 precisely each day, the second
portion of the important and valuable STOCK of PRINTS, the property of
Messrs. W. and G. Smith; comprising one of the most numerous and
interesting collections of British historical portaits ever offered for
sale, and containing a vast number of extremely rare prints by the most
eminent English engravers, generally in the finest condition, and a
large number of fine proofs and prints after the works of Sir Joshua
Reynolds. May be viewed four days prior to the sale, and catalogues had.

       *       *       *       *       *

Recently published in 8 vols. 8 vo., price 4_l_. 16_s_. cloth

A NEW EDITION of SHAKSPEARE'S WORKS, (comprising the Plays and Poems,)
the Text formed from an entirely new Collation of the Old Editions; with
the Various Readings, Notes, a Life of the Poet, and a History of the
Early English Stage. By J. PAYNE COLLIER, Esq., F.S.A. Author of "The
History of English Dramatic Poetry and the Stage," &c. &c. The Type of
this edition has been expressly cast for it, and is the largest used for
Shakespeare's Works for these Twenty Years.

    "The most perfect text with the fewest possible notes. Whoever wants
    to know what Shakespeare wrote must refer to Collier's
    edition."--_Monthly Magazine_.

    "Mr. Collier has brought to his task the aid of great research,
    discrimination, and intimate knowledge of the true mode of treating
    his subject."--_Age_.

WHITTAKER and CO., Ave Maria Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

MILLER'S CATALOGUE of BOOKS; ready this day, will be found to contain an

extremely valuable, interesting, and highly curious collection,
comprising works on Freemasonry, History, Biography, Poetry, and the
Drama, Books of Wit and Humour, with choice Pictorial Publications and
Modern Table Books, many in first-rate bindings suitable for the
drawing-room; also a few Bibles and a small portion of Divinity and
Controversial Works, with Collections of Tracts, Trials, and Illustrated
Scraps for fireside amusement, and a few pieces of Irish History,
Antiquities, and Biography; with varieties in Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, German, and Spanish. To be had GRATIS, and can be sent POSTAGE
FREE to any book-buyer on receipt of an address.

JOHN MILLER, 43. Chandos-street, King William-street, Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF WORKS

LORD CAMPBELL'S LIVES OF THE CHIEF JUSTICES OF ENGLAND. 2 vols. 8vo.
30s. (On Dec. 7th)

LORD CAMPBELL'S LIVES OF THE LORD CHANCELLORS OF ENGLAND. 3rd Edition. 7
vols. 8vo. 5l. 2s.

HALLAM'S EUROPE DURING THE MIDDLE AGES. Ninth Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s.
NOTES SUPPLEMENTAL 8vo. 10s. 6d.

HALLAM'S HISTORY of ENGLAND FROM THE ACCESSION OF HENRY VII. TO THE
DEATH OF GEORGE II. Fifth Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s.

HALLAM'S LITERARY HISTORY of EUROPE DURING THE 15th, 16th, and 17th
CENTURIES. Third Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. 36s.

TICKNER'S HISTORY OF SPANISH LITERATURE. With Criticisms and
Biographical Notices. 3 vols. 8vo. (Next Week.)

MARRYAT'S HISTORY of POTTERY and PORCELAIN, from the Earliest Period in
various Countries. With coloured Plates and 130 Woodcuts, 8vo. (Nearly
ready.)

THE ROMANESQUE AND POINTED STYLES OF ARCHITECTURE IN FRANCE; with
Notices of some of the principal Buildings on which it is founded. 8vo.
(In Dec.)

DYER'S LIFE OF JOHN CALVIN; from authentic Sources, and particularly his
Correspondence. With a Portrait. 8vo. (On Dec. 7)

IRVING'S LIFE OF COLUMBUS, with HIS VOYAGES and those of HIS COMPANIONS.
A new edition, thoroughly revised by the Author. With Maps. 3 vols. 8vo.
(Next Week.)

CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK FOR LONDON; Past and Present. A new and revised
edition. 1 vol. post 8vo. (In Jan.)

    "We can conceive no companion more welcome to an enlightened
    foreigner visiting the metropolis than Mr. Cunningham with his
    laborious research, his scrupulous exactness, his alphabetical
    arrangement, and his authorities from every imaginable source. As a
    piece of severe compact and finished structure, the 'Handbook' is
    not to be surpassed."--_The Times_.

    "In the production of the 'Handbook for London' must be recognised
    the fulfilment of a work useful in purpose, and national in
    character."--_Morning Chronicle_.

       *       *       *       *       *

MILMAN'S LIFE AND WORKS OF HORACE

Now ready, 1 vol. (700 pp.) crown 8vo. 42s.

HORACE: A NEW EDITION OF THE TEXT, Beautifully printed, and illustrated
by upwards of 300 vignettes of Coins, Gems, Bas-reliefs, Statues, Views,
&c., taken chiefly from the Antique. With a LIFE, by Rev. H.H. MILMAN,
Dean of St. Paul's.

    "Not a page can be opened where the eye does not light upon some
    antique gem. Mythology, history, art, manners, topography, have all
    their fitting representatives. It is the highest praise to say, that
    the designs throughout add to the pleasure with which Horace is
    read. Many of them carry us back to the very portraitures from which
    the old poets drew their inspirations."--_Classical Museum_.

For the convenience of Purchasers, the Work is arranged so as to be
bound in Two Volumes, for which proper Titles are given.

JOHN MURRAY, Albermarle Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CATALOGUE OF ENGLISH AND FOREIGN THEOLOGY including some of the rarest
works of our early English Divines, nearly a complete Series of the
Fathers of the Church, the various Councils, and most important
Ecclesiastical Historians, Liturgical Writers, &c. The whole in very
fine condition on sale at the prices affixed, for ready money only. By
JOHN LESLIE, 58. Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London.

The above will be forwarded to any part of the kingdom, upon receipt of
six Postage Stamps.

       *       *       *       *       *

BIBLICAL LITERATURE

Just published, and may be had, Postage free, on a Remittance of 24
Postage Stamps.

A CLASSIFIED CATALOGUE of Editions and Versions of Holy Scripture: and
of critical, explanatory, and illustrative Works: including such
patristic and ecclesiastical Writers as have treated on Scriptural
topics, the latter arranged so as to exhibit a chronological Series of
Biblical Interpretation down to the Reformation; with references under
each head to authorities or sources of information.

On sale by C.J. STEWART, 11. King William Street, West Strand, London.

    "There is no branch of literature in which classed catalogues are of
    so much importance as in biblical, and we therefore feel bound to
    notice a very excellent volume lately issued by Mr. Stewart under
    the title of 'A Catalogue of Bibles and Biblical Literature.' It is
    excellently well arranged, and will afford important facilities to
    those in search of books in particular departments... The
    preparation of such catalogues is a work of expense and labour, but
    must be well repaid (?) by the facilities afforded to
    purchasers."--_Kitte's Journal of Sacred Literature_.

    "We have much pleasure in recommending to our readers' attention
    this valuable and well arranged catalogue. Mr. Stewart's collection
    of works, in all the branches of a theological library, ranks high,
    both for number and selectness, among the very best in the
    country."--_Christian Observer_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, in the Parish
of St. Bride, in the City of London; and published by GEORGE BELL, of
No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St. Dunstan in the West, in the
City of London, Publisher, at No. 186 Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday,
December 1, 1849.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.12.01, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.12.01 ***

***** This file should be named 11636.txt or 11636.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/6/3/11636/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library
of Early Journals.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


