The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries 1850.03.23, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries 1850.03.23

Author: Various

Release Date: April 8, 2004 [EBook #11958]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES 1850.03.23 ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, William Flis, and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from images provided by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS,
ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.


"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.


No. 21.] Saturday, March 23. 1850.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4d.




CONTENTS.

NOTES:-- Page
  Early Statistics--Chart, Kent 329
  "Bis dat qui cito dat" 330
  Parallel Passages 330
  Errors corrected 331
  Direct and Indirect Etymology 331
  Error in Pope's Homer's Odyssey 331
  Proverbial Sayings and their Origins, &c. 332

QUERIES:--
  "The Supper of the Lorde" 332
  What is a Chapel, by Rev. A. Gatty 333
  Who translated the "Turkish Spy," by E.F. Rimbault, L.L.D. 334
  Philalethes Cestriensis--Stephens' Sermons 334
  Minor Queries:--Smelling of the Lamp--Gourders of Rain--The
    Temple--Family of Steward, of Bristol--Paying through the
    Nose--Memoirs of an American Lady--Bernicia--John Bull 335

REPLIES:--
  Letter attributed to Sir R. Walpole, by Lord Braybrooke 336
  Portraits of Ulrich of Hutten 336
  Change of Names 337
  Queries answered, No. 6., by Bolton Corney 337
  Beaver Hats 338
  Replies to Minor Queries:--Anecdote of the Civil Wars--Mousetrap
    Dante--Cromwell's Estates--Genealogy of European Sovereigns--
    Shipster--Kentish Ballad--Bess of Hardwick--Trophee--Emerald--
    Ancient Motto: Barnacles--Tureen--Hudibrastic Couplet--Dr. Hugh
    Todd's MSS. 338

MISCELLANIES:--
  Burnet--Translation from Vinny Bourne--Prince Madoc--Mistake in
    Gibbon--Jew's Harp--Havior, &c. 341

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c. 342
  Notices to Correspondents 343
  Advertisements 343

       *       *       *       *       *


EARLY STATISTICS.--CHART, KENT.

Perhaps some one of your numerous readers will be good enough to
inform me whether any _general statistical returns_, compiled from our
early parish registers, have ever been published. An examination of
the register of Chart next Sutton Valence, in Kent, which disclosed
some very curious facts, has led me to make this inquiry. They seem to
point to the inevitable conclusion that the disturbed state of England
during the period of the Great Rebellion retarded the increase of
population to an extent almost incredible--so as to suggest a doubt
whether some special cause might not have operated in the parish in
question which was not felt elsewhere. But, as I am quite unable to
discover the existence of any such cause, I shall be glad to learn
whether a similar result appears generally in other registers of the
period above referred to.

The register-book of Chart commences with the year 1558, and
is continued regularly from that time. During the remainder of
the sixteenth, and for about the first thirty-five years of the
seventeenth century, the baptisms registered increase steadily in
number: from that period there is a very marked decrease. For the
twenty years commencing with 1600 and ending with 1619, the number
260; for the twenty years 1620 to 1639, the number is 246; and for
the twenty years 1640 to 1659, the number is _only_ 120.

No doubt this diminution must be attributed partly to the spread
of Nonconformity; but I believe that during the Protectorate, the
registration of _births_ was substituted for that of _baptisms_, and
therefore the state of religious feeling which then prevailed bears
less directly on the question. And even after the Restoration the
register exhibits but a small increase in the number of baptisms. For
the various periods of twenty years from that event up to 1760, the
numbers range from 152 to 195. And pursuing the inquiry, I find that
the number of marriages, for any given time, varies consistently with
that of baptisms. If any of your reader can clear up the difficulty, I
shall feel much obliged for any information which may tend to do so.

Are the following extracts from the register above referred to of
sufficient interest to merit your acceptance?

"1648.--Richard, the son of George Juxon, gent., and Sarah, his wife,
who was slayne 1 Junii at Maydestone Fight, was buryed on the third
daye of June, anno predicto."

"Joseph, the son of Thomas Daye, and An, his wife, who was wounded at
Maydestone Fight 1 Junii, was buryed the eleventh daye of June."

It is hardly necessary to mention, that the fight here referred to
took place between the parliamentary forces under Fairfax, and a large
body of Kentish gentlemen, who had risen, with their dependants,
in the hope of rescuing the king from the hands of the army. After
an obstinate engagement, in which the Kentish men fully maintained
{330} their character for gallantry, they were defeated with great
slaughter.

"1653.--The third of March, Mr. John Case of Chart next Sutton Clarke,
being chosen by the parishioners of the said Chart, to be the Register
of the said parish according to the Act touching marriages, _births_,
and buryalls, was this day sworne before me, and I do allow and
approve of him to be Register accordingly. As witness my hand.

Richa. Beale."


"1660.--Marye, the daughter of John Smith, Esq. was baptized on the
thirteenth daye of Januarie, 1660, by John Case, Vicar. The first
that hath been baptized at the font since it was re-erected by the
appoynm't of the said Mr. Smith, being full sixteene yeers paste. One
Thomas Scoone, an elder, having, out of his blinde zeale, defaced and
pulled it downe, w't other ornaments belonging to the churche."

E.R.J.H.

Chancery Lane, 7th March.

       *       *       *       *       *

BIS DAT QUI CITO DAT.

Inquiry has been often made as to the origin of this proverb. Alciatus
is referred to generally as the authority whence it was derived. I
think, however, it may be traced to Publius Syrus, who lived about
forty-four years before Christ. It is equally probable, from the
peculiar species of composition in which the thought, if not the exact
words are found, that the proverb was derived from another and an
earlier source. The object of mimic exhibitions is to impress the mind
by imitation. Human life is burlesqued, personal defect heightened and
ridiculed; character is never represented in degree, but in extremes.
The dialogue of satirical comedy assumes naturally the form of the
apophthegm--it is epigrammatic and compressed that it may be pungent
and striking. Hence, no species of writing is more allied to or more
likely to pass into household words, and to become proverbs among a
people of quick retentive powers, such as the Greeks were, to whom we
are perhaps indebted for this. I send you the extract from Alciatus;
_Emblemata_, No. 162. Antverpiae, 18mo. 1584. Apud Christophorum
Plantinum.

  "Tres Charites Veneri assistunt, dominamque sequuntur:
    Hincque voluptates, atque alimenta parant;
  Laetitiam Euphrosyne, speciosum Aglaia nitorem;
    Suadela est Pithus, blandus et ore lepos.
  Cur nudae? mentis quoniam candore venustas
    Constat, et eximia simplicitate plucet.
  An quia nil referunt ingrati, atque arcula inanis
    Est Charitum? qui dat munera, nudus eget.
  Addita cur nuper pedibus talaria? _Bis dat_
    _Qui cito dat_--Minimi gratia tarda preti est.
  Implicitis ulnis cur vertitur altera? gratus
    Fenerat: huic remanent una abeunte duae.
  Jupiter iis genitor, coeli de semine divas
    Omnibus acceptas edidit Eurynome."

Now here we have the proverb clearly enough.

I subjoin the note upon the lines in which it appears.

"Bis dat qui cito dat," in Mimis Publii. "Beneficium inopi bis dat,
qui dat celeriter." Proverb, Bis dat, &c.

Referring to the Sentences of Publius Syrus, published, with the
additional Fables of Phaedrus, from the Vatican MSS., by Angelo Mai,
I found the line thus given:

  "Inopi beneficium bis dat, qui dat celeriter."

The same idea, I believe, occurs in Ovid. Query whether it is not
a thought naturally presenting itself to the mind, reflected by
memory, confirmed by experience, and which some Mimic author has
made proverbial by his terse, gnomic form of expression.

S.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARALLEL PASSAGES.

I take the liberty of sending you several parallel passages, which may
probably appear to you worthy of insertion in your valuable paper.

1.

  "There is a tide in the affairs of men,
  Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune."

Shakspeare: _Julius Caesar_.

  "There is an hour in each man's life appointed
  To make his happiness, if then he seize it."

Beaumont and Fletcher: _The Custom of the Country_.

  "There is a nick in Fortune's restless wheel
  For each man's good--"

Chapman: _Bussy d'Ambois_.

2.

            "The fann'd snow,
  That's bolted by the northern blast thrice o'er."

Shakspeare: _A Winter's Tale_.

            "Snow in the fall,
  Purely refined by the bleak northern blast."

Davenport: _The City Nightcap_.

3.

            "Like pearl
  Dropt from the opening eyelids of the morn
  Upon the bashful rose."

Middleton: _The Game at Chess_.

  "Together both, ere the high lawns appeared
  Under the opening eyelids of the morn,
  We drive afield."

Milton: _Lysidas_.

4.

  "Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
  That in a spleen enfolds both heaven and earth,
  And ere a man hath power to say--Behold!
  The jaws of darkness do devour it up."

Shakspeare: _Midsummer Night's Dream_.

  "Nicht Blitzen gleich, die schnell vorueber schiessen,
  Und ploetzlich von der Nacht verschlungen sind,
  Mein Glueck wird seyn."

Schiller: _Die Braut von Messina_.

G.

Greenock.

       *       *       *       *       *{331}

ERRORS CORRECTED.

_I._--Sharon Turner's _Hist. of England_ (Lond. 1814. 4to.), i. 332.

    "The Emperor (Henry VI.) determined to extort an immoderate
    ransom; but, to secure it, had him (Richard Coeur de Lion)
    conveyed to a castle _in the Tyrol_, from which escape was
    hopeless."--_Note_ "104. In _Tiruali_. Oxened. MS."

Ibid. p. 333:

    "He (Richard) was removed from the dungeon _in the Tyrol_
    to the emperor's residence at Haguenau."--_Note_ "109. See
    _Richard's Letter to his Mother_. Hoveden, 726."

The fortress, here represented to be in the _Tyrol_, is about 220
miles distant ("as the crow flies") from the nearest point in that
district, and is the Castle of Trifels, which still crowns the highest
of three rocky eminences (Treyfels = _Three Rocks_), which rise from
the mountain range of the Vosges, on the southern side of the town
of Annweiler. In proceeding from Landau to Zweibruecken (Deux-Ponts),
the traveller may see it on his left. The keep is still in good
preservation; and it was on account of the natural strength of its
position that the imperial crown-jewels were formerly preserved in it.

I am unable to refer at present to the MS. of Oxenedes (Cotton, Nero,
D 2), which appears to give the erroneous reading of _Tirualli_
for _Triualli_ or _Trivalli_; but Mr. Turner might have avoided the
mistake by comparing that MS. with the printed text of Hoveden, in
which Richard is represented as dating his letter "de Castello de
Triuellis, in quo detinebamur."

_II._--Wright's _S. Patrick's Purgatory_ (Lond. 1844. 8vo.), p. 135.:

    "On the patent rolls in the Tower of London, under the year
    1358, we have an instance of testimonials given by the
    king (Edward III.) on the same day, to two distinguished
    foreigners, one _a noble Hungarian_, the other a Lombard,
    Nicholas de Beccariis, of their having faithfully performed
    this pilgrimage."

In a note on this passage, Mr. Wright reprints one of the testimonials
from Rymer (_Foedera_, vol. iii. pt. i. p. 174.), in which is the
following passage:

  "Nobilis vir _Malatesta Ungarus de Arminio_ miles."

In the original deed, the text must have been _de Arimino_ (of
Rimini); for the person here referred to was a natural son of
Malatesta de' Malatesti, Lord of Rimini and of Pesaro, and took the
name of _L'Ungaro_ in consequence of his having been knighted by
Louis, King of Hungary, when the latter passed through the Malatesta
territory, when he was going to Naples for the purpose of avenging
his brother Andrew's death. In the Italian account of the family
(Clementini, _Raccolto Istorico della Fondazione di Rimino_. Rimino,
1617-27. 2 vols. 4to.), L'Ungario is said have been a great traveller,
_to have visited England_, and to have died in 1372, at the age of
45. (See also Sansovino, _Origine e Fatti delle Famiglie Illustri
d'Italia_. Venetia, 1670. 4to. p. 356.)

F.C.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

DIRECT AND INDIRECT ETYMOLOGY.

I have just been exceedingly interested in reading a lecture on
the _Origin and Progress of the English Language_, delivered at
the Athenaeum, Durham, before the Teachers' Society of the North
of England, by W. Finley, Graduate of the University of France.

The following passage well expresses a caution that should be always
kept in mind by the literary archaeologist:

    "In the orthography of English words derived from the Latin,
    _one great and leading principle_ must be kept in view. If
    the word is of new adoption, it is certain that its spelling
    will be like that which appears in the original word; or if
    it has come to us through the French, the spelling will be
    conformable to the word in that language; thus, persecution
    from _persequor_, pursue from _poursuivre_. Again, flourish
    from _fleurir_, efforescent, florid, &c., from _floreo_. And
    to establish our orthography on certain grounds, it ought
    to be the business of the lexicographer to determine the
    date of the first appearance of an adopted word, and thus
    satisfactorily determine its spelling." (_Lecture_, p. 20.
    footnote.)

D.V.S.

Home, March 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

ERRORS IN POPE'S HOMER'S ODYSSEY.

In all the editions I have seen of this translation, the following
very palpable errors exist, which I do not remember to have seen
noticed. The first of these errors is contained in book ix. lines
325, 326, 463, and 533,

  "Fools that ye are! (the savage thus replies,
  His inward fury blazing at his _eyes_.)"

  "Sing'd are his _brows_: the scorching _lids_ grow black."

  "Seest thou these _lids_ that now unfold in vain?"

and consists in Mr. Pope having bestowed two organs of sight on the
giant Polypheme.

The second occurs in line 405 of the same book;

  "Brain'd on the rock: his _second_ dire repast;"

and is owing to the inadvertency of the translator, who forgets what
he had previously written in lines 342 to 348.

  "He answer'd with his deed: his bloody hand
  Snatch'd two, unhappy of my martial band;
  And dash'd like dogs against the stony floor;
  The pavement swims with brains and mingled gore.
  Torn limb from limb, he spreads his horrid feast,
  And fierce devours it like a mountain beast."

And in lines 368 and 369;

  "The task thus finish'd of his morning hours,
  Two more he snatches, murders, and devours!"

{332}

by which it distinctly appears that line 405 has a reference to the
_third_ "dire repast" of the Cyclops, instead of the _second_.

Perhaps you will not deem me presumptuous in offering an amendment of
these passages by the following substitutions:--

For lines 325 and 326,

  Fools that ye are! (the savage made reply,
  His inward fury blazing at his eye.)

for line 463,

  Sing'd is his brow; the scorching lid grows black.

for line 405,

  Brain'd on a rock: his third most dire repast.

and for line 533,

  Seest thou this lid that now unfolds in vain?

DAVID STEVENS.

Godalming, Feb. 10. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROVERBIAL SAYINGS AND THEIR ORIGINS--PLAGIARISMS AND PARALLEL
PASSAGES.

In a note to Boswell's _Life of Johnson_ (Lond. 1816. 8vo.), iv. 196.,
the following lines are ascribed to their real authors:--

To _Joh. Baptista Mantuanus_ (Leipz. 1511. 4to), Eclog. i.:--

  "Id commune malum, semel insanivimus omnes."

To _Philippe Gaultier_, who flourished in the last half of the 12th
century (Lugduni, 1558. 4to. fol. xlij. recto):--

  "Incidis in Scillam cupiens vitare Charybdim."

At the conclusion of the same note, the authorship of

  "Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris,"

is said to remain undiscovered; but it appears to be a corrected form
of a line in Albertus ab Eyb's _Margarita Poetica_ (Nuremberg, 1472.
Fol.), where, with all its false quantities, it is ascribed to Ovid:--

  "Solacium est miseris socios habere poenarum."

_Ovidius Epistolarum_.

In the same page (fol. 149. rect.),

  (sic) "Fecundi calices quem non fecere disertum"

is transferred from Horace to Ovid; while, on the reverse of the same
fol., AEsop has the credit of

  "Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro;
  Hoc coeleste bonum praeterit orbis opes."

Of the first line of the couplet, Menage says (_Menagiana_, Amstm.
1713. 12mo.), iii. 132., that it is "de la fable du 3'e Livre de ce
meme Poete a qui nous avons dit qu'appartenoit le vers

  "'Alterius non sit qui suus esse potest;'"

But I cannot find the reference to which he alludes.

In the same fol. (149 rect.) is perhaps the earliest quotation of

  "Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadende.--_Sapiens_,"

which occurs also in _Menagiana_ (Amstm. 1713. 12mo.), i. 209.:--

    "Horace fait mention du Poete Cherile, de qui l'on n'a que ce
    vers Grec--

    "[Greek: Petran koilainei rhanis odatos endelecheiae.]"

    "Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo."

The parallel passages in Ovid are in _Epist. ex Pont._ iv. x. 5.:--

  "Gutta cavat lapidem; consumitur annulus usu,
  Et feritur pressa vomer aduncus humo,"

and in _Art. Amat._ l. 475, 476.:--

  "Quid magis est saxo durum? quid mollius unda?
  Dura tamen molli saxa cavantur aqua."

F.C.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

A TREATISE ON THE LORD'S SUPPER, BY ROBERT CROWLEY.

I have before me a somewhat scarce volume of Theological Tracts (small
8vo.), ranging between the years 1533 and 1614. With the exception of
one relating to the Sacraments, by John Prime (Lond. 1582), the most
curious treatise is that entitled "The Supper of the Lorde, after
the true meanyng of the sixte of John, &c.... wherunto is added,
an Epystle to the reader, And incidentally in the exposition of the
Supper is confuted the letter of master More against John Fryth." To
a motto taken from 1 Cor. xi. is subjoined the following date, "Anno
M.CCCCC.XXXIII., v. daye of Apryll," together with a printer's device
(two hands pointing towards each other). This Tract was promptly
answered by Sir Thomas More (A.D. 1533, "after he had geuen ouer
the offyce of Lorde Chauncellour of Englande"), and is described by
him as "the poysoned booke whych a _nameles_ heretike hath named the
Supper of the Lorde" (_Works_, pp. 1035, seqq., ed. Rastell). From
the following passage of the reply, we learn that this offensive
publication, like so many others of the same class, has been printed
abroad:--

    "And in thys wyse is ther sent ouer to be prynted the booke
    that Frythe made last against the blessed sacrament answering
    to my letter, wherewyth I confuted the pestilent treatice that
    he hadde made agaynst it before. And the brethen looked for it
    nowe at thys Bartlemewe tide last passed, and yet looke euery
    day, except it be come all redy, and secretly runne among
    them. But in the meane whyle, _ther is come ouer a nother
    booke againste the blessed sacrament_, a booke of that sorte,
    that Frythe's booke the brethren maye nowe forbeare. For more
    blasphemous and more bedelem rype then thys booke is were that
    booke harde to be, whyche is yet madde enough, as men say that
    haue seen it" (p. 1036. G.).

More was evidently at a loss to discover the {333} author of this
work; for, after conjecturing that it might have come from William
Tyndal, or George Jaye (_alias_ Joy), or "som yong unlearned fole,"
he determines "for lacke of hys other name to cal the writer mayster
Masker," a sobriquet which is preserved throughout his confutation.
At the same time, it is clear, from the language of the treatise,
that its author, though anonymous, believed himself well known to
his opponent:

    "I would have hereto put mi name, good reader, but I know wel
    that thou regardest not who writteth, but what is writen; thou
    estemest the worde of the verite, and not of the authour. And
    as for M. More, whom the verite most offendeth, and doth but
    mocke it out when he can not sole it, _he knoweth my name wel
    inough_" (sub fin).

But here rises a grave difficulty, which I have taken the liberty of
propounding to the readers of "Notes and Queries." Notwithstanding the
above statements, both of the writer and of Sir Thomas More, as to the
_anonymous_ character of the treatise we are considering, the "Epistle
to the Reader" is in my copy subscribed "Robert Crowley," naturally
inducing the belief that the whole emanated from him.

Perhaps this difficulty may be resolved on the supposition that, while
the body of the Tract was first published without the "Epistle to
the Reader," and More's reply directed against it under this form, it
might soon afterwards have reached a second edition, to which the name
of the author was appended. It is certain that More's copy consisted
of 32 leaves only (p. 1039, G.), which corresponds with that now
before me, excluding the "Epistle to the Reader." Still, it is
difficult to conceive that the paragraph in which the author speaks
of himself as anonymous should have remained uncancelled in a
second edition after he had drawn off what More calls "his visour
of dissimulacion." There is, indeed, another supposition which would
account for the discrepancy in question, viz. that the epistle and a
fresh title-page were prefixed to some copies of the original edition;
but the pagination of the Tract seems to preclude this conjecture,
for B.i. stands upon the third leaf from what must have been the
commencement if we subtract the "Epistle to the Reader."

Wood does not appear to have perceived either this difficulty, or
a second which this treatise is calculated to excite. He places the
_Supper of the Lorde_ at the head of the numerous productions of
_Robert Crowley_, as if its authorship was perfectly ascertained. But
Crowley must have been a precocious polemic if he wrote a theological
treatise, like that answered by More, at least a year previously to
his entering the university. The date of his admission at Oxford was
1534; he was elected Fellow of Magdalene in 1542; he printed the
first edition of _Piers Plowman_ in 1550; and was still Parson of St.
Giles's, near Cripplegate, in 1588, i.e. fifty-five years after the
publication of the Tract we are considering. (See _Heylin's Hist. of
the Reformation_, ii. 186., E.H.S. ed.) Were there _two_ writers named
_Robert Crowley?_ or was _the_ Crowley a pupil or protege of some
early reformer, who caused his name to be affixed to a treatise for
which he is not wholly responsible? I leave these queries for the
elucidation of your bibliographical contributors.

If I have not already exceeded the limits allowable for such
communications, I would also ask your readers to explain the allusion
in the following passage from Crowley's tract:

    "And know right well, that the more they steare thys
    sacramente the broder shal theyr lyes be spreade, the more
    shall theyr falsehoode appeare, and the more gloriously
    shall the truthe triumph: as it is to se thys daye by longe
    contencion in thys same and other like articles, which the
    papists have so long abused, and howe more his lyes utter the
    truthe every day more and more. For had he not come begynge
    for the clergy from purgatory, wyth his 'supplicacion of
    soules,' and Rastal and Rochester had they not so wyselye
    played theyr partes, purgatory paradventure had served them
    yet another yere; neyther had it so sone haue bene quenched,
    nor the poor soule and proctoure there ben _wyth his bloudye
    byshoppe christen catte so farre coniured into his owne Utopia
    with a sachel about his necke to gather for the proud prystes
    in Synagoga papistica_."

The Rastell here mentioned was doubtless he whom More (_Works_, p.
355.) calls his "brother" (i.e. his sister's husband), joining him
with Rochester (i.e. Bp. Fisher), as in this passage, on account of
his great zeal in checking the progress of the earlier Reformation;
but what is the allusion in the phrase "with his bloudye bishoppe
christen catte," &c., I am unable to divine. Neither in the
_Supplicacion of Soules_, nor in the reply to the "nameles heretike,"
have I discovered the slightest clue to its meaning.

C.H.

St. Catherine's Hall, Cambridge.

    [It would seem from a Query from the Rev. Henry Walter, in
    No. 7. p. 109., on the subject of the name "Christen Cat,"
    where the forgoing passage is quoted from Day's edition of
    _Tyndale's Works_, that this tract was by Tyndale, and not
    by Crowley.]

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT IS A CHAPEL?

What is the most approved derivation of the word Chapel?--_Capella_,
from the goat-skin covering of what was at first a movable tabernacle?
_capa_, a cape worn by _capellanus_, the chaplain? _capsa_, a chest
for sacred relics? _kaba Eli_ (Heb.), the house of God? or what other
and better etymon?

Is it not invariably the purpose of a Chapel to supply the absence or
incommodiousness of the parish church?

At what period of ecclesiastical history was the {334} word Chapel
first introduced? If there be any truth in the legend that St.
Martin's hat was carried before the kings of France in their
expeditions, and that the pavilion in which it was lodged originated
the term, it is probably a very old word, as the Saint is stated to
have died A.D. 397. Yet the word in not acknowledged by Bingham.

Is Chapel a _legal_ description of the houses of religious meeting,
which are used by those who dissent from the Church of England?

Was the adoption of the word Chapel by dissenters, or their submission
to it, indicative of an idea of assistance, rather than of rivalry or
opposition, to the Church?

Any answer to these inquiries, which are proposed only for the sake
of information, by one whose means of reference and investigation are
limited, will be very acceptable.

Alfred Gatty.

Ecclesfield, March 5. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHO TRANSLATED THE "TURKISH SPY?"

Is it known who really translated that clever work, _Letters writ by a
Turkish Spy_? The work was originally written in Italian, by John Paul
Marana, a Genoese; but the English translation has been attributed to
several individuals.

Among Dr. Charlett's correspondence, preserved in the Bodleian
Library, is a letter inquiring after a Mr. Bradshaw. The writer says,
"he was servitor or amanuensis to Dr. Allesbree, and proved very
considerable afterwards, being the author of all the volumes of the
'Turkish Spy' but one; and that was the first, which, you remember,
was printed a considerable time before the rest, and not much
taken notice of till the second volume came out. The first volume
was originally wrote in Italian, translated into French, and made
English; and all the rest after carried on by this Bradshaw, as I am
undoubtedly informed: so that I think him well worth inquiring after
while in Oxford. Dr. Midgely had only the name and conveyance to the
press, beside what books he helped Bradshaw to, which, by his poverty,
he could not procure himself." In the margin of this letter Ballard
has added, "Sir Roger Manley, author of the 'Turkish Spy.'" Baker, of
St. John's College, Cambridge, has written on the cover of the first
volume of his copy of _Athenae Oxoniensis_ (bequeathed to the Public
Library at Cambridge), "'Turkish Spy,' begun by Mr. Manley, continued
by Dr. Midgely with the assistance of others."

Edward F. Rimbault.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHILALETHES CESTRIENSIS--STEPHENS' SERMONS.

I shall feel much obliged if any of your correspondents can inform me
what is the real name of the author of the following work:

    "An Impartial enquiry into the true character of that Faith,
    which is required in the Gospel, as necessary to salvation;
    in which it is briefly shewn, upon how righteous terms
    unbelievers may become true Christians, &c., by Philalethes
    Cestriensis. 8'o. Lond. 1746. Dedicated to Philip earl of
    Chesterfield, Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland."

In your 6th Number is an inquiry for a "tract or sermon" by the Rev.
W. Stephens, which elicited a reply in No. 8. from "Mr. Denton," who
mentions four sermons by that author and inquires whether any other
sermons or tracts of his were published, which are not included in the
two posthumous volumes?

Now it has struck me that a volume of sermons in my possession may,
from the nature of the subjects, be Stephens's, but whether included
in the volume alluded to I know not. The volume contains six sermons,
each with separate title and separate pagination. A common preface is
prefixed, and there has been a common title-page, which unfortunately
is missing in my copy.

    "Serm. I. The Divinity of Christ argued, from his right
    to worship, on Rev. v. 13, 14., preached in 1720, at
    Great Torrington, at the Visitation of the Archdeacon of
    Barnstaple."

    "II. The necessity of believing the Divinity of the Son of
    God, John iii. 16., preached at Great Torrington on Christmas
    Day, 1721."

    "III. The Humiliation and Exaltation of the Son of God
    considered in the new light, Philipp. ii. 6-12., preached
    at the primary Visitation of Stephen [Weston] Lord Bishop of
    Exon, at Great Torrington, 1726."

    "IV. Christ, King of the Jews both before and after his
    Incarnation, Matt. ii. 1, 2., preached on Christmas Day and
    First Sunday after Epiphany, 1727."

    "V. The Beginning, Extent, and Duration of Christ's
    Mediatorial Kingdom, same text, and preached at the same
    season."

    "VI. The natural supremacy of God the Son; same text, &c."

The three last sermons have a title generally applicable, and repeated
before each viz., "The Supreme Dominion of God the Son, both Natural,
Oeconomical, and Judaical, proved from Scripture, in three Sermons."
The separate titles bear date 1729; and the publisher was Samuel Birt,
at the Bible and Ball, Ave Maria Lane.

This notice may supply the information of which Mr. Denton is in
quest, and at all events I should be very glad to learn who the author
really was. His sermons are, as is said of those of Stephens, far
above the ordinary run. The period at which they were delivered
agrees with the dates of those at page 118. The author, in the general
preface, says, that Sermon II. was not "suffer'd to see the light
before it had pass'd through the hands of _Dr. Waterland_." Was not
Stephens subsequently Vicar of St. Andrew's, Plymouth?

Balliolensis.

       *       *       *       *       *{335}

MINOR QUERIES.

_Smelling of the Lamp._--Can you or one of your learned
correspondents, tell me the origin or first user of the literary
"smelling of the lamp?" I know that it is commonly attributed to
Demosthenes? but if it is his, I want chapter and verse for it.


_Gourders of Rain._--Will any of your correspondents be kind enough to
suggest the etymology of the word "gourders" (= torrents)? It occurs
in the following passage of _Harding against Jewel_ (p. 189., Antv.
1565):

    "Let the _gourders_ of raine come downe from you and all other
    heretikes, let the floudes of worldly rages thrust, let the
    windes of Sathan's temptations blowe their worst, this house
    shall not be overthrowen."

C.H.

St. Catherine's Hall, Cambridge.


The _Temple or_ a _Temple_.--I am happy to see that your
correspondent, Mr. Thoms, is about to illustrate some of the
obscurities of Chaucer. Perhaps he or some of your learned
contributors may be able to remove a doubt that has arisen in my mind
relative to the poet's well-known description of the Manciple in his
Prologue to the _Canterbury Tales_.

You are aware that the occupation of the Temple by students of the
law in the reign of Edward III. has no other authority than tradition.
Dugdale, Herbert, Pearce, and others who have written on the Inns of
Court, adduce this passage from Chaucer in support of the assertion;
and they all quote the first line thus:

  "A manciple there was of _the_ Temple."

In Tyrwhitt's edition of _Chaucer_, however, and in all other copies
I have seen, the reading is

  "A gentil manciple was ther of _a_ temple."

Now the difference between "the Temple" and "a temple" is not
inconsiderable. I should feel obliged, therefore, by any explanation
which will account for it. If Chaucer was, as he is sometimes
pretended to be, a member of the Temple, it is somewhat extraordinary
that he should have designated it so loosely. The words in the real
passage would seem to have a more general signification, and not to
be applied to any particular house of legal resort.

Edward Foss.


_Family of Steward or Stewart of Bristol_.--I have in my possession a
drawing, probably of the time of James or Charles I., of the following
arms. Azure a lion rampant or, with a crescent for difference,
impaling argent a cross engrailed flory sable between four Cornish
choughs proper--Crest, on a wreath of the colours a Saracen's head
full-faced, couped at the shoulders proper, wreathed round the temples
and tied or and azure.

On removing the shield from the paper on which it was pasted, I found
a spoiled sketch of the coat of Poulett, with the name Ambrose Moore
written over it in a hand of about the reign of Charles I.: the object
in passing the fresh shield over the spoiled coat appears to have been
merely to make use of the mantling.

I have also a locket of silver gilt containing a miniature of a
gentleman apparently of the time of the Commonwealth, finely executed
in oils upon copper; on the back are engraved the arms and crest above
described without the impalement, the crescent bearing the addition
of a label. The only information I have is, that the locket and the
drawing belonged to a family of the name of Steward or Stewart, who
were clothworkers at Bristol during the Commonwealth, and for some
generations later; and they are now in the possession of their
descendants. The first of whom I have any authentic record is Hercules
Steward, who was admitted to the liberties of the city of Bristol in
1623.

I cannot find that any family of Steward has borne the arms in
question; and if any of your readers can throw a light on the matter,
I shall feel greatly obliged to them.

Query. Was there a Herald painter of the time named Ambrose Moore?

O.C.

Feb. 26. 1850.


_Paying through the Nose_.--Can any one tell me the origin of the
phrase, "Paying though the nose," expressing a dear bargain?

A.G.


_Memoirs of an American Lady_.--Are the _Memoirs of an American
Lady_ out of print? They were written by Mrs. Grant, of Laggan, the
authoress of _Letters from the Mountains_, and of whom some very
interesting memoirs have lately been published by her son.

Nemo.


_Bernicia_.--Can any learned correspondent favour me with the name
or title of any English nobleman who held authority in Wales, or the
Borders, in 1370-80? The motive for this query is, that a poem of the
time, by Trahaearn, a celebrated bard, contains the following passage:

    "Though fierce in his valour like Lleon, with a violent
    irresistible assault, he vaulted into battle, to plunder the
    King of _Bernicia_; yet the ravager of thrice seven dominions
    was a placid and liberal-handed chief, when he entertained the
    bards at his magnificent table."

It is not supposed that the king here mentioned was any thing more
than a powerful nobleman, whose possessions, or castle and lands, were
situated in the north of England; in which division of the island
the ancient Bernicia was placed. As there is no evidence as to the
locality or limits of this ancient district, it is hoped that an
answer to the above query will afford a satisfactory solution to an
uncertainty that has long existed among Welsh antiquaries.

Gomer.

{336}

_John Bull_.--Might I beg to ask, through your columns, the origin of
the name "_John Bull_," as applied to Englishmen? I have frequently
heard the question asked; but I never heard it satisfactorily
answered. An antiquary once told me that it was so applied from the
number of _Johns_ among our countrymen, and the profusion of _bles_
in our language; an explanation which I placed to the credit of my
friend's ingenuity.

R.F.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

LETTER ATTRIBUTED TO SIR ROBERT WALPOLE.

I feel very confident that I once read the letter attributed to Sir
R. Walpole (No. 19. p. 304.) in some magazine, long before I had ever
seen _Banks' Extinct and Dormant Peerage_. My impression is, also,
that I never believed the document to be authentic; and that opinion
is confirmed by a reference to the _Correspondence of Horace Walpole_,
vol. i. ed. 1840, and to the journals of the day. I find from these
authorities, that the first of the memorable divisions which drove
Sir Robert from the helm, took place on the 21st Jan. 1741-2, when
Pulteney's motion for a secret committee was lost by three voices
only. We are told that the speeches were very brilliant, and Sir
R. Walpole particularly distinguished himself. He might have been
tormented by his enemies, but not by the stone, (the excuse assigned
in the letter for his inability to attend the king), for Horace left
him at one o'clock in the morning, after the debate had terminated,
"_at supper all alive and in spirits," and he even boasted that he was
younger than his son_. The next struggle was on the 28th of Jan., on
the Chippenham election, when the minister was defeated by one, and
his friends advised him to resign; but it was not till after the 3rd
of Feb., when the majority against him upon the renewal of the last
question had increased to sixteen, that he intimated his intention
to retire. These facts, coupled with the inferences drawn by your
correspondent P.C.S.S. as to the suspicious style of the letter, and
the imprudence of such a communication, go far to prove that it was
a forgery: but the passage in _Walpole's Reminiscences_, vol. i. p.
cviii. ed. 1840, with which I will now conclude my remarks, seems to
set the question at rest:--

    "Sir Robert, before he quitted the king, persuaded his Majesty
    to insist, as a preliminary to the change, that Mr. Pulteney
    should go into the House of Lords, his great credit lying in
    the other House: and _I remember my father's action when he
    returned from Court, and told me what he had done; 'I have
    turned the key of the closet upon him,' making that motion
    with his hand_."

Braybrooke.

Audley End, March 18. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

PORTRAITS OF ULRICH OF HUTTEN.

It is pleasant to see that an answer to a query can sometimes do more
than satisfy a doubt, by accidentally touching an accordant note
which awakens a responsive feeling. I am much pleased that my scanty
information was acceptable to "R.G."; and wish it was in my power
to give him more certain information respecting the portraits of
_Hutten_, who is one of my heroes, although I am no "hero-worshipper."

The earliest woodcut portrait of him with which I am acquainted, is to
be found in the very elegant volume containing the pieces relating to
the murder of his cousin John, by Ulrich of Wirtemberg (the title too
long for these pages), which, from the inscription at the end, appears
to have been printed in the Castle of Stakelberg, in 1519. It is a
half length, in a hat, under a kind of portico, with two shields at
the upper corners: the inscription beneath is in white letters on
a black ground. It occurs near the end of the volume; in which is
another spirited woodcut, representing the murder.

The other two cotemporary portraits occur in the "Expostulatio,"
before noticed. The largest of these, at the end of the volume, is
in armour, crowned with laurel, and holding a sword, looking toward
the left. This is but indifferently copied, or rather followed, in
Tobias Stimmer's rare and elegant little volume, _Imagines Viror.
Liter. Illust._, published by Reusner and Jobinus, Argent. 1587, 12mo.

I have never seen a good modern representation of this remarkable man,
who devoted the whole energies of his soul to the sacred cause of the
truth and freedom, and the liberation of his country and mankind from
the trammels of a corrupt and dissolute Church; and, be it remembered,
that he and Reuchlin were precursors of Luther in the noble work,
which entitles them to at least a share in our gratitude for the
unspeakable benefit conferred by this glorious emancipation.

Ebernburg, the fortress of his friend, the noble and heroic Franz von
Sickingen, Hutten called the _Bulwark of Righteousness_. I had long
sought for a representation of Sickingen, and at length found a medal
represented in the _Sylloge Numismatum Elegantiorum_ of Luckius, fol.
Argent, 1620, bearing the date 1522.

Hutten's life is full of romantic incident: it was one of toil and
pain, for the most part; and he may well have compared his wanderings
to those of Ulysses, as he seems to have done in the following verses,
which accompany the portrait first above mentioned:

  "Desine fortunam miseris inimicaque fata
    Objicere, et casus velle putare deos.
  Jactatur pius AEneas, jactatur Ulysses,
    Per mare, per terras, hic bonus, ille pius.
  Crede mihi non sunt meritis sua praemia, casu
    Volvimur, haud malus est, cui mala proveniunt.
  Sis miser, et nulli miserabilis, omnia quisquis
    A diis pro merito cuique venire putas."

{337}

I should like to see the German verses your correspondent mentions, if
he will be good enough to favour me, through your intervention, with
an inspection of the volume containing them.

S.W.S.

March 12. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHANGE OF NAME.

"B." inquires (No. 16. p. 246.) what is the use of the royal license
for the change of a surname? He is referred to Mr. Markland's
paper "On the Antiquity and Introduction of Surnames into England"
(_Archaeologia_, xviii. p. 111.). Mr. Markland says,--

    "Sir Joseph Jekyll, when Master of the Rolls, in the year
    1730, remarks--'I am satisfied the usage of passing Acts of
    Parliament for the taking upon one a surname is but modern;
    and that any one may take upon him what surname, and as many
    surnames, as he pleases, without an Act of Parliament.' The
    decree in the above case was reversed in the House of Lords."

Mr. Markland adds,--

    "From the facts and deductions here stated, it would seem
    that the Master of the Rolls had good ground for making his
    decree. The law, as it stands, however, had grown out of the
    _practice_: and common prudence dictates, that the assumption
    of a new surname should now be accompanied by such an
    authority as may establish beyond all question the legality of
    the act."

It must also be remembered, that a testator often directs that a
devisee shall procure the royal license or an Act of Parliament
for the change of name, in order to entitle him to the testator's
property. If this direction be neglected, could not the party next
benefited sue for it on that ground, and with success?

S.D.D.


_Change of Name_ (No. 16. p. 246.).--The doctrine, that a person
may change his surname without any formality whatever, has long
been "settled," and is by no means of so recent a date as your
correspondent supposes, which will presently appear.

In _Coke upon Littleton_, after some observations as to the change
of Christian name at confirmation, it is stated--

    "And this doth agree with our ancient books, where it is
    holden that a man may have divers names at divers times, but
    not divers Christian names." (Vol. ii. p. 218. ed. 1818, by
    J.H. Thomas.)

Reference is made to _Acc. 1 Com. Dig._ 19, 20., "Abatement" (E. 18,
19.); _Bac. Abr._ "Misnomer," B.; Rex _v._ Billinghurst, 3 _Maul.
& S._ 254.: but these passages throw no additional light upon our
immediate subject.

Sir Joseph Jekyll, in the case of Barlow _v._ Bateman, in 1730,
said,--

    "I am satisfied the usage of passing Acts of Parliament for
    the taking upon one a surname is but modern, and that any one
    may take upon him what surname, and as many surnames, as he
    pleases, without an Act of Parliament." (3 Peere Williams,
    65.)

The decision of the Master of the Rolls in this case was afterwards
overruled by the House of Lords; but on a point not affecting the
accuracy of the observations I have quoted.

Lord Eldon, in the case of Leigh _v._ Leigh, decided in 1808, made
the following remarks:--

    "An Act of Parliament, giving a new name, does not take away
    the former name: a legacy given by that name might be taken.
    In most of the Acts of Parliament for this purpose there is
    a special proviso to prevent the loss of the former name. The
    King's licence is nothing more than permission to take the
    name, and does not give it. A name, therefore, taken in that
    way is by voluntary assumption." (15 Ves. Jun., p. 100.)

This case decided that the assumption of a name by a person, by the
King's license, would not entitle him to take under a limitation in a
will "unto the first and nearest of my kindred, being male, and of my
name and blood." The same rule would no doubt hold as to a change of
name by Act of Parliament. (See Pyot _v._ Pyot, 1 _Ves. Sen._ 335.)

These extracts from the highest authorities will sufficiently show
of how little use is an Act of Parliament, or the royal license, for
effecting a change of name; indeed, the chief, perhaps I might almost
say the only, advantage of these costly forms, except, of course,
where they are required by the express terms of a will, is the
facility they afford in case it should become necessary to prove that
John White was ten years ago John Brown.

Arun.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES ANSWERED, NO. 6.

There is no class of books which it more behoves future compilers
of glossaries to consult, than those which treat of geography,
navigation, military and naval economy, and the science of warfare
both on shore and afloat. As far as the technical terms have been used
by poets and dramatists, much valuable illustration may be found in
the annotated editions of their works, but much more is required for
general purposes, and I could point out some fifty volumes which would
enable an industrious student, possessing a competent acquaintance
with those subjects in their modern state, to produce a most useful
supplement to our existing glossaries.

With very small pretensions to the amount of information which [Greek:
S] ascribes to me, I will at once answer his query on the meaning of
_grummett_.

GRUMETE is pure Spanish. It also occurs as a Portuguese word. I shall
transcribe the explanations of it as given by the best authorities on
those languages:--

    "GRVMETE.--El muchacho que sirue en el nauio, y sube por el
    mastil, o arbol, y por la antena, y haze todo {338} lo demas
    que le mandan con gran presteza."--Sebastian de Couarruuias,
    1611.

    "GRUMETE.--El mozo que sirve en el navio para subir a la
    gavia y otros usos. _Tirunculus nauticus_."--La real academia
    Espanola.

    "GRUMETE.--Grumete he o moco que serve como de criado
    aos marinheiros, sobindo pellos mastros ate a gavea,
    etc."--Raphael Bluteau.

We have a statement of the rank and ratings of the officers and men
of a ship of war in the _Sea grammar_ of captain Smith, 1627. 4to. The
word in question, as a _rating_, had then become obsolete. The duties
of the seamen are thus described:

    "The _sailers_ are the ancient men for hoising the sailes,
    getting the tacks aboord, haling the bowlings, and steering
    the ship.

    "The _younkers_ are the young men called fore-mast men, to
    take in the top-sailes, or top and yard, for furling the
    sailes, or slinging the yards, bousing or trising, and take
    their turnes at helme."

Now, a comparison of the definitions of the Spanish and Portuguese
_gromete_, and the English _younker_, leads me to infer that the
latter term had been substituted for _grummett_ or _gromet_, and
that the duties of both classes were nearly the same.

If the above information should seem less precise than might be
expected, I must make my apology in the words which Edward Jorden
addressed to captain Smith on the publication of his _Sea grammar_:

            "Who can
  Deriue thy words, is more grammarian
  Than Camden, Clenard, Ramus, Lilly were:
  Here's language would haue non-plust Scaliger!"

Bolton Corney.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEAVER HATS.

Permit me to suggest that, in asking a question, it is often desirable
that the querist should state briefly the amount of information he
already possesses on the subject. For instance, had Mr. "T.H. Turner,"
when inquiring after _beaver hats_ (No. 7. p. 100.), stated, that he
had met with the mention of them as early as the time of Hen. III., I,
of course, should not have troubled you with a notice of them in the
reign of Elizabeth. Indeed, I owe Mr. Turner an apology; for if I had
reflected a moment upon the extensive antiquarian information of
the querist, I should certainly have concluded that he must be well
acquainted with the authorities I cited, which happened to be at my
elbow at the time I read the query. Mr. B. Corney (No. 19. p. 307.)
has supplied a beaver hat from Chaucer's _Canterbury Tales_; we meet
with another in his _Testament of Creseide_, v. 386., "in a mantill
and a beaver hat." We may therefore conclude that they were not
unusual in Chaucer's time. I now think it very probable that beaver
hats were introduced into this country as early as the Norman
Conquest; for we find mention of them in Normandy at a still earlier
period. In the "Chronicle of the Abbey of St. Wandrille" (edited by
Acheri, in his _Spicilegium_), we find, amongst the gifts of the Abbot
Ansegisus, who died A.D. 833,

    "Cappas Romanas duas, unam videlicet ex rubeo cindato, et
    fimbriis viridibus in circuitu ornatam; alteram _ex cane
    Pontico_, quero vulgus _Bevurum_ nuncupat, similiter fimbriis
    sui coloris decoratam in orbe."

I do not conceive this cap to have been made of the _skin_ of a
beaver, for the term would then most probably have been "ex _pelli_
canis Pontici."

This Chronicle contains several curious inventories of the gifts of
many of the abbots; in which we may see the splendour of the vessels
and vestments used at that period in religious services, as well as
the style of reading then prevalent amongst the monks.

Gastros.

Cambridge, March 11.

    [There is a Query which arises out of this subject which none
    of our correspondents have yet touched upon--What was the
    original meaning of _Beaver_, as applied to a hat or cap? and
    was it taken from the name of the animal, or did it give the
    name to it?]

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Anecdote of the Civil Wars_.--In looking through your "Notes and
Queries," to which I heartily wish continued success, I find, in No.
6. p. 93, a question which appears to be as yet unanswered.

The story to which your questioner alludes as an "anecdote of the
Civil Wars," is a very beautiful one, and deserves authentication.

I have a note of it from Dr. Thomas's additions to Dugdale's
_Warwickshire_, which dates the occurrence as having taken place Oct.
22, 1642, the day previous to the battle of Edgehill, and identifies
the merry sportsman as Richard Schuckburgh, of Upper Shuckburgh; who,
however, on his presentation to the king, "immediately went home,
aroused his tenants, and the next day attended the army to the field,
where he was knighted, and was present at the battle." Being out of
the reach of books, I am unable further to verify the story; but it is
to such unhappy rustics that your publication is most acceptable.

C.W.B.

    [Thanks to the kindness of our correspondent "C.W.B.," we
    have referred to Dugdale's _Warwickshire_ (ed. Thomas, 1730).
    vol. i. p. 309., and extract from it the following proof that
    Walpole had authority for his story. Who knows, after this,
    but we may in the same way trace from whence he procured the
    celebrated letter of the Countess of Pembroke, respecting
    which there is a query from Mr. Peter Cunningham, in No. 2.
    p. 28.

    "As king Charles the First marched to Edgcot, near Banbury, on
    22nd Oct., 1642, he saw him hunting in the fields not far from
    Shuckborough, with a very good pack of hounds, upon which it
    is reported, that he fetched a deep sigh and asked who that
    gentleman was that hunted so merrily that morning, when he was
    going to fight for his crown and dignity. And being told {339}
    that it was this Richard Shuckburgh, he was ordered to be
    called to him, and was by him very graciously received. Upon
    which he went immediately home, armed all his tenants, and the
    next day attended on him in the field, where he was knighted,
    and was present at the battle of Edghill."]


_Mousetrap Dante_ (No. 10. pp. 154, 155.).--I beg to refer your
correspondent to the Visconte Colomb de Batines' _Bibliographia
Dantesea_ (Prato, 1845-48. 8vo.), tom. ii. pp. 264, 265., where he
will find a list (correct so far as it goes) of the fifteen MSS. of
the _Comedia_, purchased for the Bodleian Library about the year 1822,
from the Abbate Matteo Canonici, of Venice.

I have reason for believing, that the only MSS. which exist in that
collection, in addition to those enumerated in the list, are: 1.
Canon Ital. 100. "Compendium Cujusdam Commentarii" (4to paper); and
2. "Codices Canonici Miscellanei 449." fol., _vellum_ (it cannot
therefore be this), which contains the complete commentary of Jacopo
dalla Lana.

F.C.B.


_Cromwell's Estates_ (No. 18. p. 277.).--The seignory of Gower is the
peninsula which runs out between the bays of Swansea and Carmarthen;
and which terminates at Swansea on the S.E. side, and at Longhor on
the N.W., and comprises the district which, in common with a part of
Scotland, anciently bore the name of Rheged. It is a locality rich in
all that can attract the antiquary and the naturalist.

Mr. Dillwyn's _Contributions towards a History of Swansea_ contains
the following references to the Gower property of Cromwell:--"We are
informed by the Minute-book of the Common Hall" (at Swansea), "that
on May 19, 1648, there came to this towne the truly Honourable Oliver
Cromwell, Esq.... Lord of this towne, the Seignory of Gower, and Manor
of Killay, with the members thereof," &c. "On May 5. 1647, Parliament
settled the estates of the Marquis of Worcester, in Gloucestershire
and Monmouthshire, on Cromwell; and, by a subsequent order, the
estate in Glamorganshire was added to this grant. The conveyance from
Parliament to Cromwell is made, not only in the name of his Majesty,
but has a portrait of Charles the First at its head."

SELEUCUS.


_Genealogy of European Sovereigns_ (No. 6. p. 92.)--The best and most
comprehensive work on this subject bears the following title:--_Johann
Huebner's genealogische Tabellen_, 4 vols. folio, oblong, Leipzig,
1737 et seq. (Of the 3rd vol. a new and much improved edition, by
G.F. Krebel, appeared in 1766.) Supplement: _Tafeln zu J. Huebner's
genealogischen Tabellen_, by Sophia Queen of Denmark, 6 parts, folio,
oblong, Copenhagen, 1822-24.

A. Asher.

Berlin.


_Shipster_ (No. 14. p. 216.).--Are not _Baxter_ and _Tupster_ the
feminines of _Baker_ and _Tapper_?--and may not _Shipster_ signify a
_female ship-owner_?

F.C.B.


_Kentish Ballad_ (No. 16. p. 247.).--The song beginning "When Harold
was invaded" has long been a favourite in this county. It is entitled
"The Man of Kent," and was composed by Tom Durfey, in the time of
Charles the Second. It may be found, with the music, in Chappell's
_Collection of English Airs_. He cites it as being in _Pills to purge
Melancholy, with Music_, 1719, and states that in the _Essex Champion,
or famous History of Sir Billy of Billericay and his Squire Ricardo_,
1690, the song of "The Man of Kent" is mentioned. I have none of these
works at hand for immediate reference, but the above note contains all
that I have been able to collect on the subject of our popular ballad.

There is another song, much to the same purport, beginning--

  "When as the Duke of Normandy,
  With glistening spear and shield,"

in Evans's _Songs_, vol. ii. p. 33, printed by him from _The Garland
of Delight_, by Delone, in the Pepys collection at Cambridge--a
black-letter volume; and probably the song was by himself.

Your correspondent "F.B." asks for the remainder of the song. In pity
to yourself and your readers, I forbear sending you the countless
stanzas--numerous enough in the _original_ song, but now, by the
additions of successive generations, swelled to a volume. He will find
in Chappell's collection all that is worth having, with the assurance,
repeated oft enough for the most enthusiastic of our _modest_
countrymen, that

  "In Britain's race if one surpass,
    A man of Kent is he."

LAMBERT LARKING.

Ryarsh Vicarage.


_Bess of Hardwick_ (No. 18. p. 276.).--The armorial bearings of John
Hardwick, of Hardwick, co. Derby, father of Bess, were: Argent, a
saltier engrailed, and on a chief blue three roses of the field.

M. COMES.

Oxford, March 9. 1850.


_Trophee_ (No. 19. p. 303.).--"Trophe," in the Prologue of Lydgate's
Translation of Boccaccio's _Fall of Princes_, is a misprint:
_corrige_--

  "In youth he made a translation
  Of a boke, which called is Troyle,
  In Lumbardes tonge, as men may rede and se,
  And in our vulgar, long or that he deyde,
  Gave it the name of Troylous and Cres-eyde."

The book called _Troyle_ is Boccaccio's _Troilo_, or _Filostrato_.

M.C.

Oxford, March 11. 1850.

{340}


_Emerald_ (No. 14. p. 217.).--Before we puzzle ourselves with the
meaning of a thing, it is well to consider whether the authority _may_
not be very loose and inaccurate. This _emerald cross_, even if it was
made of emeralds, might have been in several pieces. But we are told
generally, in Phillips's _Mineralogy_, that "the large emeralds spoken
of by various writers, such as that in the Abbey of Richenau, of the
weight of 28 lbs., and which formerly belonged to Charlemagne, are
believed to be either green fluor, or prase. The most magnificent
specimen of genuine emeralds was presented to the Church of Loretto
by one of the Spanish kings. It consists of a mass of white quartz,
thickly implanted with emeralds, more than an inch in diameter."

The note to the above exemplifies what I have just said. It is called
_emerald_, he says, because it is _green_, from the Greek. I might
make a query of this; but it is clearly a mistake of some half-learned
or ill-understood informant. The name has nothing to do with green.
_Emerald_, in Italian _smeraldo_, is, I dare say, from the Greek
_smaragdus_. It is derived, according to the Oxford _Lexicon_, from
[Greek: mairo], to shine, whence [Greek: marmarugae]. In looking for
this, I find another Greek word, _smirix_, which is the origin of
_emery_, having the same meaning. It is derived from [Greek: smao],
to rub, or make bright. I cannot help suspecting that the two radical
verbs are connected.

C.B.


_Ancient Motto--Barnacles_.--In reference to your querist in No. 6.,
respecting the motto which "some Pope or Emperor caused to be engraven
in the centre of his table," and the correspondent in No. 7. who
replies to him by a quotation from Horace, I beg to observe that
honest Thomas Fuller, in _The Holy State_, 275. ed. Lond. 1648, tells
us, that St. Augustine "had this distich written on his table:--

  "Quisquis amat dictis absentem rodere famam,
  Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.
         *       *       *       *       *
  He that doth love on absent friends to jeere,
  May hence depart, no room is for him here."

With respect to the Barnacle fowl, it may be an addendum, not
uninteresting to your correspondent "W.B. MacCabe," to add to
his extract from Giraldus another from Hector Boece, _History of
Scotland_, "imprentit be Thomas Davidson, prenter to the Kyngis nobyll
grace [James VI.]." He observes, that the opinion of some, that the
"Claik geis growis on treis be the nebbis, is vane," and says he "maid
na lytyll lauboure and deligence to serche the treuthe and virite
yairof," having "salit throw the seis quhare thir Clakis ar bred," and
assures us, that although they were produced in "mony syndry wayis,
thay ar bred ay allanerly be nature of the seis." These fowls, he
continues, are formed from worms which are found in wood that has been
long immersed in salt water, and he avers that their transformation
was "notably provyn in the zier of God 1480 besyde the castell of
Petslego, in the sycht of mony pepyll," by a tree which was cast
ashore, in which the creatures were seen, partly formed, and some
with head, feet, and wings; "bot thay had na faderis." Some years
afterwards, a tree was thrown on the beach near Dundee, with the same
appearances, and a ship broken up at Leith exhibited the same marvel;
but he clinches the argument by a "notable example schawin afore our
eyne. Maister Alexander Galloway Person, of Kynkell, was with us in
thir Illis (the Hebridae), and be adventure liftet up ane see tangle,
hyng and full of mussil schellis," one of which he opened, "bot than
he was mair astonist than afore, for he saw na fische in it bot ane
perfit schapin foule. This clerk, knawin us richt desirous of sic
uncouth thingis, came haistely, and opinit it iwith all circumstance
afore rehersit." So far the venerable "Chanon of Aberdene." The West
Highlanders still believe in the barnacle origin of this species of
fowl.

JAMES LOGAN


_Tureen_ (No. 16. p. 246.; No. 19. p. 307.).--I have seen
old-fashioned silver tureens which turned on a pivot attached to the
handles, and always concluded that it was to this form that Goldsmith
alluded in the line quoted by "G.W."

SELEUCUS.


_Hudibrastic Couplet_ (No. 14. p. 211.).--These lines do _not_ occur
in the reprint of the _Musarum Deliciae_ (Lond. 1817, 8vo. 2 vols.).
Lowndes (_Bibliogr. Manual_) states that they are to be found in the
2nd ed. of the work (London, 1656. 12mo.).

F.C.B.


_Topography of Foreign Printing Presses_ (No. 18. p. 277.)--About
twelve years ago, Valpy published a vol. of Supplements to
_Lempriere's Dictionary_, by E.H. Barker. One of these contained
a complete list of all the foreign towns in which books had been
printed, with the Latin names given to them in alphabetical order.

W. and N.


Your correspondent "P.H.F." will find in _Cotton's Typographical
Gazetteer_ (8vo. Clarendon Press, 1831), every information he will
ordinarily require.

J.M.S.

Islington, March 7. 1850


_Dr. Hugh Todd's MSS._ (No. 18. p. 282.).--The only MS. in the library
of University College, Oxford, is that mentioned by "F.M."; and it
is described in the Catalogue, compiled by the Rev. H.O. Coxe, of
the MSS. belonging to the College, p. 47. No. clxx. There is a note
stating it was "ex dono Hugonis Todd, Socii, A.D. 1690."

C.I.R.

       *       *       *       *       *{341}


MISCELLANIES.

_Burnet_.--In addition to the opinions expressed in favour of or
opposed to Burnet's "History," (No. 3. p. 40., and No. 8. p. 120.),
I may also refer to Dr. King's _Anecdotes_; he says,

    "I knew Burnet; he was a furious party-man, and easily imposed
    on by any lying spirit of his own faction; but he was a better
    pastor than any man who is now seated on the Bishop's bench."

Dryden's chastisement of Burnet--"the noble Buzzard"--in his _Hind and
Panther_ must be familiar to your readers. It was given as "adequate
retaliation" for the Bishop's censure of the immorality of Dryden's
plays. Applied to Burnet's _Sketches of Characters_, Dryden says:

  "His praise of foes is venomously nice,
  So touch'd, it turns a virtue to a vice."

Scott's note on this passage well merits perusal.

J.H.M.

Bath.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERVENIRI AD SUMMUM NISI EX PRINCIPIIS NON POTEST.

(_FROM THE LATIN OF VINCENT BOURNE_.)

  Newton, the light of each succeeding age,
  First learned his letters from a female sage.
  But thus far taught--the alphabet once learn'd--
  To loftier use those elements he turn'd.
  Forced th' unconscious signs, by process rare,
  Known quantities with unknown to compare;
  And, by their aid, profound deductions drew
  From depths of truth his teacher never knew.
  Yet the true authoress of all was she!--
  Newton's Principia were his _a_, _b_, _c_.

Rufus.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Prince Madoc_ (No. 4. p. 56.; No. 18. p. 282.).--In the darkness
superinduced by the absence of historical evidence on the Welsh
settlement in America, I beg leave to offer a few remarks on some
ethnological subjects involved in this question.

In reference to the specimen of a Welsh-Indian Vocabulary in Catlin's
_N.A. Indians_, which "Gomer" opposes to Prof. Elton's proposition
on this subject (No. 15. p. 236.), were the instances of similarity
to exhibit the influence of opinion, of government, or of commerce,
on the language of the tribe, the origin of such words would be as
indisputable as that of those introduced by the English into the
various countries of the East where they have factories; e.g.
governor, council, company. But these and numerous other traces of the
Celtic language which have been found in Florida and Darien are not
indicative of such impressions; most of them, from their universality,
bespeak themselves to be primitive; and who can assure us that some
may not have reached them before the twelfth century, through "Walsh
or strangers," "a race mightier than they and wiser," by whom they
may have been instructed in the arts which have excited so much
astonishment?

The glass beads, erroneously called Druid's beads, furnish Catlin
with another proof of affiliation, which, however, is invalidated by
the well-ascertained facts of glass-manufactories having, in remotest
antiquity, existed in Egypt, and of glass beads having been dispersed
by the Phoenicians among the nations which they visited. (See Tassie's
_Gems_, introd.--Here, by the by, are mentioned celebrated emeralds,
which have turned out to be only lumps of green glass!)

Lhuyd relates that the cross was honoured in N. America before the
arrival of the Spaniards, and Sir R. Manley (_Turk. Spy_, vol.
viii.) states that they found crucifixes also. Unfortunately for this
hypothesis, it has been shown, by G. Becanus (_Hierogl._, see Index),
Olaus Wormius (_De Danicis Monumentis_, see Index), M. Ficinus (_De
Vita coelitus Propaganda_, l. iii. c. 18.), and Kircherus (_Prodromus
Coptus_, p. 163.), that in various countries the cross was, before
the Christian era, an object of veneration, and symbolled the genius
of their religion. In the event of crucifixes having been found (for
which, however, Sir R. Manley supplies no authority) we need not be
surprised that the Christian topography was so far extended, since
the Christianity of China, between the seventh and the thirteenth
century, has been invincibly proved; and simultaneously, perhaps,
the aborigines of America received the symbol, [Greek: Eros mou
hestaurotai], which is peculiar to the Christian religion.

In conclusion, permit me to cite Southey _versus_ Catlin:--"That
country," says the author of _Madoc_ "has now been fully explored;
and wherever Madoc may have settled, it is now certain that no Welsh
Indians are to be found upon any branches of the Missouri" (Preface,
note written in 1815).

Since I wrote the above, I have met with a work, by Mr. George
Jones, entitled _The History of Ancient America anterior to the Time
of Columbus_, vol. i.: "The Tyrian AEra." In the second, not yet
published, he promises to give "The Introduction of Christianity into
the Western Hemisphere by the Apostle St. Thomas."

T.I.


_Mistake in Gibbon_.--Those of your readers, who are, like myself,
occasional verifiers of references, will perhaps thank me for pointing
out a false reference, that I have just discovered in one of Gibbon's
notes:

    "Capitolinus gives us the particulars of these tumultuary
    votes, which were moved by one senator, and repeated, or
    rather chanted, by the whole body."--_Hist. August._ p. 52.

See Gibbon's _Decline and Fall_, chap. 4, note {342} under marginal
lemma, "The memory of Commodus declared infamous."

These "tumultuary votes" are recorded, _not_ by Capitolinus, but by
AElius Lampridius, in his _Life of Commodus_. Vide _Historiae Augustae
Scriptores. AElii Lampridii Commodus Antoninus_, capita 18, 19.

Capitolinus wrote the life of his _immediate_ successor, Pertinax;
hence perhaps the mistake, "Egregio in corpore naevus!" Let those who
wish to know what passion really is, read the tiger-like yells of the
Roman senate in _Lampridius_!

C. Forbes.

Temple, Feb. 27.


_Jew's Harp_.--The late Mr. Douce always maintained that the proper
name of this instrument was the _Jaw's Harp_, and that the Jews had
no special concern with either its invention or its use.

J.H.M.


_Havior_.--The word "havior" is probably of a hybrid character; partly
of Anglo-Saxo, and partly of British origin. If so, the first syllable
is obvious enough, "half" being generally pronounced as if the liquid
were considered an evanescent quantity, "ha'f, heif, hav'," &c., and
"iwrch" is the British word for a roe-buck. Dropping the guttural
termination, therefore, and writing "ior" instead of "iwrch," we
have the significant designation of the animal described by Lord
Braybrooke, whose flesh, like that of the capon, may afford a
convenient variety among the delicacies of the season, if well cooked
according to the recondite mysteries of the gastronomic art.

Hypomagirus.

Trinity College, Oxford, Feb 14.

N.B. "Heifer" has already been explained as "heif-ker, half-cre,"
A.-S., "anner," Br.


_Haviour, Haver, Hyfr_ (No. 15. p. 230, and No. 17. p. 269.).--If I
may throw out a question where I cannot give an explanation, I would
ask, are we not approaching very near to the word "heifer" (from the
Saxon) in these, but especially in the last of the above terms? They
seem to me to be identical. The introduction of the sound of _y_
between the sounds of _v_ and _ur_, is not uncommon in the vernacular
or corrupted pronunciation of many words; nay, it is sanctioned by
general usage, in "behaviour" from "behave," "Saviour" from "save,"
&c. If the words are identical, still the history of the appropriation
of the one to male animals of the class described, and of the other to
females, must be curious and worth investigating. May not the _aver_
and _averium_, like _irreplegibilia_ and other barbarous law terms, be
framed (rather than derived) from one of our English terms, as well as
from the French _avoir_?

G.W.


_America known to the Ancients_.--I have a note of the following
references, as illustrating the passage quoted by "C." (No. 7. p.
107.), and countenancing the idea that the existence of America was
at least suspected by the ancients. As I have not had an opportunity
of consulting the authorities myself, I cannot tell how far they may
affect the point in question; and I fear the references are not as
accurate as might be wished, but I shall be truly glad if they prove
at all useful:--Diodorus Siculus, _Bibl._ lib. iv. pp. 299, 300 edit.
Rhodoman; Apuleius, _De Mund. Oper._ vol. ii. p. 122.; _Avitus in
Senec. Suasor._; Horn, _De Origin. Americ._ lib. i. c. 10. p. 57.

G. William Skyring.


_Error in Meyrick's Ancient Armour_ (No. 17. p. 266.).--In the second
edition of Meyrick's _Armour_, the error pointed out by Mr. Hudson
Turner has not been corrected. The passage is, "Item a gamboised coat
with a rough surface of gold embroidered on the nap of the cloth;" and
with the note, "Like a thicket."

F.C.B.


_Nomade_.--The last Indian mails brought me the following derivation
of the word _Nomade_, in a letter from a friend, who was, when he
wrote, leading a nomade life among the Ryots of Guzerat:--

    "Camp, Kulpore, Jan. 30. 1850.

    "The natives use [for their tents] a sort of woollen stuff,
    about half an inch thick, called 'numbda.' * * * * * * By the
    bye, this word 'numbda' is said to be the origin of the word
    _nomade_, because the nomade tribes used the same material for
    their tents. When I was at school, I used to learn _nomde_,
    from [Greek: nemo]."

Melanion.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

A view of the Exhibition of the Works of Ancient and Mediaeval Art has
convinced us that fame had done no more than justice to its merits and
interest. We dare not attempt to enumerate one tithe of the gems in
Glass, Enamel, Metalwork, Carving in Wood and Ivory, Porcelain, &c.,
now gathered together in the Adelphi to justify the enthusiasm of the
antiquary, and to show, in the words of Marlowe,

  "Oh! what a world of profit and delight,
  Of power, of honour, of omnipotence,
  Is promis'd to the studious artizan?"

and how small, after all, is our boasted advance. We must therefore
be content with recommending our readers to visit, again and again,
this matchless collection. Mr. Hailstone, the originator of the
exhibition, must be highly gratified at the manner in which, thanks
to the liberality of the owners, and the zeal and good taste of the
committee, his idea has been carried out. If, too, at this time, when
there is so much unemployed labour among us, this exhibition should
have the {343} effect of creating a demand for articles which can be
produced by the hand and mind of a skilful workman only, and not by
machinery, however costly and elaborate, an enormous benefit, beyond
that originally contemplated, must result from the exhibition--namely,
that of supplying fresh fields for the labour and ingenuity of our
workmen.

It is with great satisfaction that we are enabled to announce that
there is at length a prospect of our seeing the monument which
Nicholas Brigham erected, in Poet's Corner, to the memory of Geoffrey
Chaucer properly restored. Arrangements are making for collecting
subscriptions for that purpose, to be limited to five shillings each,
that more may have the pleasure of assisting in the good work. We hope
to give further particulars of this right and necessary step in the
course of a week or two.

We have received John Petheram's (94. High Holborn) Catalogue of Old
and New Books, No. 109., being No. 3. for 1850;--from Thomas Cole (15.
Great Turnstile, Holborn) his Catalogue of Cheap Books, No. 25.; and
from John Russell Smith, (4. Old Compton Street, Soho) Part 2. for
1850 of his Catalogue of Choice, Useful, and Curious Books. We have
also received from Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of 191. Piccadilly,
a Catalogue of a Six-Days' Sale of Miscellaneous Books, chiefly
Theological and Classical, but comprising also much General
Literature, which commences this day (Saturday).

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE

(_IN CONTINUATION OF LISTS IN FORMER NOS._)

Caussinus, Nicolas, De Symbolica AEgyptiorum Sapentia. Caussinus,
Polyhistor Symbolicus.

_Odd Volume and Plate_.

Hutchins' Dorset, 2nd Edition, 1803, Vol. II. Horsley's Britannia
Romana, The Map which faces page 1.

***Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_,
to be sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186 Fleet
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.

DISS.--The sanction of the authorities was first duly obtained in the
matter to which our correspondent refers.

A.G.'s hint will not be lost sight of.

The present Number will, we trust, furnish a satisfactory reply to our
correspondent at Godalming.

_Notes and Queries_ may be procured of any Bookseller or Newsman
if previously ordered. Gentlemen residing in the country, who may
find a difficulty in procuring it through any bookseller in the
neighbourhood, may be supplied regularly with the _stamped_ edition,
by giving their orders direct to the publisher, Mr. George Bell, 186.
Fleet Street, accompanied by a Post Office order, for a quarter (4s.
4d.); a half year (8s. 8d.); or one year (17s. 4d.)

Notes and Queries may also be procured in Monthly Parts at the end
of each month, Part I. price 1s., Part II., price 1s. 3d., have been
reprinted, and may now be had, together with Parts III, price 1s., and
Part IV., price 1s. Part V., price 1s., will be ready next week.

       *       *       *       *       *

Post 8vo. Cloth, 10s. 6d.

THE HISTORY OF JUNIUS AND HIS WORKS, and a Review of the Controversy
respecting Junius, with an Appendix, containing Portraits and
Sketches, by Junius, selected from the Letters. By John Jaques.

    "This is a very able book; well arranged in its plan, and
    complete in its matter. To those who are interested in the
    controversy, or even to any readers of Junius who wish for
    further information than the common editions furnish, we
    strongly recommend this volume. They will find it full,
    without being overcharged; and it possesses an advantage
    even over Woodfall's edition, in only containing what is
    essential to the point, besides exhibiting much which does not
    appear in that elaborate publication. The 'History of Junius
    and his Works' is an essential companion to the 'Letters of
    Junius.'"--_Spectator_, March 4, 1843.

London: George Bell, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

In One Volume, square crown 8vo. price 18s. cloth.

SOUTHEY'S COMMONPLACE-BOOK.

Edited by Mr. Southey's Son-in-Law, the Rev. John Wood Warter,
B.D. Second Series, being SPECIAL COLLECTIONS, and forming a Volume
complete in itself.

    "This volume [SPECIAL COLLECTIONS] is a monument of industry
    such as few could pile, and affords striking evidence of the
    indomitable perseverance and varied learning of Southey....
    The oftener we dip into these massive pages, the profounder
    grows our surprise that such a mass of information could
    have been thrown together by one man.... It is just the book
    to dive into for the spare half hour, assured of finding
    amusement and information in every page.... The index is so
    ample and well arranged, that any particular paragraph may be
    turned to without difficulty. Altogether it is a massive and
    elegant volume, got up without regard to expense, and as well
    adapted for the shelves of the mechanic's library, as for the
    study-table of the literary man."--_Eclectic Review_.

Also a New Edition, in One Volume, price 18s.

SOUTHEY'S COMMONPLACE-BOOK, First Series; containing CHOICE PASSAGES,
with "Collections for the History of English Manners and Literature,"
and forming a Volume complete in itself.

London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Press and will be published immediately, in 1 vol. 8vo.
Illustrated with a Map of the town in 1763, and Engravings by Basire,
Le Keux, Hunter, and Childs, from Drawings by the late Richard
Stileman, Esq., Buck, Blore, Hooper, S. Prout, T. Ross, Stephens, and
A.D. Gough, and Woodcuts of Arms and Seals. Price, to subscribers, 5s.

A HISTORY OF THE TOWN OF WINCHELSEA.

(Ancient and Modern,) in the County of Sussex, by William Durrant
Cooper, F.S.A.

Subscribers' names will be received by the Publishers, John Russell
Smith, 4. Old Compton Street, Soho, London; and Henry Osborne, 55.
George Street, Hastings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early Antiquities of England Illustrated.

THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK.

By J.J.A. Worsaae, M.R.S.A., of Copenhagen. Translated and applied to
the Illustration of similar Remains in England, by William J. Thoms,
Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden Society. Illustrated with
numerous Woodcuts. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

    "This is the best antiquarian handbook we have ever met
    with--so clear is its arrangement, and so well and so plainly
    is each subject illustrated by well-executed engravings,
    that confusion for the future is impossible upon a variety of
    points on which the most grievous mistakes have hitherto been
    made by anxious and zealous antiquarians. * * * It is the
    joint production of two men who have already distinguished
    themselves as authors and antiquarians. It is a book of which
    it may be said, that in every sentence is to be found an
    interesting fact, and that every page teems with instructions,
    and may be regarded as a sure guide to all antiquarians in
    their future archaeological inquiries."--_Morning Herald_.

See also _Gentleman's Magazine_ for February, 1850.

John Henry Parker, Oxford, and 377. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *{344}

ENGLISH HISTORICAL PORTRAITS.

THIS SERIES OF PORTRAITS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF ENGLISH HISTORY, is engraved
from highly-finished Drawings of ORIGINAL PICTURES, existing in
various Galleries and Family Collections throughout the country, made
with scrupulous accuracy by Mr. G.P. Harding; the greater portion
never having been previously engraved.

M.M. HOLLOWAY, having purchased the whole of the impressions and
plates, now offers the Sets in a Folio Volume, bound in cloth, and
including Biographical Letter-press to each subject, at the greatly
reduced price of L2 12s. 6d., and L4 4s. 0d. for Proofs before
Letters, of which but 18 copies remain.

The Collection consists of the following Portraits:

KING HENRY VIII. and the EMPEROR CHARLES V., from the Original,
formerly in the Strawberry Hill Gallery.

QUEEN KATHARINE OF ARRAGON, from a Miniature by Holbein, in the
possession of the Duke of Buccleugh.

SIR ANTHONY BROWNE, K.G., from the Original in the possession of
Thomas Baylis, Esq., F.S.A.

ANTHONY BROWNE, VISCOUNT MONTAGUE, K.G., from the Collection of the
Marquess of Exeter.

EDWARD VERE, EARL OF OXFORD, from the Original Picture in the
Collection of the Duke of Portland.

SIR WILLIAM RUSSELL, BARON THORNHAUGH, LORD DEPUTY OF IRELAND, from
the Original Picture in the Collection of the Duke of Bedford.

WILLIAM CAMDEN, CLARENCEUX KING OF ARMS, from the Picture in the
possession of the Earl of Clarendon.

SIR ANTHONY SHIRLEY, AMBASSADOR FROM THE COURT OF PERSIA TO JAMES I.,
from the Original Miniature by Peter Oliver.

HENRY CAREY, LORD FALKLAND, LORD DEPUTY OF IRELAND, from the Original
by Vansomer, formerly in the Strawberry Hill Collection.

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY, SON OF THE EARL OF LEICESTER, from an Original
Miniature by N. Hilliard, in the possession of Lord De l'Isle and
Dudley.

THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM LENTHALL, SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, from
a Miniature by J. Cooper, in the possession of R.S. Holford, Esq.

MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, from the Original Picture in
the Collection of F. Vernon Wentworth, Esq.

SIR THOMAS BROWNE, M.D., of NORWICH, from an Original Picture in the
College of Physicians, London.

SIR CHARLES SCARBOROUGH, M.D., PHYSICIAN TO CHARLES II., JAMES II.,
and WILLIAM III., from the Original Picture in the Barber-Surgeons'
Hall.

FLORA MACDONALD, from the Original by A. Ramsay, 1749, in the Picture
Gallery, Oxford.

M.M. Holloway, 25. Bedford Street, Covent Garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRONOLOGICAL CHART of BRITISH ARCHITECTURE, with the Genealogy and
Armorial Bearings of the Sovereigns of England, and parallel Tables
of the most important events in British and General History; with an
Explanatory Volume. By Archibald Barrington. Price, Four sheets, in
wrapper, 15s. In French case, or on roller, 21s. Roller, varnished,
26s. Volume of Plain Hints, 4s. in addition.

    "A most splendid and elaborate Chart or Scheme, illustrated
    with numerous coloured engravings, presenting a synoptical
    view of the subjects in the title. A glance or two at such
    a plan will sometimes give a truer, a larger, and certainly
    a more vivid idea of the subject, than many pages of
    reading."--_British Critic_.

POCKET CHART OF BRITISH ARCHITECTURE chronologically arranged, neatly
printed in red and black, and containing seventy-five figures, with
a Descriptive Manual. By Archibald Barrington. Price, on sheet, with
Manual, 2s. In cloth, with Manual, 3s.

POCKET CHART OF FOREIGN ARCHITECTURE. Printed uniformly with the
above, in red and black, with a Descriptive Manual. By Archibald
Barrington. Price, on sheet, with Manual, 2s. In cloth case, with
Manual, 3s.

DISPLAY of HERALDRY, presenting at one view an Epitome of the Science,
with Descriptive Letter-press. By Archibald Barrington. Price, on
sheet, partly coloured, 8s. In case, or on roller, ditto, 10s. 6d.
On roller, varnished, 12s. 6d. Fully coloured, 4s. 6d. extra.

TABULAR DISPLAY OF BRITISH ARCHITECTURE, with a Manual for Beginners,
by which the dates of our Cathedral and other Churches may be easily
known. By Archibald Barrington. Price, with the Manual, on sheet,
4s. In case, 5s. On roller, 7s. 6d. On roller, varnished, 8s. 6d.
The Manual, by itself, 1s.

    "By the aid of this little pamphlet, and the 'Tabular Display'
    which it accompanies, any person previously unacquainted with
    architecture may learn to discriminate the various styles
    and dates of Gothic structures. The examples are sufficiently
    numerous and characteristic to embrace the peculiarities
    of each style, and the text referring to them supplies the
    requisite verbal information."--_Spectator_.

THE GENEALOGY and ARMORIAL BEARINGS of the SOVEREIGNS of ENGLAND, with
an Explanatory Volume, entitled, "Genealogy Simplified, and applied to
the Illustration of British History." By Archibald Barrington. Price
of the sheet, coloured, 6s. In case, or on roller, 9s. Varnished, 11s.
The Explanatory Volume of Genealogy Simplified, 3s. in addition.

    "A very clear explanation of the origin and meaning of the
    various heraldic devices of British Monarchs, and exhibiting
    the lineal descent of Queen Victoria from the Saxon Egbert.
    The Chart is set forth in bold characters, and not encumbered
    with superfluous details. The source of each line of monarchs
    and the events that led to the interruption of the succession
    are explained with such simplicity as to be perfectly
    intelligible to the youngest readers."--_Spectator_.

London: George Bell, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by Thomas Clark Shaw, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London;
and published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish
of St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No.
186. Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, March 23. 1850.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries 1850.03.23, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES 1850.03.23 ***

***** This file should be named 11958.txt or 11958.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/9/5/11958/

Produced by Jon Ingram, William Flis, and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from images provided by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


