The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cobb's Anatomy, by Irvin S. Cobb

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cobb's Anatomy

Author: Irvin S. Cobb

Posting Date: August 15, 2008 [EBook #1222]
Release Date: February, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COBB'S ANATOMY ***




Produced by Kirk Pearson





COBB'S ANATOMY

By Irvin S. Cobb


          To G. H. L.

          Who stood godfather to these contents




Preface

This Space To-Let to Any Reputable Party Desiring a Good Preface



Contents

     I.   Tummies
     II.  Teeth
     III. Hair
     IV.  Hands and feet




TUMMIES


Dr. Woods Hutchinson says that fat people are happier than other people.
How does Dr. Woods Hutchinson know? Did he ever have to leave the two
top buttons of his vest unfastened on account of his extra chins? Has
the pressure from within against the waistband where the watchfob is
located ever been so great in his case that he had partially to undress
himself to find out what time it was? Does he have to take the tailor's
word for it that his trousers need pressing?

He does not. And that sort of a remark is only what might be
expected from any person upward of seven feet tall and weighing about
ninety-eight pounds with his heavy underwear on. I shall freely take Dr.
Woods Hutchinson's statements on the joys and ills of the thin. But when
he undertakes to tell me that fat people are happier than thin
people, it is only hearsay evidence with him and decline to accept his
statements unchallenged. He is going outside of his class. He is, as you
might say, no more than an innocent bystander. Whereas I am a qualified
authority.

I will admit that at one stage of my life, I regarded fleshiness as a
desirable asset. The incident came about in this way. There was a circus
showing in our town and a number of us proposed to attend it. It was
one of those one-ring, ten-cent circuses that used to go about over the
country, and it is my present recollection that all of us had funds laid
by sufficient to buy tickets; but if we could procure admission in the
regular way we felt it would be a sinful waste of money to pay our way
in.

With this idea in mind we went scouting round back of the main tent to a
comparatively secluded spot, and there we found a place where the canvas
side-wall lifted clear of the earth for a matter of four or five inches.
We held an informal caucus to decide who should should go first.
The honor lay between two of us--between the present writer, who
was reasonably skinny, and another boy, named Thompson, who was
even skinnier. He won, as the saying is, on form. It was decided by
practically a unanimous vote, he alone dissenting, that he should crawl
under and see how the land lay inside. If everything was all right he
would make it known by certain signals and we would then follow, one by
one.

Two of us lifted the canvas very gently and this Thompson boy started
to wriggle under. He was about halfway in when--zip!--like a flash he
bodily vanished. He was gone, leaving only the marks where his toes had
gouged the soil. Startled, we looked at one another. There was something
peculiar about this. Here was a boy who had started into a circus tent
in a circumspect, indeed, a highly cautious manner, and then finished
the trip with undue and sudden precipitancy. It was more than
peculiar--it bordered upon the uncanny. It was sinister. Without a word
having been spoken we decided to go away from there.

Wearing expressions of intense unconcern and sterling innocence upon our
young faces we did go away from there and drifted back in the general
direction of the main entrance. We arrived just in time to meet our
young friend coming out. He came hurriedly, using his hands and his
feet both, his feet for traveling and his hands for rubbing purposes.
Immediately behind him was a large, coarse man using language that
stamped him as a man who had outgrown the spirit of youth and was
preeminently out of touch with the ideals and aims of boyhood.

At that period it seemed to me and to the Thompson boy, who was moved to
speak feelingly on the subject, and in fact to all of us, that excessive
slimness might have its drawbacks. Since that time several of us have
had occasion to change our minds. With the passage of years we have
fleshened up, and now we know better. The last time I saw the Thompson
boy he was known as Excess-Baggage Thompson. His figure in profile
suggested a man carrying a roll-top desk in his arms and his face looked
like a face that had refused to jell and was about to run down on his
clothes. He spoke longingly of the days of his youth and wondered if the
shape of his knees had changed much since the last time he saw them.

Yes sir, no matter what Doctor Hutchinson says, I contend that the slim
man has all the best of it in this world. The fat man is the universal
goat; he is humanity's standing joke. Stomachs are the curse of our
modern civilization. When a man gets a stomach his troubles begin. If
you doubt this ask any fat man--I started to say ask any fat woman, too.
Only there aren't any fat women to speak of. There are women who are
plump and will admit it; there are even women who are inclined to be
stout. But outside of dime museums there are no fat women. But there are
plenty of fat men. Ask one of them. Ask any one of them. Ask me.

This thing of acquiring a tummy steals on one insidiously, like a thief
in the night. You notice that you are plumping out a trifle and for the
time being you feel a sort of small personal satisfaction in it. Your
shirts fit you better. You love the slight strain upon the buttonholes.
You admire the pleasant plunking sound suggestive of ripe watermelons
when you pat yourself. Then a day comes when the persuasive odor of
mothballs fills the autumnal air and everybody at the barber shop is
having the back of his neck shaved also, thus betokening awakened social
activities, and when evening is at hand you take the dress-suit, which
fitted you so well, out of the closet where it has been hanging and
undertake to back yourself into it. You are pained to learn that it is
about three sizes too small. At first you are inclined to blame the
suit for shrinking, but second thought convinces you that the fault lies
elsewhere. It is you that have swollen, not the suit that has shrunk.
The buttons that should adorn the front of the coat are now plainly
visible from the rear.

You buy another dress-suit and next fall you have out-grown that one
too. You pant like a lizard when you run to catch a car. You cross your
legs and have to hold the crossed one on with both hands to keep your
stomach from shoving it off in space. After a while you quit crossing
them and are content with dawdling yourself on your own lap. You are
fat! Dog-gone it--you are fat!

You are up against it and it is up against you, which is worse. You are
something for people to laugh at. You are also expected to laugh. It
is all right for a thin man to be grouchy; people will say the poor
creature has dyspepsia and should be humored along. But a fat man with
a grouch is inexcusable in any company--there is so much of him to be
grouchy. He constitutes a wave of discontent and a period of general
depression. He is not expected to be romantic and sentimental either. It
is all right for a giraffe to be sentimental, but not a hippopotamus. If
you doubt me consult any set of natural history pictures. The giraffe is
shown with his long and sinuous neck entwined in fond embrace about the
neck of his mate; but the amphibious, blood-sweating hippo is depicted
as spouting and wallowing, morose and misanthropic, in a mud puddle
off by himself. In passing I may say that I regard this comparison as
a particularly apt one, because I know of no living creature so truly
amphibious in hot weather as an open-pored fat man, unless it is a
hippopotamus.

Oh how true is the saying that nobody loves a fat man! When fat comes up
on the front porch love jumps out of the third-story window. Love in
a cottage? Yes. Love in a rendering plant? No. A fat man's heart is
supposed to lie so far inland that the softer emotions cannot reach it
at all. Yet the fattest are the truest, if you did but know it, and
also they are the tenderest and a man with a double chin rarely leads a
double life. For one thing, it requires too much moving round.

A fat man cannot wear the clothes he would like to wear. As a race fat
men are fond of bright and cheerful colors; but no fat man can indulge
his innocent desires in this direction without grieving his family and
friends and exciting the derisive laughter of the unthinking. If he puts
on a fancy-flowered vest, they'll say he looks like a Hanging Garden
of Babylon. And yet he has a figure just made for showing off a
fancy-flowered vest to best effect. He may favor something in light
checks for his spring suit; but if he ventures abroad in a checked suit,
ribald strangers will look at him meaningly and remark to one another
that the center of population appears to be shifting again. It has
been my observation that fat men are instinctively drawn to short tan
overcoats for the early fall. But a fat man in a short tan overcoat,
strolling up the avenue of a sunny afternoon, will be constantly
overhearing persons behind him wondering why they didn't wait until
night to move the bank vault. That irks him sore; but if he turns round
to reproach them he is liable to shove an old lady or a poor blind
man off the sidewalk, and then, like as not, some gamin will sing out:
"Hully gee, Chimmy, wot's become of the rest of the parade? 'Ere's the
bass drum goin' home all by itself."

I've known of just such remarks being made and I assure you they cut a
sensitive soul to the core. Not for the fat man are the snappy clothes
for varsity men and the patterns called by the tailors confined because
that is what they should be but aren't. Not for him the silken shirt
with the broad stripes. Shirts with stripes that were meant to run
vertically but are caused to run horizontally, by reasons over which
the wearer has no control, remind others of the awning over an Italian
grocery. So the fat man must stick to sober navy blues and depressing
blacks and melancholy grays. He is advised that he should wear his
evening clothes whenever possible, because black and white lines are
more becoming to him. But even in evening clothes, that wide expanse of
glazed shirt and those white enamel studs will put the onlookers in mind
of the front end of a dairy lunch or so I have been cruelly told.

When planning public utilities, who thinks of a fat man? There never was
a hansom cab made that would hold a fat man comfortably unless he left
the doors open, and that makes him feel undressed. There never was an
orchestra seat in a theater that would contain all of him at the same
time--he churns up and sloshes out over the sides. Apartment houses and
elevators and hotel towels are all constructed upon the idea that the
world is populated by stock-size people with those double-A-last shapes.

Take a Pullman car, for instance. One of the saddest sights known is
that of a fat man trying to undress on one of those closet shelves
called upper berths without getting hopelessly entangled in the hammock
or committing suicide by hanging himself with his own suspenders. And
after that, the next most distressing sight is the same fat man after
he has undressed and is lying there, spouting like a sperm-whale and
overflowing his reservation like a crock of salt-rising dough in a warm
kitchen, and wondering how he can turn over without bulging the side of
the car and maybe causing a wreck. Ah me, those dark green curtains with
the overcoat buttons on them hide many a distressful spectacle from the
traveling public!

If a fat man undertakes to reduce nobody sympathizes with him. A
thin man trying to fatten up so he won't fall all the way through his
trousers when he draws 'em on in the morning is an object of sympathy
and of admiration, and people come from miles round and give him advice
about how to do it. But suppose a fat man wants to train down to a point
where, when he goes into a telephone booth and says "Ninety-four Broad,"
the spectators will know he is trying to get a number and not telling
his tailor what his waist measure is.

Is he greeted with sympathetic understanding? He is not. He is greeted
with derision and people stand round and gloat at him. The authorities
recommend health exercises, but health exercises are almost invariably
undignified in effect and wearing besides. Who wants to greet the dewy
morn by lying flat on his back and lifting his feet fifty times? What
kind of a way is that to greet the dewy morn anyhow? And bending over
with the knees stiff and touching the tips of the toes with the tips
of the fingers--that's no employment for a grown man with a family to
support and a position to maintain in society. Besides which it
cannot be done. I make the statement unequivocally and without fear
of successful contradiction that it cannot be done. And if it could
be done--which as I say it can't--there would be no real pleasure in
touching a set of toes that one has known of only by common rumor for
years. Those toes are the same as strangers to you--you knew they were
in the neighborhood, of course, but you haven't been intimate with them.

Maybe you try dieting, which is contrary to nature. Nature intended that
a fat man should eat heartily, else why should she endow him with the
capacity and the accommodations. Starving in the midst of plenty is not
for him who has plenty of midst. Nature meant that a fat man should have
an appetite and that he should gratify it at regular intervals--meant
that he should feel like the Grand Canyon before dinner and like the
Royal Gorge afterward. Anyhow, dieting for a fat man consists in not
eating anything that's fit to eat. The specialist merely tells him to
eat what a horse would eat and has the nerve to charge him for what
he could have found out for himself at any livery stable. Of course
he might bant in the same way that a woman bants. You know how a woman
bants. She begins the day very resolutely, and if you are her husband
you want to avoid irritating her or upsetting her, because hell hath no
fury like a woman banting. For breakfast she takes a swallow of lukewarm
water and half of a soda cracker. For luncheon she takes the other
half of the cracker and leaves off the water. For dinner she orders
everything on the menu except the date and the name of the proprietor.
She does this in order to give her strength to go on with the treatment.

No fat man would diet that way; but no matter which way he does diet it
doesn't do him any good. Health exercises only make him muscle-sore and
bring on what the Harvard ball team call the Charles W. Horse; while
banting results in attacks of those kindred complaints--the Mollie K.
Grubbs and the Fan J. Todds.

Walking is sometimes recommended and the example of the camel is pointed
out, the camel being a creature that can walk for days and days. But,
as has been said by some thinking person, who in thunder wants to be a
camel? The subject of horseback riding is also brought up frequently in
this connection. It is one of the commonest delusions among fat men
that horseback riding will bring them down and make them sylphlike and
willowy. I have several fat men among my lists of acquaintances who
labor under this fallacy. None of them was ever a natural-born horseback
rider; none of them ever will be. I like to go out of a bright morning
and take a comfortable seat on a park bench--one park bench is plenty
roomy enough if nobody else is using it--and sit there and watch these
unhappy persons passing single file along the bridle-path. I sit there
and gloat until by rights I ought to be required to take out a gloater's
license.

Mind you, I have no prejudice against horseback riding as such.
Horseback riding is all right for mounted policemen and Colonel W. F.
Cody and members of the Stickney family and the party who used to play
Mazeppa in the sterling drama of that name. That is how those persons
make their living. They are suited for it and acclimated to it. It is
also all right for equestrian statues of generals in the Civil War. But
it is not a fit employment for a fat man and especially for a fat man
who insists on trying to ride a hard-trotting horse English style, which
really isn't riding at all when you come right down to cases, but an
outdoor cure for neurasthenia invented, I take it, by a British subject
who was nervous himself and hated to stay long in one place. So, as I
was saying, I sit there on my comfortable park bench and watch
those friends of mine bouncing by, each wearing on his face that set
expression which is seen also on the faces of some men while waltzing,
and on the faces of most women when entertaining their relatives by
marriage. I have one friend who is addicted to this form of punishment
in a violent, not to say a malignant form. He uses for his purpose a
tall and self-willed horse of the Tudor period--a horse with those high
dormer effects and a sloping mansard. This horse must have been raised,
I think, in the knockabout song-and-dance business. Every time he hears
music or thinks he hears it he stops and vamps with his feet. When
he does this my friend bends forward and clutches him round the neck
tightly. I think he is trying to whisper in the horse's ear and beg him
in Heaven's name to forbear; but what he looks like is Santa Claus with
a clean shave, sitting on the combing of a very steep house with his
feet hanging over the eaves, peeking down the chimney to see if the
children are asleep yet. When that horse dies he will still have finger
marks on his throat and the authorities will suspect foul play probably.

Once I tried it myself. I was induced to scale the heights of a horse
that was built somewhat along the general idea of the Andes Mountains,
only more rugged and steeper nearing the crest. From the ground he
looked to be not more than sixteen hands high, but as soon as I was up
on top of him I immediately discerned that it was not sixteen hands--it
was sixteen miles. What I had taken for the horse's blaze face was
a snow-capped peak. Miss Anna Peck might have felt at home up there,
because she has had the experience and is used to that sort of thing,
but I am no mountain climber myself.

Before I could make any move to descend to the lower and less rarefied
altitudes the horse began executing a few fancy steps, and he started
traveling sidewise with a kind of a slanting bias movement that was
extremely disconcerting, not to say alarming, instead of proceeding
straight ahead as a regular horse would. I clung there astraddle of his
ridge pole, with my fingers twined in his mane, trying to anticipate
where he would be next, in order to be there to meet him if possible;
and I resolved right then that, if Providence in His wisdom so willed it
that I should get down from up there alive, I would never do so again.
However, I did not express these longings in words--not at that time. At
that time there were only two words in the English language which seemed
to come to me. One of them was "Whoa" and the other was "Ouch," and
I spoke them alternately with such rapidity that they merged into the
compound word "Whouch," which is a very expressive word and one that I
would freely recommend to others who may be situated as I was.

At that moment, of all the places in the world that I could think
of--and I could think of a great many because the events of my past
life were rapidly flashing past me--as is customary, I am told, in other
cases of grave peril, such as drowning--I say of all the places in the
world there were just two where I least desired to be--one was up on top
of that horse and the other was down under him. But it seemed to be a
choice of the two evils, and so I chose the lesser and got under him. I
did this by a simple expedient that occurred to me at the moment. I fell
off. I was tramped on considerably, and the earth proved to be harder
than it looked when viewed from an approximate height of sixteen miles
up, but I lived and breathed--or at least I breathed after a time
had elapsed--and I was satisfied. And so, having gone through this
experience myself, I am in position to appreciate what any other man
of my general build is going through as I see him bobbing by--the poor
martyr, sacrificing himself as a burnt offering, or anyway a blistered
one--on the high altar of a Gothic ruin of a horse. And, besides, I
know that riding a horse doesn't reduce a fat man. It merely reduces the
horse.

So it goes--the fat man is always up against it. His figure is
half-masted in regretful memory of the proportions he had once, and
he is made to mourn. Most sports and many gainful pursuits are closed
against him. He cannot play lawn tennis, or, at least according to my
observation, he cannot play lawn tennis oftener than once in two weeks.
In between games he limps round, stiff as a hat tree and sore as a
mashed thumb. Time was when he might mingle in the mystic mazes of the
waltz, tripping the light fantastic toe or stubbing it, as the case may
be. But that was in the days of the old-fashioned square dance, which
was the fat man's friend among dances, and also of the old-fashioned
two-step, and not in these times when dancing is a cross between a
wrestling match, a contortion act and a trip on a roller-coaster, and is
either named for an animal, like the Bunny Hug and the Tarantula Glide,
or for a town, like the Mobile Mop-Up, and the Far Rockaway Rock and the
South Bend Bend. His friends would interfere--or the authorities would.
He can go in swimming, it is true; but if he turns over and floats,
people yell out that somebody has set the life raft adrift; and if he
basks at the water's edge, boats will come in and try to dock alongside
him; and if he takes a sun bath on the beach and sunburns, there's so
everlasting much of him to be sunburned that he practically amounts to a
conflagration. He can't shoot rapids, craps or big game with any degree
of comfort; nor play billiards. He can't get close enough to the table
to make the shots, and he puts all the English on himself and none of it
on the cue ball.

Consider the gainful pursuits. Think how many of them are denied to the
man who may have energy and ability but is shut out because there are a
few extra terraces on his front lawn. A fat man cannot be a leading man
in a play. Nobody desires a fat hero for a novel. A fat man cannot go
in for aeroplaning. He cannot be a wire-walker or a successful walker
of any of the other recognized brands--track, cake, sleep or floor. He
doesn't make a popular waiter. Nobody wants a fat waiter on a hot day.
True, you may make him bring your order under covered dishes, but
even so, there is still that suggestion of rain on a tin roof that is
distasteful to so many.

So I repeat that fat people are always getting the worst of it, and I
say again, of all the ills that flesh is heir to, the worst is the flesh
itself. As the poet says--"The world, the flesh and the devil"--and
there you have it in a sentence--the flesh in between, catching the
devil on one side and the jeers of the world on the other. I don't care
what Dr. Woods Hutchinson or any other thin man says! I contend that
history is studded with instances of prominent persons who lost out
because they got fat. Take Cleopatra now, the lady to whom Marc Antony
said: "I am dying, Egypt, dying," and then refrained from doing so for
about nineteen more stanzas. Cleo or Pat--she was known by both names,
I hear--did fairly well as a queen, as a coquette and as a promoter of
excursions on the river--until she fleshened up. Then she flivvered.
Doctor Johnson was a fat man and he suffered from prickly heat, and from
Boswell, and from the fact that he couldn't eat without spilling most
of the gravy on his second mezzanine landing. As a thin and spindly
stripling Napoleon altered the map of Europe and stood many nations on
their heads. It was after he had grown fat and pursy that he landed
on St. Helena and spent his last days on a barren rock, with his arms
folded, posing for steel engravings. Nero was fat, and he had a lot of
hard luck in keeping his relatives--they were almost constantly dying on
him and he finally had to stab himself with one of those painful-looking
old Roman two-handed swords, lest something really serious befall him.
Falstaff was fat, and he lost the favor of kings in the last act. Coming
down to our own day and turning to a point no farther away than the
White House at Washington--but have we not enough examples without
becoming personal? Yes, I know Julius Caesar said: "Let me have men
about me that are fat." But you bet it wasn't in the heated period when
J. Caesar said that!




TEETH


One of the most pleasant features about being born, as I conceive it,
is that we are born without teeth. I believe there have been a few
exceptions to this rule--Richard the Third, according to the accounts,
came into the world equipped with all his teeth and a perfectly
miserable disposition; and once in a while, especially during Roosevelt
years, when the Colonel's picture is hanging on the walls of so many
American homes, we read in the paper that a baby has just been born
somewhere with a full set, and even, as in the case of the infant son
of a former member of the Rough Riders, with nose glasses and a
close-cropped mustache. This, however, may have been a pardonable
exaggeration of the real facts. As I recall now, it was reported in a
dispatch to the New York Tribune from Lover's Leap, Iowa, during the
presidential campaign eight years ago.

In the main, though, we are born without teeth. We are born without a
number of things--clothes for example--although Anthony Comstock is said
to be pushing a law requiring all children to be born with overalls on;
but teeth is the subject which we are now discussing. This absence of
teeth tends to give the very young of our species the appearance in the
face of an old fashioned buckskin purse with the draw string broken, but
be that as it may, we are generally fairly well content with life until
the teeth begin to come.

First there are the milk teeth. Right there our troubles start. To use
the term commonly in use, we cut them, although as a matter of fact,
they cut us--cut them with the aid of some such mussy thing as a
toothing ring or the horny part of the nurse's thumb, or the reverse
side of a spoon--cut them at the cost of infinite suffering, not only
for ourselves but for everybody else in the vicinity. And about the time
we get the last one in we begin to lose the first one out. They go one
at a time, by falling out, or by being yanked out, or by coming out of
their own accord when we eat molasses taffy. They were merely what
you might call our Entered Apprentice teeth. We go in now for the full
thirty-two degrees--one degree for each tooth and thirty-two teeth to
a set. By arduous and painful processes, stretching over a period
of years, we get our regular teeth--the others were only
volunteers--concluding with the wisdom teeth, as so called, but it is a
misnomer, because there never is room for them and they have to stand
up in the back row and they usually arrive with holes in them, and if we
really possessed any wisdom we would figure out some way of abolishing
them altogether. They come late and crowd their way in and push the
other teeth out of line and so we go about for months with the top of
our mouths filled with braces and wires and things, so that when we
breathe hard we sob and croon inside of ourselves like an Aeolean harp.

But in any event we get them all and no sooner do we get them than we
begin to lose them. They develop cavities and aches and extra roots and
we spend a good part of our lives and most of our substance with the
dentist. Nevertheless, in spite of all we can do and all he can do, we
keep on losing them. And after awhile, they are all gone and our face
folds up on us like a crush hat or a concertina and from our brow to our
chin we don't look much more than a third as long as we used to look.
We dislike this folded-up appearance naturally--who wouldn't? And we get
tired of living on spoon victuals and the memory of past beef-steaks. So
we go and get some false ones made. They have to be made to order;
there appears to be no market for custom made teeth; you never see any
hand-me-down teeth advertised, guaranteed to fit any face and withstand
a damp climate. Getting them made to order is a long and unhappy process
and I will pass over it briefly. Having got them, we find that they do
not fit us or that we do not fit them, which comes to the same thing.
The dentist makes them fit by altering us some and the teeth some, and
after some months they quit feeling as though they didn't belong to us
but had been borrowed temporarily from somebody's loan collection of
ceramics.

But just about the time they are becoming acclimated and we are getting
used to them, the interior of our mouth for private reasons best known
to itself changes around materially and we either have to go back and
start all over and go through the whole thing again, or else haply we
die and pass on to the bourne from which no traveller returneth either
with his teeth or without them. If Shakespeare had only thought of
it--and he did think of a number of things from time to time--he might
have divided his Seven Ages of Man much better by making them the Seven
Ages of Teeth as follows: First age--no tooth; second age--milk teeth;
third age--losing 'em; fourth age--getting more teeth; fifth
age--losing 'em; sixth age--getting false teeth and finding they aren't
satisfactory; seventh age--toothless again.

I knew a man once who was a gunsmith and lost all his teeth at a
comparatively early age. He went along that way for years. He had to
eschew the tenderloin for the reason that he couldn't chew it, and he
had to cut out hickory nut cake and corn on the ear and such things. But
there is nothing about the art of gunsmithing which seems to call for
teeth, so he got along very well, living in a little house with the wife
of his bosom and a faithful housedog named Ponto. But when he was past
sixty he went and got himself some teeth from the dentist. He did this
without saying anything about it at home; he was treasuring it up for a
surprise. The corner stone was laid in May and the scaffolding was all
up by July and in August the new teeth were dedicated with suitable
ceremonies.

They altered his appearance materially. His nose and chin which had been
on terms of intimacy now rubbed each other a last fond good-bye and his
face lost that accordion-pleated look and straightened out and became
about six or seven inches longer from top to bottom. He now had a sort
of determined aspect like the iron jawed lady in a circus, whereas
before his face had the appearance of being folded over and wadded
down inside of his neck band, so his hat could rest comfortably on his
collar. He knew he was altered, but he didn't realize how much he was
altered until he went home that evening and walked proudly in the front
gate. His wife who was timid about strangers, slammed the door right in
his face and faithful Ponto came out from under the porch steps and bit
him severely in the calf of the leg. There was only one consolation
in it for him--for the first time in a long number of years he was in
position to bite back.

And that's how it is with teeth--with your teeth let us say--for right
here I'm going to drop the personal pronoun and speak of them as your
teeth from now on. If anybody has to suffer it might as well be you and
not me; I expect to be busy telling about it. As I started to say awhile
ago, you--remember it's you from this point--you get your regular teeth
and they start right in giving you trouble. Every little while one of
them bursts from its cell with a horrible yell and in the lulls between
pangs you go forth among men with the haunted look in your eye of one
who is listening for the footfalls of a dread apparition, and one half
of your head is puffed out of plumb as though you were engaged in the
whimsical idea of holding an egg plant in the side of your jaw. A kind
friend meets you, and, speaking with that high courage and that lofty
spirit of sacrifice which a kind friend always exhibits when it's your
tooth that is kicking up the rumpus and not his, he tells you you ought
to have something done for it right away. You know that as well as he
does, but you hate to have the subject brought up. It's your toothache
anyhow. It originated with you. You are its proud parent but not so
awfully proud at that. Mother and child doing as well as could be
expected, but not expected to do very well.

But these friends of yours keep on shoving their free advice on you and
the tooth keeps on getting worse and worse until the pain spreads all
through the First Ward and finally you grab your resolution in both
hands to keep it from leaking out between your fingers and you go to the
dentist's.

This happens so many times that after awhile you lose count and so would
the dentist, if he didn't write your name down every time in his little
red book with pleasingly large amounts entered opposite to it. It seems
to you that you are always doing something for your teeth? You have them
pulled and pushed and shoved and filled and unfilled and refilled and
excavated and blasted and sculptured and scroll-sawed and a lot of other
things that you wouldn't think could be done legally without a building
permit. As time passes on, the inside of your once well-tilled and
commodious head becomes but little more than a recent site. Your vaults
have been blown and most of your contents abstracted by Amalgam Mike
and Dental Slim, the Demon Yeggmen of the Human Face. You are merely the
scattered clews left behind for the authorities to work on; you are the
faint traces of the fiendish crime. You are the point marked X.

But all along there is generally one tooth that has behaved herself like
a lady. Other teeth may have betrayed your confidence but Old Faithful
has hung on, attending to business, asking only for standing room and
kind treatment. The others you may view with alarm, but to this tooth
you can point with pride. But have a care--she is deceiving you.

Some night you go to bed and have a dream. In your dream it seems to you
that a fox terrier is chasing a woodchuck around and around the inside
of your head. In that tangled sort of fashion peculiar to dreams your
sympathy seems to go out first to the fox terrier and then to the
woodchuck as they circle about nimbly, leaping from your tonsils to your
larynx and then up over the rafters in the roof of your mouth and down
again and pattering over the sub-maxillary from side to side. But about
then you wake up with a violent start and decide that any sympathy
you may have in stock should be reserved for personal use exclusively,
because at this moment the dog trees the woodchuck at the base of
that cherished tooth of yours and starts to dig him out. He is a very
determined dog and very active, but he needs a manicure. You are struck
by that fact almost immediately.

Uttering some of those trite and commonplace remarks that are customary
for use under such circumstances and yet are so futile to express
one's real sentiments, you arise and undertake to pacify the infuriated
creature with household remedies. You try to lure him away with a wad
of medicated cotton stuck on the end of a parlor match. But arnica is
evidently an acquired taste with him. He doesn't seem to care for it any
more than you do. You begin to dress, using one hand to put your clothes
on with and the other to hold the top of your head on. At this important
juncture, the dog tears down the last remaining partitions and nails the
woodchuck. The woodchuck is game--say what you will about the habits and
customs of the woodchuck you have to hand it to him there--he's game as
a lion. He fights back desperately. Intense excitement reigns throughout
the vicinity. While the struggle wages you get your clothes on and wait
for daylight to come, which it does in from eight to ten weeks. Norway
is not the only place where the nights are six months long.

There is nobody waiting at the dentist's when you get there, it being
early. You are willing to wait. At a barber shop it may be different but
at a dentist's you are always willing to wait, like a gentleman. But the
sinewy young man who is sitting in the front parlor reading the Hammer
Thrower's Gazette, welcomes you with a false air of gaiety entirely out
of keeping with the circumstances and invites you to step right in. He
tells you that you are next. This is wrong--if you were next you would
turn and flee like a deer. Not being next, you enter. Right from the
start you seem to take a dislike to this young man. You catch him
spitting in his hands and hitching his sleeves up as you are hanging up
your hat. Besides he is too robust for a dentist. With those shoulders
he ought to be a boiler maker or a safe mover or something of that sort.
You resolve inwardly that next time you go to a dentist you are going to
one of a more lady-like bearing and gentler demeanor. It seems a
brutal thing that a big strong man should waste his years in a dental
establishment when the world is clamoring for strong men to do the heavy
lifting jobs. But before you can say anything, this muscular athlete has
laid violent hands on your palpitating form and wadded it abruptly into
the hideous embraces of a red plush chair, which looks something like
the one they use up at Sing Sing, only it's done more quickly up there
and with less suffering on the part of the condemned. On one side of
you you behold quite a display of open plumbing and on the other side
a tasty exhibit of small steel tools of assorted sizes. No matter which
way your gaze may stray you'll be seeing something attractive.

You also take notice of an electric motor about large enough, you would
say, to run a trolley car, which is purring nearby in a sinister and
forbidding way. They are constantly making these little improvements
in the dental profession. I have heard that fifty years ago a dentist
traveled about over the country from place to place, sometimes pulling a
tooth and sometimes breaking a colt. He practiced his art with an outfit
consisting of two pairs of iron forceps--one pair being saber-toothed
while the other pair was merely saw-fretted--and he gave a man the same
kind of treatment he gave a horse, only he tied the horse's legs first.
But now electricity is in general use and no dentist's establishment is
complete without a dynamo attachment which makes a crooning sound when
in operation and provides instrumental accompaniment to the song of the
official canary.

I know why a barber in a country town is always learning to play on the
guitar and I know why a man with an emotional Adam's apple always wears
an open front collar. I know these things, but am debarred from telling
them by reason of a solemn oath. But I have not yet been able to
discover why every dentist keeps a canary in his office. Nor do I know
why it is, just as you settle your neck back on a head rest that's every
bit as comfortable as an anvil, and just as a dentist climbs into you
as far as the arm pits and begins probing at the bottom of a tooth which
has roots extending back behind your ears, like an old-fashioned pair of
spectacles, that the canary bird should wipe his nose on a cuttle bone
and dash into a melodious outburst of two hundred thousand twitters,
all of them being twitters of the same size, shape, and color. For that
matter, I don't even know what kind of an animal a cuttle is, although I
should say from the shape of his bone as used by the canary instead of
a pocket handkerchief, that he is circular and flat and stands on
edge only with the utmost difficulty. If you will pardon my temporary
digressions into the realm of natural history, we will now return to the
main subject, which was your tooth.

The moment the muscular young man starts up his motor and gives the
canary its music cue and begins pawing over his tool collection to pick
out a good sharp one, you recover. All of a sudden you feel fine, and
so does the tooth. Neither one of you ever felt better. The fox terrier
must have killed the woodchuck and then committed suicide. You are
about to mention this double tragedy and beg the young man's pardon for
causing him any trouble and excuse yourself and go away, but just then
he quits feeling of his biceps and suddenly seizes you by your features
and undoes them. If you are where you can catch a glimpse of yourself in
a mirror you will immediately note how much the human face divine can be
made to look like an old-fashioned red brick Colonial fire place.

There are likely to be several things you would like to talk about. You
are full of thoughts seeking utterance. For one thing you want to tell
him you don't think the brand of soap he uses on his hands is going to
agree with you at all. You probably don't care personally for the way
your barber's thumb tastes either, but a barber's thumb is Peaches
Melba alongside of a dentist's. Before you can say anything though he
discovers a cavity or orifice of some sort in the base of your tooth.
It seems to give him pleasure. Filled with intense gratification by this
discovery and fired moreover by the impetuous ardor of the chase, he
grabs up a crochet needle with a red hot stinger on the end of it and
jabs it down your tooth to a point about opposite where your suspenders
fork in the back.

You have words with him then, or at least you start to have words with
him, but he puts his knee in your chest and tells you that it really
doesn't hurt at all, but is only your imagination, and utters other
soothing remarks of that general nature. He then exchanges the crochet
needle for a kind of an instrument with a burr on the end of it. This
instrument first came into use at the time of the Spanish Inquisition
but has since been greatly improved on and brought right up to date. He
takes this handy little utensil and proceeds to stir up your imagination
some more. You again try to say something, speaking in a muffled tone,
but he is not listening. He is calling to a brother assassin in
the adjoining room to come and see a magnificent example of a prime
old-vatted triple X exposed nerve. So the Second Grave Digger rests his
tools against the palate of his victim and comes in.

As nearly as you can gather from hearsay evidence, you not being an eye
witness yourself, one of them harpoons the nerve just back of the gills
with a nutpick--remember please it is your nerve that they are taking
all these liberties with--and pulls it out of its retreat and the other
man takes a tack hammer and tries to beat its brains out. Any time he
misses the nerve he hits you, so his average is still a thousand, and
it is fine practice for him. A pleasant time is had by everybody present
except you and the nerve. The nerve wraps its hind legs around your
breastbone and hangs on desperately. You perspire freely and make noises
like a drunken Zulu trying to sing a Swedish folk song while holding a
spoonful of hot mush in his mouth.

In time becoming wearied even of these congenial diversions and tiring
of the shop talk that has been going on, the second dentist returns
to his original prey and the party who has you in charge tries a new
experiment. He arms himself with a kind of an automatic hammering
machine, somewhat similar to the steam riveter used in constructing
steel office buildings, except that this one is more compact and can
deliver about eighty-five more blows to the second. Thus equipped, he
descends far below your high water mark and engages in aquatic sports
and pastimes for a considerable period of time. It seems to you that you
never saw a man who could go down and stay down as long as this young
man can. You begin to feel that you misjudged his real vocation in life
when you decided that he ought to be a boiler maker. You know that he
was intended for pearl fishing. He's a natural born deep sea diver. He
doesn't even have to come up to breathe, but stays below, knee deep in
your tide wash, merrily knocking chunks off your lowermost coral reefs
with his little steam riveter and having a perfectly lovely time.

You are overflowing copiously and you wish he would take the time to
stop and bail you out. You abhor the idea of being drowned as an inside
job. But no, he keeps right on and along about here it is customary for
you to swoon away.

On recovering, you observe that he has changed his mind again. He is now
going in for amateur theatricals and is using you for a theatre. First
thoughtfully draping a little rubber drop curtain across your proscenium
arch to keep you from seeing what is going on behind your own scenes, he
is setting the stage for the thrilling sawmill scene in Blue Jeans. You
can distinctly feel the circular saw at work and you can taste a hod of
mortar and a bucket of hot tar and one thing and another that have been
left in the wings. You also judge that the insulation is burning off of
an electric fixture somewhere up stage.

All this time the tooth is still offering resistance, and eventually the
dentist comes out in front once more and makes a little curtain speech
to you. He has just ascertained that what the tooth really needed was
not filling but pulling. He thought at first that it should be filled
and that is what he has been doing--filling it--but now he knows that
pulling is the indicated procedure. He does not understand how a tooth
that seemed so open could have deceived him. Nevertheless he will now
pull the tooth.

He pulls her. She does her level best but he pulls her. He harvests
small sections of the gum from time to time and occasionally he stops
long enough to loosen up the roots as far down as your floating ribs.
But he pulls her. He spares no pains to pull that tooth. Or if he spares
any you are not able subsequently to remember what they were. You utter
various loud sounds in a strange and incomprehensible language and he
lays back and braces his knees against your lower jaw, and the tooth
utters the death rattle and begins picking the cover-lid. And then he
gives one final heave and breaks the roots away from the lower part of
your spinal column to which they were adhering, and emerges into the
open panting but triumphant, and holds his trophy up for you to look
at. If you didn't know it was your tooth you would take it for an
old-fashioned china cuspidor that had been neglected by the janitor.

It was a tooth that you had been prizing for years, but now you wouldn't
have it as a gracious gift. You are through with that tooth forever. You
never want to see it again.

As for the dentist, he collects the fixed charge for stumpage and
corkage and one thing and another and you come away with a feeling in
the side of your jaw like a vacant lot. Your tongue keeps going over
there to see if it can recognize the old place by the hole where the
foundations used to be. You never realized before what a basement there
was to a tooth.

As you come out you pass a fresh victim going in and you see the dentist
welcome him and then turn to crank up his motor and you hear the canary
tuning up with a new line of v-shaped twitters. And you are glad that he
is the one who is going in and that you are the one who is coming out.

Science tells us that the teeth are the hardest things in the human
composition, which is all very well as far as it goes, but what science
should do is to go on and finish the sentence. It means the hardest to
keep.




HAIR


As I remarked in the preceding chapter of this work, one of the
pleasantest features about being born is that we are born without teeth
and other responsibilities. Teeth, like debts and installment payments,
come along later on. It is the same way with hair.

Born, we are, hairless or comparatively so. We are in a highly
incomplete state at that period of our lives. It takes a fond and doting
parent to detect evidences of an actual human aspect in us. Only the
ears and the mouth appear to be up to the plans and specifications.
There is a mouth which when opened, as it generally is, makes the
rest of the face look like a tire, and there is a pair of ears of
such generous size that only a third one is needed, round at the back
somewhere, to give us the appearance of a loving cup. And we are smocked
and hem-stitched with a million wrinkles apiece, more or less, which
partly accounts for the fact that every newborn infant looks to be about
two hundred years old. And uniformly we have the nice red complexion of
a restaurant lobster. You know that live-broiled look?

As for our other features, they are more or less rudimentary. Of a
nose there is only what a chemist would call a trace. It seems hard to
imagine that a dinky little nubbin like that, a dimple turned inside
out, as it were, will ever develop into a regular nose, with a capacity
for freckling in the summer and catching cold in the winter--a nose that
you can sneeze through and blow with. There are no eyebrows to speak of
either, and the skull runs up to a sharp point like a pineapple cheese.
Just back of the peak is a kind of soft, dented-in place like a Parker
House roll, and if you touch it we die. In some cases this spot remains
soft throughout life, and these persons grow up and go through railroad
trains in presidential years taking straw votes.

And, as I said before, there isn't any hair; only on the slopes of the
cheese are some very pale, faint, downy lines, which look as though they
had been sketched on lightly with a very soft drawing pencil and would
wipe off readily. That, however is the inception and beginning of what
afterward becomes, among our race, hair. To look at it you could hardly
believe it, but it is. Barring accidents or backwardness, it continues
to grow from that time on through our childhood, but its behavior is
always a profound disappointment. If the child is a girl and, therefore,
entitled to curly hair, her hair is sure to come in stiff and straight.
If it's a boy, to whom curls will be a curse and a cross of affliction,
he is morally certain to be as curly as a frizzly chicken, and until
he gets old enough to rebel he will wear long ringlets and boys of his
acquaintance will insert cockle-burs and chewing gum into his tresses,
and he will be known popularly as Sissie and otherwise his life with be
made joyous and carefree for him. If a reddish tone of hair is desired
it is certain to grow out yellow or brown or black; and if brown is your
favorite shade you are absolutely sure to be nice and red-headed, with
eyebrows and lashes to match, and so many cowlicks that when you remove
your hat people will think you're wearing two or three halos at once.
Hair rarely or never acts up to its advance notices.

One of the earliest and most painful recollections of my youth is
associated with hair. I still tingle warmly when I think of it. I should
say I was about eight years old at the time. My mother sent me down the
street to the barber's to have my hair trimmed--shingled was the term
then used. Some of my private collection of cowlicks had begun to
stand up in a way that invited adverse criticism and reminded people
of sunbursts. They made me look as though my hair were trying to pull
itself out by the roots and escape. So I was sent to the barber's.
My little cousin, two years younger, went along in my charge. It was
thought that the performance might entertain her. I was mounted in
a chair and had a cloth tucked in round my neck, like a self-made
millionaire about to eat consomme. The officiating barber got out a
shiny steel instrument with jaws--the first pair of clippers I had ever
seen--and he ran this up the back of my neck, producing a most agreeable
feeling. He reached the top of my head and would have paused but I told
him to go right ahead and clip me close all over, which he did. When he
had finished the job I was so delighted with the sensation and with the
attendant result as viewed in a mirror that I suggested he might give my
little cousin a similar treat. From a mere child I was ever so--willing
always to share my simple pleasures with those about me, especially
where it entailed no inconvenience on my part. I told him my father
would pay the bill for both of us when he came by that night.

The barber fell in with the suggestion. It has ever been my experience
that a barber will fall in readily with any suggestion whereby the
barber is going to get something out of it for himself. In this instance
he was going to get another quarter, and a quarter went farther in
those days than it does now. I dismounted from the chair and my innocent
little cousin was installed in my place. As I now recall she made no
protest. The barber ran his clippers conscientiously and painstakingly
over her tender young scalp, while I stood admiringly by and watched the
long yellow curls fall writhing upon the floor at my feet. It seemed
to me that a great and manifest improvement was produced in her general
appearance. Instead of being hampered by those silly curls dangling down
all round her face, she now had a round, slick, smooth dome decorated
with a stiff yellowish stubble, and the skin showed through nice and
pink and the ears were well displayed, whereas before they had been
practically hidden. She was also relieved of those foolish bangs hanging
down in her eyes. This, I should have stated, occurred in the period
when womankind of whatsoever age and also some men wore bangs, a disease
from which all have since recovered with the exception of racehorses and
princesses of the various reigning houses of Europe. And now my little
cousin was shut of those annoying bangs, and her forehead ran up so high
that you had to go round behind her to see where it left off.

Filled with a joyous sense of achievement and conscious of a kindly
deed worthily performed, I took my little cousin by her hand and led her
home.

My mother was waiting for us at the front door. She seemed surprised
when I took off my hat and gave her a look, but that wasn't a
circumstance to her surprise when I proudly took off my little cousin's
cap. She uttered a kind of a strangled cry and my cousin's mother came
running, and the way she carried on was scandalous and ill-timed. I will
draw a veil over the proceedings of the next few minutes. At the time it
would have been a source of great personal gratification and comfort to
me if I could have drawn a number of veils, good, thick, woolen ones,
over the proceedings. My mother wept, my aunt wept, my little cousin
wept, and I am not ashamed to state that I wept quite copiously myself.
But I had more provocation to weep than any of them.

When this part of the affair was over my mother sent me back to the
barber with a message. I was to say that a heart-broken woman demanded
to have the curls of which her darling child had been denuded. I believe
that there was some idea entertained of sewing them into a cap and
requiring my cousin to wear the cap until new ones had sprouted. Even to
me, a mere child of eight, this seemed a foolish and totally unnecessary
proceeding, but the situation had already become so strained that I
thought it the part of prudence to go at once without offering any
arguments of my own. I felt, anyhow, that I would rather be away from
the house for a while, until calmer second judgment had succeeded
excitement and tumult.

The man who owned the barber shop seemed surprised when I delivered the
message, but he told me to come back in a few minutes and he'd do what
he could. I drifted on down to the confectionery store at the corner to
forget my sorrows for the moment in a worshipful admiration of a display
of prize boxes and cracknels in glass-front cases--you should be able to
fix the period by the fact that cracknels and prize boxes were still in
vogue among the young. When I returned the head barber handed me quite a
large box--a shoebox--with a string tied round it. It did not seem
possible to me that my cousin could have had a whole shoebox full of
curls, but things had been going pretty badly that afternoon and my
motives had been misjudged and everything, so without any talk I took
the box and hurried home with it. My mother cut the string and my aunt
lifted the lid.

I should prefer again to draw a veil over the scenes that now ensued,
but the necessity of finishing this narrative requires me to state that
it being a Saturday and the head barber being a busy man, he had not
taken time to sort out my cousin's curls from among the flotsam and
jetsam of his establishment, but had just swept up enough off the
floor to make a good assorted boxful. I think the oldest inhabitant had
probably dropped in that day to have himself trimmed up a little round
the edges. I seem to remember a quantity of sandy whiskers shot with
gray. There was enough hair in that box and enough different kinds and
colors of hair and stuff to satisfy almost any taste, you would have
thought, but my mother and aunt were anything but satisfied. On the
contrary, far from it. And yet my cousin's hair was all there, if they
had only been willing to spend a few days sorting it out and separating
it from the other contents.

In this particular instance I was the exception to the rule, that hair
generally gives a boy no great trouble from the time he merges out of
babyhood until he puts on long pants and begins to discern something
strangely and subtly attractive about the sex described by Mr. Kipling
as being the more deadly of the species. During this interim it is a
matter of no moment to a boy whether he goes shaggy or cropped, shorn or
unshorn. At intervals a frugal parent trims him to see if both his ears
are still there, or else a barber does it with more thoroughness, often
recovering small articles of household use that have been mysteriously
missing for months; but in the main he goes along carefree and
unbarbered, not greatly concerned with putting anything in his head or
taking anything off of it.

In due season, though, he reaches the age where adolescent whiskers and
young romance begin to sprout out on him simultaneously--and from that
moment on for the rest of his life his hair is giving him bother, and
plenty of it.

Your hair gives you bother as long as you have it and more bother when
it starts to go. You are always doing something for it and it is always
showing deep-dyed ingratitude in return; or else the dye isn't deep
enough, which is even worse. Hair is responsible for such byproducts as
dandruff, barbers, wigs, several comic weeklies, mental anguish, added
expense, Chinese revolutions, and the standard joke about your wife's
using your best razor to open a can of tomatoes with. Hair has been of
aid to Buffalo Bill, Little Lord Fauntleroy, Samson, The Lady Godiva,
Jo-Jo, the Dog-Faced Boy, poets, pianists, some artists and most
mattress makers, but a drawback and a sorrow to Absalom, polar bears in
captivity and the male sex in general.

This assertion goes not only for hair on the head but for hair on the
face. Let us consider for a moment the matter of shaving. If you shave
yourself you excite a barber's contempt, and there is nobody whose
contempt the average man dreads more than a barber's, unless it is
a waiter's. And on the other hand, if you let a barber shave you he
excites not your contempt particularly, but your rage and frequently
your undying hatred. Once in a burst of confidence a barber told me one
of the trade secrets of his profession--he said that among barbers every
face fell into one of three classes, it being either a square, a round
or a squirrel. I know not, reader, whether yours be a square or a
round or a squirrel, but this much I will chance on a venture, sight
unseen--that you have your periods of intense unhappiness when you are
being shaved.

I do not refer so much to the actual process of being shaved. Indeed
there is something restful and soothing to the average male adult in
the feel of a sharp razor being guided over a bristly jowl by a deft
and skillful hand, to the accompaniment of a gentle grating sound and
followed by a sensation of transient silken smoothness. Nor do I refer
to the barber's habit of conversation. After all, a barber is human--he
has to talk to somebody, and it might as well be you. If he didn't have
you to talk to he'd have to talk to another barber, and that would be no
treat to him.

What I do refer to is that which precedes a shave and more especially
that which follows after it. You rush in for a shave. In ten minutes you
have an engagement to be married or something else important, and you
want a shave and you want it quick. Does the barber take cognizance of
the emergency? He does not. Such would be contrary to the ethics of his
calling. Knowing from your own lips that you want a shave and that's
positively all, he nevertheless is instantly filled with a burning
desire to equip you with a large number of other things. In this regard
the barbering profession has much in common with the haberdashering
or gents'-furnishing profession as practiced in our larger cities. You
invade a haberdashering establishment for the purpose, let us say, of
investing in a plain and simple pair of half hose, price twenty-five
cents. That emphatically is all that you do desire. You so state in
plain, simple language, using the shorter and uglier word socks.

Does the youth in the pale mauve shirt with the marquise ring on the
little finger of the left hand rest content with this? Need I answer
this question? In succession he tries to sell you a fancy waistcoat with
large pearl buttons, a broken lot of silk pajamas, a bath-robe, some
shrimp-pink underwear--he wears this kind himself he tells you in strict
confidence--a pair of plush suspenders and a knitted necktie that you
wouldn't be caught wearing at twelve o'clock at night at the bottom of
a coal mine during a total eclipse of the moon. If you resist his
blandishments and so far forget that you are a gentleman as to use harsh
language, and if you insist on a pair of socks and nothing else, he'll
let you have them, but he will never feel the same toward you as he did.

'Tis much the same with a barber. You need a shave in a hurry and he is
willing that you should have a shave, he being there for that purpose,
but first and last he can think of upward of thirty or forty other
things that you ought to have, including a shampoo, a hair cut, a hair
singe, a hair tonic, a hair oil, a manicure, a facial massage, a scalp
massage, a Turkish bath, his opinion on the merits of the newest White
Hope, a shoeshine, some kind of a skin food, and a series of comparisons
of the weather we are having this time this month with the weather we
were having this time last month. Not all of us are gifted with the
power of repartee by which my friend Frisbee turned the edge of the
barber's desires.

"Your hair," said the barber, fondling a truant lock, "is long."

"I know it is," said Frisbee. "I like it long. It's so Roycrofty."

"It is very long," said the barber with a wistful expression.

"I like it very long," said Frisbee. "I like to have people come up to
me on the street and call me Mr. Sutherland and ask me how I left
my sisters? I like to be mistaken for a Russian pianist. I like for
strangers to stop me and ask me how's everything up at East Aurora. In
short, I like it long."

"Yes, sir," said the barber, "quite so, sir; but it's very long,
particularly here in the back--it covers your coat collar."

"Indeed?" said Frisbee. "You say it covers my coat collar?"

"Yes, sir," said the barber. "You can't see the coat collar at all."

"Have you got a good sharp pair of shears there?" said Frisbee.

"Oh, yes, sir," said the barber.

"All right then," said Frisbee; "cut the collar off."

But not all of us, as I said before, have this ready gift of parry and
thrust that distinguishes my friend Frisbee. Mostly we weakly surrender.
Or if we refuse to surrender, demanding just a shave by itself and
nothing else, what then follows? In my own case, speaking personally, I
know exactly what follows. I do not like to have any powder dabbed on my
face when I am through shaving. I believe in letting the bloom of youth
show through your skin, providing you have any bloom of youth to do
so. I always take pains to state my views in this regard at least twice
during the operation of being shaved--once at the start when the barber
has me all lathered up, with soapsuds dripping from the flanges of my
shell-like ears and running down my neck, and once again toward the
close of the operation, when he has laid aside his razor and is sousing
my defenseless features in a liquid that smells and tastes a good deal
like those scented pink blotters they used to give away at drug-stores
to advertise somebody's cologne.

Does the barber respect my wishes in this regard? Certainly not. He
insists on powdering me, either before my eyes or surreptitiously and in
a clandestine manner. If he didn't powder me up he would lose his sense
of self-respect, and probably the union would take his card away
from him. I think there is something in the constitution and by-laws
requiring that I be powdered up. I have fought the good fight for
years, but I'm always powdered. Sometimes the crafty foe dissembles. He
pretends that he is not going to powder me up. But all of a sudden when
my back is turned, as it were, he grabs up his powder swab and makes a
quick swoop upon me and the hellish deed is done. I should be pleased to
hear from other victims of this practice suggesting any practical relief
short of homicide. I do not wish to kill a barber--there are several
other orders in ahead, referring to the persons I intend to kill off
first--but I may be driven to it.

After he has gashed me casually hither and yen, and sluiced down my
helpless countenance with the carefree abandon of a livery-stable hand
washing off a buggy, and after, as above stated, he has covered up the
traces of his crime with powder, the barber next takes a towel and folds
it over his right hand, as prescribed in the rules and regulations, and
then he dabs me with that towel on various parts of my face nine hundred
and seventy-four--974--separate and distinct times. I know the exact
number of dabs because I have taken the trouble to keep count. I may
be in as great a hurry as you can imagine; I may be but a poor nervous
wreck already, as I am; I may be quivering to be up and away from there,
but he dabs me with his towel--he dabs me until reason totters on her
throne--sometimes just a tiny tot, as the saying goes, or it may be that
the whole cerebral structure is involved--and then when he is apparently
all through the Demoniac Dabber comes back and dabs me one more
fiendish, deliberate and premeditated dab, making nine hundred and
seventy-five dabs in all. He has to do it; it's in the ritual that I and
you and everybody must have that last dab. I wonder how many gibbering
idiots there are in the asylum today whose reason was overthrown by
being dabbed that last farewell dab. I know from my own experience that
I can feel the little dark-green gibbers sloshing round inside of me
every time it happens, and some day my mind will give away altogether
and there'll be a hurry call sent in for the wagon with the lock on the
back door. Yet it is of no avail to cavil or protest; we cannot hope to
escape; we can only sit there in mute and helpless misery and be filled
with a great envy for Mexican hairless dogs.

For quite a spell now we have been speaking of hair on the face; at this
point we revert to hair in its relation to the head. There are some few
among us, mainly professional Southerners and leading men, who retain
the bulk of the hair on their heads through life; but with most of us
the circumstances are different. Your hair goes from you. You don't
seem to notice it at first; then all of a sudden you wake up to the
realization that your head is working its way up through the hair. You
start in then desperately doing things for your hair in the hope of
inducing it to stick round the old place a while longer, but it has
heard the call of the wild and it is on its way. There's no detaining
it. You soak your skull in lotions until your brain softens and your
hat-band gets moldy from the damp, but your hair keeps right on going.

After a while it is practically gone. If only about two-thirds of it is
gone your head looks like a great auk's egg in a snug nest; but if
most of it goes there is something about you that suggests the Glacial
Period, with an icy barren peak rising high above the vegetation line,
where a thin line of heroic strands still cling to the slopes. You are
bald then, a subject fit for the japes of the wicked and universally
coupled in the betting with onions, with hard-boiled eggs and with the
front row of orchestra chairs at a musical show.

At this time of writing baldness is creeping insidiously up each side of
my head. It is executing flank movements from the temples northward, and
some day the two columns will meet and after that I'll be considerably
more of a highbrow than I am now. At present I am craftily combing the
remaining thatch in the middle and smoothing it out nice and flat, so
as to keep those bare spots covered--thinly perhaps, but nevertheless
covered. It is my earnest desire to continue to keep them covered. I
am not a professional beauty; I am not even what you would call a good
amateur beauty; and I want to make what little hair I have go as far as
it conveniently can. But does the barber to whom I repair at frequent
intervals coincide with my desires in this respect? Again I reply he
does not. Every time I go in I speak to him about it. I say to him:
"Woodman, spare that hair, touch not a single strand; in youth it
sheltered me and I'll protect it now." Or in substance that.

He says yes, he will, but he doesn't mean it. He waits until he can
catch me with my guard down. Then he seizes a comb, and using the edge
of his left hand as a bevel and operating his right with a sort of
free-arm Spencerian movement, he roaches my hair up in a scallop effect
on either side, and upon reaching the crest he fights with it and
wrestles with it until he makes it stand erect in a feather-edged
design. I can tell by his expression that he is pleased with this
arrangement. He loves to send his victims forth into the world tufted
like the fretful cockatoo. He likes to see surging waves of hair dash
high on a stern and rockbound head. His sense of the artistic demands
such a result.

What cares he how I feel about it so long as the higher cravings of
his own nature are satisfied? But I resent it--I resent it bitterly.
I object to having my head look like a real-estate development with an
opening for a new street going up each side and an ornamental design in
fancy landscape gardening across the top. If I permit this I won't be
able to keep on saying that I was twenty-seven on my last birthday, with
some hope of getting away with it. So I insist that he put my front
hair right back where he found it. He does so, under protest and
begrudgingly, it is true, but he does it. And then, watching his
opportunity, he runs in on me and overpowers me and roaches it up some
more.

If I weaken and submit he is happy as the day is long. If he gets it
roached up on both sides that will make me look like a horizontal-bar
performer, which is his idea of manly beauty. Or if he gets it roached
up on one side only there is still some consolation in it for him I'm
liable to be mistaken anywhere for a trained-animal performer. But once
in a very great while he doesn't get it roached up on either side, but
has to stand there and suffer as he sees me walk forth into the world
with my hair combed to suit me and not him. I can tell by his look that
he is grieved and downcast, and that he will probably go home and be
cross to the children. He has but one solace--he hopes to have better
luck with me next time. And probably he will.

The last age of hair is a wig. But wigs are not so very satisfactory
either. I've seen all the known varieties of wigs, and I never saw one
yet that looked as though it were even on speaking terms with the head
that was under it. A wig always looks as though it were a total stranger
to the head and had just lit there a minute to rest, preparatory to
flying along to the next head. Nevertheless, I think on the whole I'll
be happier when my time comes to wear one, because then no barber can
roach me up.




HANDS AND FEET


Nearly every boy has a period in his life when he is filled with
an envious admiration for the East India god with the extra set of
arms--Vishnu, I think this party's name is. To a small boy it seems a
grand thing to have a really adequate assortment of hands. He considers
the advantage of such an arrangement in school--two hands in plain view
above the desk holding McGuffy's Fourth Reader at the proper angle for
study and the other two out of sight, down underneath the desk engaged
in manufacturing paper wads or playing crack-a-loo or some other really
worth while employment.

Or for robbing birds' nests. There would be two hands for use in
skinning up the tree, and one hand for scaring off the mother bird and
one hand for stealing the eggs. And for hanging on behind wagons the
combination positively could not be beaten. Then there would be the
gaudy conspicuousness of going around with four arms weaving in and
out in a kind of spidery effect while less favored boys were forced to
content themselves with just an ordinary and insufficient pair. Really,
there was only one drawback to the contemplation of this scheme--there'd
be twice as many hands to wash when company was coming to dinner.

Generally speaking a boy's hands give him no serious concern during the
first few years of his life except at such times as his mother grows
officious and fussy and insists that they ought to be washed up as far
as the regular place for washing a boy's hands, to wit, about midway
between the knuckles and the wrist. The fact that one finger is usually
in a state of mashedness is no drawback, but a benefit. The presence
of a soiled rag around a finger gives to a boy's hand a touch of
distinctiveness--singles it out from ordinary unmaimed hands. Its
presence has been known to excuse its happy possessor from such chores
as bringing in wood for the kitchen stove or pulling dock weeds out of
the grass in a front yard where it would be much easier and quicker to
pull the grass out of the dock weeds. It may even be made a source of
profit by removing the wrappings and charging two china marbles a look.
I seem to recall that in the case of a specially attractive injury, such
as a thumb nail knocked off or a deep cut which has refused to heal by
first intention or an imbedded splinter in process of being drawn out
by a scrap of fat meat, that as much as four china marbles could be
charged.

On the Fourth of July you occasionally burned your hands and in cold
winters they chapped extensively across the knuckles but these were but
the marks and scars of honorable endeavor and a hardy endurance. In
our set the boy whose knuckles had the deepest cracks in them was
a prominent and admired figure, crowned, as you might say, with an
imaginary chaplet by reason of his chaps.

With girls, of course, it was different.

Girls were superfluous and unnecessary creatures with a false and
inflated idea of the value of soap and water. Their hands weren't
good for much anyway. Later on we discovered that a girl's hands were
excellent for holding purposes in a hammock or while coming back from
a straw ride, but I am speaking now of the earlier stages of our
development, before the presence of the ostensibly weaker sex began to
awaken responsive throbs in our several bosoms--in short when girls were
merely nuisances and things to be ignored whenever possible. In that
early stage of his existence hands have no altruistic or sentimental or
ornamental value for a boy--they are for useful purposes altogether and
are regarded as such.

It is only when he has reached the age of tail coats and spike-fence
collars that he discovers two hands are frequently too many and often
not enough. They are too many at your first church wedding when wearing
your first pair of white kids and they are not enough at a five o'clock
tea. There is a type of male who can go to a five o'clock tea and not
fall over a lot of Louie Kahn's furniture or get himself hopelessly
tangled up in a hanging drapery and who can seem perfectly at ease while
holding in his hands a walking stick, a pair of dove colored gloves,
a two-quart hat, a cup of tea with a slice of lemon peel in it, a tea
spoon, a lump of sugar, a seed cookie, an olive, and the hand of a lady
with whom he is discussing the true meaning of the message of the late
Ibsen but these gifted mortals are not common. They are rare and exotic.
There are also some few who can do ushing at a church wedding with a
pair of white kids on and not appear overly self-conscious. These are
also the exceptions. The great majority of us suffer visibly under
such circumstances. You have the feeling that each hand weighs fully
twenty-four pounds and that it is hanging out of the sleeve for a
distance of about one and three-quarters yards and you don't know what
to do with your hands and on the whole would feel much more comfortable
and decorative if they were both sawed off at the wrists and hidden some
place where you couldn't find 'em. You have that feeling and you look
it. You look as though you were working in a plaster of paris factory
and were carrying home a couple of large sacks of samples. It would be
grand to be a Vishnu at a five o'clock tea, but awful to be one at a
church wedding.

About the time you find yourself embarking on a career of teas and
weddings you also begin to find yourself worrying about the appearance
of your hands. Up until now the hands have given you no great concern
one way or the other, but some day you wake to the realization that you
need to be manicured. Once you catch that disease there is no hope for
you. There are ways of curing you of almost any habit except manicuring.
You get so that you aren't satisfied unless your nails run down about a
quarter of an inch further than nails were originally intended to run,
and unless they glitter freely you feel strangely distraught in company.
Inasmuch as no male creature's finger nails will glitter with the
desired degree of brilliancy for more than twenty-four short and
fleeting hours after a treatment you find yourself constantly in the
act of either just getting a manicure or just getting over one. It is
an expensive habit, too; it takes time and it takes money. There's the
fixed charge for manicuring in the first place and then there's the tip.
Once there was a manicure lady who wouldn't take a tip, but she is now
no more. Her indignant sisters stabbed her to death with hat pins and
nail-files. Manicuring as a public profession is a comparatively recent
development of our civilization. The fathers of the republic and the
founders of the constitution, which was founded first and has been
foundering ever since if you can believe what a lot of people in
Congress say--they knew nothing of manicuring. Speaking by and large,
they only got their thumbs wet when doing one of three things--taking a
bath, going in swimming or turning a page in a book. Washington probably
was never manicured nor Jefferson nor Franklin; it's a cinch that Daniel
Boone and Israel Putnam and George Rogers Clark weren't and yet it is
generally conceded that they got along fairly well without it. But as
the campaign orators are forever pointing out from the hustlers and the
forum, this is an age calling for change and advancement. And manicuring
is one of the advancements that likewise calls for the change--for fifty
cents in change anyhow and more if you are inclined to be generous with
the tip.

Shall you ever forget your first manicure? The shan'ts are unanimously
in the majority. It seems an easy thing to walk into a manicure parlor
or a barber shop and shove your hands across a little table to a strange
young woman and tell her to go ahead and shine 'em up a bit--the way you
hear old veteran manicurees saying it. It seems easy, I say, and looks
easy; but it isn't as easy as it seems. Until you get hardened, it
requires courage of a very high order. You, the abashed novice, see
other men sitting in the front window of the manicure shop just as
debonair and cozy as though they'd been born and raised there, swapping
the ready repartee of the day with dashing creatures of a frequently
blonde aspect, and you imagine they have always done so. You little know
that these persons who are now appearing so much at home and who can
snap out those bright, witty things like "I gotcher Steve," and "Well,
see who's here?" without a moment's hesitation and without having to
stop and think for the right word or the right phrase but have it right
there on the tip of the tongue--you little reck that they too passed
through the same initiation which you now contemplate. Yet such is the
case.

You have dress rehearsals--private ones--in your room. In the seclusion
of your bed chamber you picture yourself opening the door of the marble
manicure hall and stepping in with a brisk yet graceful tread--like
James K. Hackett making an entrance in the first act--and glancing about
you casually--like John Drew counting up the house--and saying "Hello
girlies, how're all the little Heart's Delights this afternoon?" just
like that, and picking out the most sumptuous and attractive of the
flattered young ladies in waiting; and sinking easily into the chair
opposite her--see photos of William Faversham and throwing the coat
lapels back, at the same time resting the left hand clenched upon the
upper thigh with the elbow well out--Donald Brian asking a lady to
waltz--and offering the right hand to the favored female and telling her
to go as far as she likes with it. It sounds simple when you figuring it
out alone, but it rarely works out that way in practice. It is my belief
that every woman longs for the novelty of a Turkish bath and every man
for the novelty of a manicure long before either dares to tackle it.
I may be wrong but this is my belief. And in the case of the man he
usually makes a number of false starts.

You go to the portals and hesitate and then, stumbling across the
threshold, you either dive on through to the barber shop--if there is a
barber shop in connection--or else you mumble something about being in
a hurry and coming back again, and retreat with all the grace and ease
that would be shown by a hard shell crab that was trying to back into
the mouth of a milk-bottle. You are likely to do this several times;
but finally some day you stick. You slump down into one of those little
chairs and offer your hands or one of them to a calm and slightly
arrogant looking young lady and you tell her to please shine them up
a little. You endeavor to appear as though you had been doing this
at frequent periods stretching through a great number of years, but
she--bless her little heart!--she knows better than that. The female
of the manicuring species is not to be deceived by any such cheap and
transparent artifices. If you wore a peekaboo waist she couldn't see
through you any easier. Your hands would give you away if your face
didn't. In a sibulent aside, she addresses the young lady at the next
table--the one with the nine bracelets and the hair done up delicatessen
store mode--sausages, rolls and buns--whereupon both of them laugh in
a significant, silvery way, and you feel the back of your neck setting
your collar on fire. You can smell the bone button back there scorching
and you're glad it's not celluloid, celluloid being more inflammable and
subject to combustion when subjected to intense heat.

When both have laughed their merry fill, the young woman who has you in
charge looks you right in the eye and says:

"Dearie me; you'll pardon me saying so, but your nails are in a
perfectly turrible state. I don't think I've seen a jumpman's nails in
such a state for ever so long. Pardon me again--but how long has it been
since you had them did?"

To which you reply in what is meant to be a jaunty and off-hand tone:

"Oh quite some little while. I've--I've been out of town."

"That's what I thought," she says with a slight shrug. It isn't so much
what she says--it's the way she says it, the tone and all that, which
makes you feel smaller and smaller until you could crawl into your own
watch pocket and live happily there ever after. There'd be slews of
room and when you wanted the air of an evening you could climb up in a
buttonhole of your vest and be quite cosy and comfortable. But shrink
as you may, there is now no hope of escape, for she has reached out and
grabbed you firmly by the wrist. She has you fast. You have a feeling
that eight or nine thousand people have assembled behind you and are all
gazing fixedly into the small of your back. The only things about you
that haven't shrivelled up are your hands. You can feel them growing
larger and larger and redder and redder and more prominent and
conspicuous every instant.

The lady begins operations. You are astonished to note how many tools
and implements it takes to manicure a pair of hands properly. The top of
her little table is full of them and she pulls open a drawer and shows
you some more, ranged in rows. There are files and steel biters and
pigeon-toed scissors and scrapers and polishers and things; and wads of
cotton with which to staunch the blood of the wounded, and bottles of
liquid and little medicinal looking jars full of red paste; and a cut
glass crock with soap suds in it and a whole lot of little orange wood
stobbers.

In the interest of truth I have taken the pains to enquire and I have
ascertained that these stobbers are invariably of orange wood. Say what
you will, the orange tree is a hardy growth. Every February you read in
the papers that the Florida orange crop, for the third consecutive time
since Christmas has been entirely and totally destroyed by frost and yet
there is always an adequate supply on hand of the principal products
of the orange-phosphate for the soda fountains, blossoms for the bride,
political sentiment for the North of Ireland and little sharp stobbers
for the manicure lady. Speaking as an outsider I would say that there
ought to be other varieties of wood that would serve as well and bring
about the desired results as readily--a good thorny variety of poison
ivy ought to fill the bill, I should think. But it seems that orange
wood is absolutely essential. A manicure lady could no more do a
manicure properly without using an orange wood stobber at certain
periods than a cartoonist could draw a picture of a man in jail without
putting a ball and chain on him or a summer resort could get along
without a Lover's Leap within easy walking distance of the hotel. It
simply isn't done, that's all.

Well, as I was saying, she gets out her tool kit and goes to work
on you. You didn't dream that there were so many things--mainly of
a painful nature--that could be done to a single finger nail and you
flinch as you suddenly remember that you have ten of them in all,
counting thumbs in with fingers. She takes a finger nail in hand and she
files it and she trims it and she softens it with hot water and hardens
it with chemicals and parboils it a little while and then she cuts off
the hang nails--if there aren't any hang nails there already she'll
make a few--and she shears away enough extra cuticle to cover quite a
good-sized little boy. She goes over you with a bristle brush, and warms
up your nerve ends until you tingle clear back to your dorsal fin and
then she takes one of those orange wood stobbers previously referred to,
and goes on an exploring expedition down under the nail, looking for the
quick. She always finds it. There is no record of a failure to find
the quick. Having found it she proceeds to wake it up and teach it some
parlor tricks. I may not have set forth all these various details in the
exact order in which they take place, but I know she does them all. And
somewhere along about the time when she is half way through with the
first hand she makes you put the other hand in the suds.

Later on when you have had more practice at this thing you learn to wait
for the signal before plunging the second hand into the suds, but being
green on this occasion, you are apt to mistake the moving of the crock
of suds over from the right hand side to the left hand side as a notice
and to poke your untouched hand right in without further orders, hoping
to get it softened up well so as to save her trouble in trimming it down
to a size which will suit her. But this is wrong--this is very wrong,
as she tells you promptly, with a pitying smile for your ignorance.
Manicure girls are as careful about boiling a hand as some particular
people are about bailing their eggs for breakfast of a morning. A two
minute hand is no pleasure to her absolutely if she has diagnosed your
hand as one calling for six minutes, or vice versa. So, should you err
in this regard she will snatch the offending hand out and wipe it off
and give it back to you and tell you to keep it in a dry place until she
calls for it. Manicure girls are very funny that way.

Thus time passes on and on and by degrees you begin to feel more and
more at home. Your bashfulness is wearing off. The coherent power of
speech has returned to you and you have exchanged views with her on the
relative merits of the better known brands of chewing gum and which kind
holds the flavor longest, and you have swapped ideas on the issue of
whether ladies should or should not smoke cigarettes in public and she
knows how much your stick pin cost you and you know what her favorite
flower is. You are getting along fine, when all of a sudden she dabs
your nails with a red paste and then snatches up a kind of a polishing
tool and ferociously rubs your fingers until they catch on fire. Just
when the conflagration threatens to become general she stops using the
polisher and proceeds to cool down the ruins by gently burnishing your
nails against the soft, pink palm of her hand. You like this better than
the other way. You could ignite yourself by friction almost any time,
if you got hold of the right kind of a chamois skin rubber, but this is
quite different and highly soothing. You are beginning to really enjoy
the sensation when she roguishly pats the back of your hand--pitty
pat--as a signal that the operation is now over. You pay the check and
tip the lady--tip her fifty cents if you wish to be regarded as a lovely
jumpman or only twenty-five cents if you are satisfied with being a
vurry nice fella--and you secure your hat and step forth into the open
with the feeling of one who has taken a trip into a distant domain and
on the whole has rather enjoyed it.

You stand in the sunlight and waggle your fingers and you are struck
with the desirable glitter that flits from finger tip to finger tip
like a heleograph winking on a mountain top. It is indeed a pleasing
spectacle. You decide that hereafter you will always glitter so. It is
cheaper than wearing diamonds and much more refined, and so you take
good care of your fingers all that day and carefully refrain from
dipping them in the brine while engaged in the well known indoor sport
of spearing for dill pickles at the business men's lunch.

But the next morning when you wake up the desirable glitter is gone.
You only glimmer dully--your fingers do not sparkle and dazzle and
scintillate as they did. As Francois Villon, the French poet would
undoubtedly have said had manicures been known at the time he was
writing his poems, "Where are the manicures of yesterday?" instead of
making it, "Where are the snows of yesteryear?" there being no answer
ready for either question, except that the manicures of yesterday like
the snows of yesteryear are never there when you start looking for them.
They have just naturally got up and gone away, leaving no forwarding
address.

You have now been launched upon your career as a manicuree. You never
get over it. You either get married and your wife does your nails for
you, thus saving you large sums of money, but failing to impart the high
degree of polish and the spice of romance noticed in connection with
the same job when done away from home, or you continue to patronize the
regular establishments and become known in time as Polished Percival,
the Pet of the Manicure Parlor. But in either event your hands which
once were hands and nothing more, have become a source of added trouble
and expense to you.

Speaking of hands naturally brings one to the subject of feet, which was
intended originally to be the theme for the last half of this chapter,
but unfortunately I find I have devoted so much space to your hands that
there is but little room left for your feet and so far as your feet are
concerned, we must content ourselves on this occasion with a few general
statements.

Feet, I take it, speaking both from experience and observation, are even
more trouble to us than hands are. There are still a good many of us
left who go through life without doing anything much for our hands but
with our feet it is different. They thrust themselves upon us so to
speak, demanding care and attention. This goes for all sizes and all
ages of feet. From the time you are a small boy and suffer from stone
bruises in the summer and chilblains in the winter, on through life
you're beset with corns and callouses and falling of the instep and all
the other ills that feet are heir to.

The rich limp with the gout, the moderately well to do content
themselves with an active ingrown nail or so, and the poor man goes out
and drops an iron casting on his toe. Nearly every male who lives to
reach the voting age has a period of mental weakness in his youth when
he wears those pointed shoes that turn up at the ends, like sleigh
runners; and spends the rest of his life regretting it. Feet are
certainly ungrateful things. I might say that they are proverbially
ungrateful. You do for them and they do you. You get one corn, hard or
soft, cured up or removed bodily and a whole crowd of its relatives
come to take its place. I imagine that Nature intended we should go
barefooted and is now getting even with us because we didn't. Our poor,
painful feet go with us through all the years and every step in life is
marked by a pang of some sort. And right on up to the end of our days,
our feet are getting more infirm and more troublesome and more crotchety
and harder to bear with all the time. How many are there right now
who have one foot in the grave and the other at the chiropodist's?
Thousands, I reckon.

Napoleon said an army traveled on its stomach. I don't blame the army,
far from it; I've often wished I could travel that way myself, and
I've no doubt so has every other man who ever crowded a number nine and
three-quarters foot into a number eight patent-leather shoe, and then
went to call on friends residing in a steam-heated apartment. As what
man has not? Once the green-corn dance was an exclusive thing with the
Sioux Indians, but it may now be witnessed when one man steps on another
man's toes in a crowd.

We are accustomed to make fun of the humble worm of the dust but in
one respect the humble worm certainly has it on us. He goes through
existence without any hands and any feet to bother him. Indeed in this
regard I can think of but one creature in all creation who is worse off
than we poor humans are. That is the lowly ear wig. Think of being an
ear wig, that suffers from fallen arches himself and has a wife that
suffers from cold feet!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cobb's Anatomy, by Irvin S. Cobb

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COBB'S ANATOMY ***

***** This file should be named 1222.txt or 1222.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/2/1222/

Produced by Kirk Pearson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
