The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the Philippines
and Our New Possessions, Including The Ladrones, Hawaii,
Cuba and Porto Rico, by Murat Halstead

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of the Philippines and Our New Possessions,
         Including The Ladrones, Hawaii, Cuba and Porto Rico
       The Eldorado of the Orient

Author: Murat Halstead

Release Date: May 22, 2004 [EBook #12409]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE PHILIPPINES ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Distributed Proofreaders Team.




The Story of the Philippines and Our New Possessions,
Including The Ladrones, Hawaii, Cuba and Porto Rico.



The Story of the Philippines.

Natural Riches, Industrial Resources, Statistics of Productions,
Commerce and Population; The Laws, Habits, Customs, Scenery and
Conditions of the Cuba of the East Indies and the Thousand Islands
of the Archipelagoes of India and Hawaii, With Episodes of Their
Early History

The Eldorado of the Orient

Personal Character Sketches of and Interviews with Admiral Dewey,
General Merritt, General Aguinaldo and the Archbishop of Manila.

History and Romance, Tragedies and Traditions of our Pacific
Possessions.

Events of the War in the West with Spain, and the Conquest of Cuba
and Porto Rico.



By Murat Halstead,

_War Correspondent in America and Europe, Historian of the Philippine
Expedition_.



Splendidly and Picturesquely Illustrated with Half-Tone Engravings from
Photographs, Etchings from Special Drawings, and the Military Maps of
the Philippines, Prepared by the War Department of the United States.

_Our Possessions Publishing Co._




1898


The engravings in this volume were made from original photographs,
and are specially protected by copyright; and notice is hereby given,
that any person or persons guilty of reproducing or infringing upon
the copyright in any way will be dealt with according to law.




Inscribed
To the Soldiers and Sailors
of
The Army and Navy of the United States,
With Admiration for Their Achievements
In the War With Spain;
Gratitude for the Glory They Have Gained for the American Nation,
And Congratulations That All the People of All the
Country Rejoice in the Cloudless Splendor of Their Fame
That is the Common and Everlasting
Inheritance of Americans.



Author's Preface.

The purpose of the writer of the pages herewith presented has
been to offer, in popular form, the truth touching the Philippine
Islands. I made the journey from New York to Manila, to have the
benefit of personal observations in preparing a history for the
people. Detention at Honolulu shortened my stay in Manila, but
there was much in studies at the former place that was a help at the
latter. The original programme was for me to accompany General Merritt,
Commander-in-Chief of the Philippine Expedition, but illness prevented
its full realization, and when I arrived in Manila Bay the city had
already been "occupied and possessed" by the American army; and the
declaration of peace between the United States and Spain was made,
the terms fully agreed upon with the exception of the settlement of
the affairs of the Philippines. While thus prevented from witnessing
stirring military movements other than those attending the transfer
of our troops across the Pacific Ocean, an event in itself of
the profoundest significance, the reference of the determination
of the fate of the Philippine Islands to the Paris Conference,
and thereby to the public opinion of our country, in extraordinary
measure increased the general sensibility as to the situation of the
southern Oriental seas affecting ourselves, and enhanced the value
of the testimony taken on the spot of observers of experience, with
the training of journalism in distinguishing the relative pertinence
and potency of facts noted. Work for more than forty years, in the
discussion from day to day of current history, has qualified me for
the efficient exercise of my faculties in the labor undertaken. It
has been my undertaking to state that which appeared to me, so that
the reader may find pictures of the scenes that tell the Story that
concerns the country, that the public may with enlightenment solve
the naval, military, political, commercial and religious problems we
are called upon by the peremptory pressure of the conditions local,
and international, to solve immediately. This we have to do, facing the
highest obligations of citizenship in the great American Republic, and
conscious of the incomparably influential character of the principles
that shall prevail through the far-reaching sweep of the policies that
will be evolved. I have had such advantages in the assurance of the
authenticity of the information set forth in the chapters following,
that I may be permitted to name those it was my good fortune to consult
with instructive results; and in making the acknowledgments due. I
may be privileged to support the claim of diligence and success in
the investigations made, and that I am warranted in the issue of this
Story of the Philippines by the assiduous improvement of an uncommon
opportunity to fit myself to serve the country.

Indebtedness for kind consideration in this work is gratefully
acknowledged to Major-General Merritt, commanding the Philippine
Expedition; Major-General Otis, who succeeds to the duties of
military and civil administration in the conquered capital of the
islands; Admiral George Dewey, who improved, with statesmanship,
his unparalleled victory in the first week of the war with Spain,
and raised the immense questions before us; General F.V. Greene,
the historian of the Russo-Turkish war, called by the President to
Washington, and for whose contributions to the public intelligence
he receives the hearty approval and confidence of the people; Major
Bell, the vigilant and efficient head of the Bureau of Information
at the headquarters of the American occupation in the Philippines;
General Aguinaldo, the leader of the insurgents of his race in Luzon,
and His Grace the Archbishop of Manila, who gave me a message for the
United States, expressing his appreciation of the excellence of the
behavior of the American army in the enforcement of order, giving peace
of mind to the residents in the distracted city of all persuasions
and conditions, and of the service that was done civilization in the
prevention, by our arms, of threatened barbarities that had caused
sore apprehension; and, I may add, the Commissioner of the Organized
People of the Philippines, dispatched to Washington accompanying
General Greene; and of the citizens of Manila of high character,
and conductors of business enterprises with plants in the community
whose destiny is in the hands of strangers.

These gentlemen I may not name, for there are uncertainties that
demand of them and command me to respect the prudence of their
inconspicuity. This volume seems to me to be justified, and I have no
further claim to offer that it is meritorious than that it is faithful
to facts and true to the country in advocacy of the continued expansion
of the Republic, whose field is the world.

Steamship China, Pacific Ocean, September 20, 1898.



The Origin of this Story of the Philippines.

The letter following is the full expression by the author of this
volume of his purposes and principles in making the journey to the
East Indies.

_Going to the Philippines_.

Washington City, D.C., July 18.

With the authorization of the Military Authorities, I shall go to
the Philippine  Islands with General Merritt, the Military Governor,
and propose to make the  American people better acquainted with that
remarkable and most important and  interesting country. The presence
of an American army in the Philippines is an  event that will change
broad and mighty currents in the world's history. It has  far more
significance than anything transpiring in the process of the conquest
of  the West India possessions of Spain, for the only question there,
ever since the  Continental colonies of the Spanish crown won their
independence, has been the  extent of the sacrifices the Spaniards, in
their haughty and vindictive pride, would  make in fighting for a lost
Empire and an impossible cause with an irresistible  adversary. That
the time was approaching when, with the irretrievable steps of the
growth of a living Nation of free people, we would reach the point
where it should be  our duty to accept the responsibility of the
dominant American power, and accomplish  manifest Destiny by adding
Cuba and Porto Rico to our dominion, has for half a century  been the
familiar understanding of American citizens. Spain, by her abhorrent
system,  personified in Weyler, and illustrated in the murderous
blowing up of the Maine  with a mine, has forced this duty upon us;
and though we made war unprepared, the  good work is going on, and the
finish of the fight will be the relegation of Spain, whose colonial
governments have been, without exception, disgraceful and disastrous
to herself, and curses to the colonists, to her own peninsula. This
will be for her own  good, as well as the redemption of mankind from
her unwholesome foreign influences,  typified as they are in the
beautiful city of Havana, which has become the center of political
plagues and pestilential fevers, whose contagion has at frequent
intervals reached our own shores.

In the Philippine Islands the situation is for us absolutely novel. It
cannot be said to be out of the scope of reasonable American expansion
and is in the right line of enlarging the area of enlightenment and
stimulating the progress of civilization. The unexpected has happened,
but it is not illogical. It must have been written long ago on the
scroll of the boundless blue and the stars. The incident of war was
the "rush" order of the President of the United States to Admiral
Dewey to destroy the Spanish fleet at Manila, for the protection
of our commerce. The deed was done with a flash of lightning, and
lo! we hold the golden key of a splendid  Asiatic archipelago of
a thousand beautiful and richly endowed islands in our grip. This
is the most brilliant and startling achievement in the annals of
navies. Never before had the sweep of sea power, ordered through
the wires that make the world's continents, oceans and islands one
huge whispering gallery, such striking exemplification. There was
glory and fame in it, and immeasurable material for the making of
history. We may paraphrase Dr. Johnson's celebrated advertisement
of the widow's brewery by saying: Admiral Dewey's victory was not
merely the capture of a harbor commanding a great city, one of the
superb places of the earth, and the security of a base of operations
to wait for reinforcements commensurate with the  resources of the
United States of America--the victorious hero fixed his iron hand
upon a wonderful opportunity it was the privilege of our Government
to secure at large, according to the rights of a victorious Nation
for the people thereof--a chance for the youth of America, like that
of the youth of Great Britain, to realize upon the  magnificence of
India; and this is as Dr. Johnson said of the vats and barrels of
the Thrale estate--"the potentiality of wealth beyond the dreams of
avarice." It is a new departure, but not a matter for the panic or
apprehension of conservatism, that the Stars and Stripes float as the
symbol of sovereignty over a group of islands in the waters of Asia,
that are equal to all the West Indies. If we are strangers there now we
shall not be so long. We have a front on the Pacific Ocean, of three
great States--Washington, equal to England; Oregon, whose grandeur
rolls in the sound of her famous name, and incomparable California,
whose title will be the synonym of golden good times forever. The
Philippines are southwest from our western front doors. They have
been the islands of our sunsets in the winter. Now they look to us
for the rosy dawn out of which will come the clear brightness of the
white light of mornings and the fullness of the ripening noons, all
the year around. With our bulk of the North American continent bulging
into both the great oceans, it was  foreordained since the beginning
when God created the earth, that we, the possessors of this imperial
American zone, should be a great Asiatic Power. We have it now  in
evidence, written in islands among the most gorgeous of those that
shine in the  Southern seas--islands that are east from the Atlantic
and west from the Pacific  shores of the One Great Republic--that
we may personify hereafter, sitting at the head of the table when
the empires of the earth consult themselves as to the courses  of
empire. Our Course of Empire is both east and west.

The contact of American and Asiatic civilization in the Philippines,
with the  American army there, superseding the Spaniards, will be
memorable as one of the  matters of chief moment in the closing days
of the nineteenth century, and remembered  to date from for a thousand
years. It is my purpose to write of this current  history while it
is a fresh, sparkling stream, and attempt something more than the
recitation of the news of the day, as it is condensed and restrained
in telegrams; to give it according to the extent of my ability and the
advantages of my opportunity, the local coloring, the characteristic
scenery; the  pen pictures of the people and their pursuits; sketches
of the men who are doers of  deeds that make history; studies of the
ways and means of the islanders; essays to  indicate the features of
the picturesque of the strange mixture of races; the revolutionary
evolutions of politics; the forces that pertain to the mingling of
the religions  of the Occident and the Orient, in a chemistry untried
through the recorded ages.  It is a tremendous canvas upon which I am
to labor, and I know full well how inadequate  the production must be,
and beg that this index may not be remembered  against me. It is meant
in all modesty, and I promise only that there will be put  into the
task the expertness of experience and the endeavor of industry.

_Murat Halstead._




Contents.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

THE ORIGIN OF THIS STORY OF THE PHILIPPINES

CHAPTER I.

ADMIRAL DEWEY ON HIS FLAGSHIP.

A Stormy Day on Manila Bay--Call on Admiral Dewey--The Man in
White--He Sticks to His Ship--How He Surprised the Spaniards--Every
Man Did His Duty on May-Day--How Dewey Looks and Talks--What He Said
About War With Germany in Five Minutes--Feeds His Men on "Delicious"
Fresh Meat from Australia--Photography Unjust to Him

CHAPTER II.

LIFE IN MANILA.

Character of the Filipinos--Drivers Lashing Laboring Men in
the Streets--What  Americans Get in Their Native Air--The Logic
of Destiny--Manila  as She Fell Into Our Hands--The Beds in the
Tropics--A  Spanish Hotel--Profane Yells for Ice--Sad Scenes in the
Dining Room--Major-General Calls for "Francisco"--A Broken-Hearted
Pantry Woman

CHAPTER III.

FROM LONG ISLAND TO LUZON.

Across the Continent--An American Governor-General Steams Through
the Golden Gate--He is a Minute-Man--Honolulu as a Health Resort--The
Lonesome Pacific--The Skies of Asia--Dreaming Under the Stars of the
Scorpion--The Southern Cross

CHAPTER IV.

INTERVIEW WITH GENERAL AGUINALDO.

The Insurgent Leader's Surroundings and Personal Appearance--His
Reserves and Ways of Talking--The Fierce Animosity of the Filipinos
Toward Spanish Priests--A Probability of Many Martyrs in the Isle
of Luzon


CHAPTER V.

THE PHILIPPINE MISSION.

Correspondence with Aguinaldo About It--Notes by Senor Felipe
Agoncillo--Relations Between Admiral Dewey and Senor Aguinaldo--Terms
of Peace Made by Spanish Governor-General with Insurgents, December,
1897--Law Suit Between Aguinaldo and Arlacho--Aguinaldo's  Proclamation
of May 21, 1898

CHAPTER VI.

THE PROCLAMATIONS OF GENERAL AGUINALDO.

June 16th, 1898, Establishing Dictatorial Government--June 20th, 1898,
Instructions for Elections--June 23d, 1898, Establishing Revolutionary
Government--June 23d, 1898, Message to Foreign Powers--June  27th,
1898, Instructions Concerning Details--July 23d, 1898, Letter from
Senor Aguinaldo to General Anderson--August  1st, 1898, Resolution
of Revolutionary Chiefs Asking Recognition--August 6th, 1898, Message
to Foreign Powers Asking Recognition

CHAPTER VII.

INTERVIEW WITH ARCHBISHOP OF MANILA.

Insurgents' Deadly Hostility to Spanish Priests--The Position of
the Archbishop as He Defined It--His Expression of Gratitude to the
American Army--His Characterization of the Insurgents--A Work of
Philippine Art--The Sincerity of the Archbishop's Good Words

CHAPTER VIII.

WHY WE HOLD THE PHILIPPINES.

The Responsibility of Admiral Dewey--We Owe It to Ourselves to Hold
the Philippines--Prosperity Assured by Our Permanent Possession--The
Aguinaldo Question--Character Study of the Insurgent Leader--How
Affairs Would Adjust Themselves for Us--Congress Must Be Trusted to
Represent the People and Firmly Establish International Policy

CHAPTER IX.

THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS AS THEY ARE.

Area and Population--Climate--Mineral Wealth--Agriculture--Commerce
and Transportation--Revenue and Expenses--Spanish Troops--Spanish
Navy--Spanish Civil Administration--Insurgent Troops--Insurgent Civil
Administration--United States Troops--United  States Navy--United
States Civil Administration--The Future of the Islands


CHAPTER X.

OFFICIAL HISTORY OF THE CONQUEST OF MANILA.

The Pith of the Official Reports of the Capture of Manila, by
Major-General Wesley Merritt, Commanding the Philippine Expedition;
General Frank V. Greene, General Arthur McArthur, and General
Thomas Anderson, with the Articles of Capitulation, Showing How
8,000 Americans Carried an Intrenched City with a Garrison of 13,000
Spaniards, and Kept Out 14,000 Insurgents--The Difficulties of American
Generals with Philippine Troops

CHAPTER XI.

THE ADMINISTRATION OF GENERAL MERRITT.

The Official Gazette Issued at Manila--Orders and Proclamation of
Major-General Wesley Merritt, Who, as Commander of the Philippine
Expedition, Became, Under the Circumstances of the Capture of Manila,
the Governor of That City

CHAPTER XII.

THE AMERICAN ARMY IN MANILA.

Why the Boys Had a Spell of Homesickness--Disadvantages of the
Tropics--Admiral  Dewey and His Happy Men--How Our Soldiers Passed
the Time on the Ships--General Merritt's Headquarters--What Is Public
Property--The Manila Water Supply--England Our Friend--Major-General
Otis, General Meritt's Successor

CHAPTER XIII.

THE WHITE UNIFORMS OF OUR HEROES IN THE TROPICS.

The Mother Hubbard Street Fashion in Honolulu, and That of Riding
Astride--Spoiling Summer Clothes in Manila Mud--The White Raiment
of High Officers--Drawing the Line on Nightshirts--Ashamed  of Big
Toes--Dewey and Merritt as Figures of Show--The  Boys in White

CHAPTER XIV.

A MARTYR TO THE LIBERTY OF SPEECH.

Dr. Jose Rizal, the Most Distinguished Literary Man of the Philippines,
Writer of History, Poetry, Political Pamphlets, and Novels, Shot on the
Luneta of Manila--A Likeness of the Martyr--The Scene of His Execution,
from a Photograph--His Wife Married the Day Before His Death--Poem
Giving His Farewell Thoughts, Written in His Last Hours--The Works
That Cost Him His Life--The Vision of Friar Rodriguez


CHAPTER XV.

EVENTS OF THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR.

No Mystery About the Cause of the War--The Expected and the Inevitable
Has Happened--The Tragedy of the Maine--Vigilant Wisdom of President
McKinley--Dewey's Prompt Triumph--The Battles at Manila and Santiago
Compared--General Shafter Tells of the Battle of Santiago--Report of
Wainwright Board on Movements of Sampson's Fleet in the Destruction of
Cervera's Squadron--Stars and Stripes Raised Over Porto Rico--American
and Spanish Fleets at Manila Compared--Text of Peace Protocol

CHAPTER XVI.

THE PEACE JUBILEE.

The Lessons of War in the Joy Over Peace in the Celebrations
at Chicago and Philadelphia--Orations by Archbishop Ireland
and Judge Emory Speer--The President's Few Words of Thrilling
Significance--The  Parade of the Loyal League, and the Clover Club
Banquet at Philadelphia--Address by the President--The Hero Hobson
Makes a Speech--Fighting Bob Evans' Startling Battle Picture--The
Destruction of Cervera's Fleet--The Proclamation of Thanksgiving

CHAPTER XVII.

EARLY HISTORY OF THE PHILIPPINES.

The Abolishment of the 31st of December, 1844, in Manila--The Mystery
of the Meridian 180 Degrees West--What Is East and West?--Gaining  and
Losing Days--The Tribes of Native Filipinos--They Had an Alphabet and
Songs of Their Own--The Massacre of Magellan--His Fate Like That of
Captain Cook--Stories of Long-Ago Wars--An Account by a Devoted Spanish
Writer of the Beneficent Rule of Spain in the Philippines--Aguinaldo
a Man Not of a Nation, But of a Tribe--Typhoons and Earthquakes--The
Degeneracy of the Government of the Philippines After It Was Taken
from Mexico--"New Spain"--The Perquisites of Captain-Generals--The
Splendor of Manila a Century Ago

CHAPTER XVIII.

THE SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES.

Important Facts About the Lesser Islands of the Philippine
Archipelago--Location, Size and Population--Capitals and
Principal Cities--Rivers and Harbors--Surface and Soil--People
and Products--Leading Industries--Their Commerce and Business
Affairs--The Monsoons and Typhoons--The Terrors of the Tempests and
How to Avoid Them


CHAPTER XIX.

SPECIFICATIONS OF GRIEVANCES OF THE FILIPINOS.

An Official Copy of the Manifesto of the Junta Showing the Bad Faith
of Spain in the Making and Evasion of a Treaty--The Declaration
of the Renewal of the War of Rebellion--Complaints Against the
Priests Defined--The Most Important Document the Filipinos Have
Issued--Official Reports of Cases of Persecution of Men and Women in
Manila by the Spanish Authorities--Memoranda of the Proceedings in
Several Cases in the Court of Inquiry of the United States Officers

CHAPTER XX.

HAWAII AS ANNEXED.

The Star Spangled Banner Up Again in Hawaii, and to Stay--Dimensions
of the Islands--What the Missionaries Have Done--Religious Belief
by Nationality--Trade Statistics--Latest Census--Sugar Plantation
Laborers--Coinage of Silver--Schools--Coffee Growing

CHAPTER XXI.

EARLY HISTORY OF THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.

Captain James Cook's Great Discoveries and His Martyrdom--Character
and Traditions of the Hawaiian Islands--Charges Against the Famous
Navigator and Effort to Array the Christian World Against Him--The
True Story of His Life and Death--How Charges Against Cook Came
to Be Made--Testimony of Vancouver, King and Dixon, and Last
Words of Cook's Journal--Light Turned on History That Has Become
Obscure--Savagery of the Natives--Their  Written Language Took
Up Their High Colored Traditions and Preserved Phantoms--Scenes in
Aboriginal Theatricals--Problem of Government in an Archipelago Where
Race Questions Are Predominant--Now Americans Should Remember Captain
Cook as an Illustrious Pioneer

CHAPTER XXII.

THE START FOR THE LAND OF CORN STALKS.

Spain Clings to the Ghost of Her Colonies--The Scene of War Interest
Shifts from Manila--The Typhoon Season--General Merritt on the Way
to Paris--German Target Practice by Permission of Dewey--Poultney
Bigalow with Canoe, Typewriter and Kodak--Hongkong as a Bigger and
Brighter Gibraltar


CHAPTER XXIII.

KODAK SNAPPED AT JAPAN.

Glimpses of China and Japan on the Way Home from the
Philippines--Hongkong  a Greater Gibraltar--Coaling the China--Gangs
of Women Coaling the China--How the Japanese Make Gardens of the
Mountains--Transition from the Tropics to the Northern Seas--A
Breeze from Siberia--A Thousand Miles Nothing on the Pacific--Talk
of Swimming Ashore

CHAPTER XXIV.

OUR PICTURE GALLERY.

Annotations and Illustrations--Portraits of Heroes of the War in the
Army and Navy, and of the Highest Public Responsibilities--Admirals
and Generals, the President and Cabinet--Photographs of Scenes
and Incidents--The Characteristics of the Filipinos--Their Homes,
Dresses and Peculiarities in Sun Pictures--The Picturesque People of
Our New Possessions

CHAPTER XXV.

CUBA AND PORTO RICO.

Conditions In and Around Havana--Fortifications and Water Supply of the
Capital City--Other Sections of the Pearl of the Antilles--Porto Rico,
Our New Possession, Described--Size and Population--Natural Resources
and Products--Climatic Conditions--Towns and Cities--Railroad and
Other Improvements--Future Possibilities

CHAPTER XXVI.

THE LADRONES.

The Island of Guam a Coaling Station of the United States--Discovery,
Size and Products of the Islands

CHAPTER XXVII.

THE OFFICIAL TITLE TO OUR NEW POSSESSIONS IN THE INDIES.

Full Text of the Treaty of Peace with Spain Handed the President of
the United States as a Christmas Gift for the People, at the White
House, 1898--The Gathered Fruit of a Glorious and Wonderful Victory


CHAPTER XXVIII.

BATTLES WITH THE FILIPINOS BEFORE MANILA.

The Aguinaldo War Upon the Americans--The Course of Events
in the Philippines Since the Fall of Manila--Origin of the
Filipino War--Aguinaldo's  Insolent and Aggressive Acts, Including
Treachery--His  Agent's Vanity and Duplicity in Washington--Insurgents
Under Aguinaldo Attack American Forces--Battle of Manila,
February 4 and 5--Heroism of American Troops in Repelling the
Insurgents--Aguinaldo's Proclamations--Agoncillo's Flight to
Canada--The Ratification of the Treaty of Peace with Spain by the
American Senate Followed the Fighting--The Gallantry and Efficiency
of the American Volunteers--Another Glorious Chapter of Our War History

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE AGUINALDO WAR OF SKIRMISHES.

The Filipino Swarms, After Being Repulsed with Slaughter, Continue
Their Scattering Efforts to Be Assassins--They Plan a General
Massacre and the Burning of Manila--Defeated in Barbarous Schemes,
They Tell False Tales and Have Two Objects, One to Deceive the People
of the Philippines, the other to Influence Intervention--The Peril of
Fire--Six Thousand Regulars Sent to General Otis--Americans Capture
Iloilo, and Many Natives Want Peace--The People of the Isla of Negros
Ask that They May Go with Us--Dewey Wants Battleships and Gunboats,
Gets Them, and Is Made an Admiral--Arrival of Peace Commissioners,
with Their School Books, Just Ahead of the Regulars with Magazine
Rifles--The Germans at Manila Salute Admiral Dewey at Last



ILLUSTRATIONS.


  1. Frontispiece ... Major-General Merritt, First Governor-General of
     the Philippines.
  2. The President and His Cabinet
  3. President McKinley
  4. Secretary of State Hay
  5. Secretary of the Treasury Gage
  6. Secretary of War Alger
  7. Secretary of the Navy Long
  8. Attorney General Griggs
  9. Postmaster General Smith
 10. Secretary of the Interior Bliss
 11. Secretary of Agriculture Wilson
 12. Admiral Dewey, the Hero of Manila
 13. Map of the Philippine Islands
 14. Photograph and Autograph of Aguinaldo, as Presented by Him to Mr.
     Halstead, the Author
 15. Archbishop of Manila. His Photograph and Autograph Presented to
     Mr. Halstead, the Author
 16. Ex-Consul General Fitzhugh Lee, Now Major-General Commanding
 17. Captain Sigsbee, Commander of the Ill-fated Maine
 18. Brigadier-General F.V. Greene
 19. Government Building in Pampanga
 20. Church at Cavite
 21. Masacue--Town in Cavite
 22. Natives Taking Refreshments
 23. Official Map of the Isle of Luzon, Prepared by War Department
 24. Official Map by the War Department of the Seat of War in the
     Philippines
 25. Murat Halstead, the Author, at Manila
 26. Cathedral of Manila After Earthquake
 27. Spanish Re-inforcements Crossing Bridge Over Pasig River
 28. Oriental Hotel, Manila
 29. The Sultan of Jolo in Mindanao
 30. A Beheaded Spaniard--Sign of the Order of Katipunan
 31. San Juan del Monte, Where Revolution Started
 32. Brigadier-General E.S. Otis
 33. Brigadier-General Thomas M. Anderson
 34. Military Heroes of Santiago and Porto Rico
 35. Major-General Miles
 36. Major-General Shafter
 37. Major-General Wheeler
 38. Major-General Brooke
 39. Brigadier-General Wood
 40. Colonel Roosevelt
 41. Naval Heroes of Santiago
 42. Admiral Sampson
 43. Admiral Schley
 44. Captain Chadwick, of the New York
 45. Captain Cooke, of the Brooklyn
 46. Captain Clarke, of the Oregon
 47. Captain Evans, of the Iowa
 48. Captain Higginson, of the Massachusetts
 49. Captain Philip, of the Texas
 50. Commander Wainwright, of the Gloucester
 51. Lieutenant R.P. Hobson
 52. General Greene's Headquarters at Manila
 53. Manila and Its Outskirts, Showing Malate
 54. Principal Gate to the City
 55. Loading Buffaloes with Produce in Luzon
 56. Filipina Preparing for a Siesta
 57. Philippine Author-Martyr, His Wife and His Execution
 58. Dr. Rizal
 59. Dr. Rizal's Execution
 60. Dr. Rizal's Wife
 61. The Seat of War in Cavite
 62. Attack on Manila, Showing Position of Our Ships and Troops
 63. Fortifications of Manila
 64. United States Peace Commissioners
 65. Senator Frye
 66. Senator Gray
 67. Ex-Secretary of State Day
 68. Senator Davis
 69. Whitelaw Reid
 70. Flowers of the Philippines
 71. Interior of the Fortifications of Manila
 72. Fort Santiago at Manila, Where the American Flag Was Raised
 73. Dining Room in General Merritt's Palace at Manila
 74. An Execution Entertainment on the Luneta
 75. Victims Reported Dead After the Execution
 76. Aguinaldo and His Compatriots
 77. Senor Aguinaldo
 78. Senor Montsusgro
 79. Senor Natividah
 80. Senor Ninisgra
 81. Senor Rins
 82. Senor Belavinino
 83. Senor Covinbing
 84. Senor Mascordo
 85. Senor Arbacho
 86. Senor Pilar
 87. Senor Viola
 88. Senor Francisco
 89. Senor Llansoo
 90. Savage Native Hunters
 91. Girl's Costume to Show One Shoulder
 92. Public Buildings in Manila
 93. Fort Weyler, Built by General Weyler When Governor of the
     Philippines
 94. The Destruction of Cervera's Spanish Squadron at Santiago
 95. The Luneta--Favorite Outing Grounds of Manila, and a Place for
     Executing Insurgents
 96. Admiral Dewey's Fleet That Won the Battle of Manila Bay
 97. The Flagship Olympia
 98. The Baltimore
 99. The Concord
100. The Raleigh
101. The Boston
102. The Petrel
103. The Monument of Magellinos in the Walled City
104. A Railroad Station North of Manila--Spaniards Airing Themselves
105. The Battle of Manila Bay--In the Heat of the Raging Fight
106. A Suburb of Manila, Showing a Buffalo Market Cart
107. The Cathedral at Manila
108. An Insurgent Outlook Near Manila
109. Display in Manila Photograph Gallery, Insurgent Leaders
110. Group of Filipinos Who Want Independence
111. The Principal Gate to the Walled City
112. A Public Square in Manila
113. A Bit of Scenery in Mindanao, Showing Tropical Vegetation
114. Parade of Spanish Troops on One of Their Three Annual Expeditions
     to the Southern Islands
115. After an Execution--Prostrate Forms are Men Shot
116. Spaniards Ready to Execute Insurgent Prisoners
117. A Group of the Unconquerable Mohammedans
118. A Native House
119. Riding Buffaloes Through Groves of Date Palms
120. Natives Fishing from a Canal Boat
121. Great Bridge at Manila
122. Southern Islanders--Showing Cocoanut Palms and the Monkey Tree
123. A Review of Spanish Filipino Volunteers
124. A Spanish Festival in Manila
125. Spanish Troops Repelling an Insurgent Attack on a Convent
126. Business Corner in Manila
127. A Native in Regimentals
128. A Country Pair
129. Peasant Costumes
130. Woodman in Working Garb
131. Map of Hawaii
132. Official Map of the Hawaiian Islands
133. Map of Cuba
134. Map of Porto Rico
135. Outline Map of the Philippine Islands
136. A Spanish Dude--An Officer at Manila
137. The Harbor at Manila
138. General E.S. Otis and Staff on Porch of Malacanan Palace, Manila
139. Malacanan Palace and Pasig River, Manila
140. General Otis and Staff, Dining Room, Malacanan Palace, Manila
141. Views in Manila, Philippine Islands
142. View from My Office Window in Palace, Sept. 8, 1898
143. Fountain, Manila, August, 1898
144. Door of Hospital De San Juan Di Dios, Intramuros, Manila,
     Aug. 29, 1898
145. Sentry Box in Old Manila Wall, August, 1898
146. Dungeons in Old Manila Wall, Sept. 7, 1898
147. Door of Jesuit Church, Manila, Sept. 3, 1898
148. Court Yard of Palace, Manila, Sept, 3, 1898
149. View of Tower of Iglisia De Sta Grum, Manila, Sept. 9, 1898
150. Corner of Old Manila Wall, August, 1898
151. Interior in Palace, Manila, Sept. 4, 1898
152. View of Church of August 30, Manila
153. General Hughes' Temporary Office in Palace
154. Puerto De Gabel, Old Manila Wall, Aug. 29, 1898
155. Views in Manila, Philippine Islands
156. Wash Lady in the River, Manila
157. Soldiers Washing Their Persons and Clothes, Manila
158. Man Rowing Small Boat, Manila
159. Ferry in Canal, Manila
160. Group of Native Women on Canal Bank, Manila
161. Government Launch, Manila
162. View of Canal in New Manila
163. View From My Ferry Crossing River Looking Toward New Town, Manila
164. View of Intramuros From the Water, Manila
165. Women Washing, Manila
166. Barge in Canal, New Town, Half Barge, Half House Boat, Manila
167. Canal Scene in Neuva, Manila
168. Stern of Lighter in Canal, Manila
169. Views in Manila, Philippine Islands
170. Native Woman, with Fruit and Child
171. Native Woman
173. Fruit Woman on Main Bridge
173. Small Boy, With Pup
174. Native Woman on Canal Bank
175. Buffalo, Wagon and Two Coolies
176. Beggar on Main Bridge
177. Views in Honolulu and Manila
178. Leaving Honolulu, Aboard U.S.S. Peru for Manila
179. A Soldier on Deck of Oakland Ferry
180. Three College Men, Corporal Morrow in Center
181. U.S.S. Philadelphia Entering Honolulu Harbor
182. In Camp at Manila
183. Leaving Honolulu, U.S.S. Peru, for Manila
184. U.S.S. Philadelphia, Honolulu Harbor
185. Bridge Over River Naig, Cavite, Connecting Santa Cruz Road with
     Town of Naig
186. Highway in the Philippines
187. Native House in Suburb of Calamba, Philippines
188. Front and Back View of Native Woven Shirt
189. Malay Women of Jolo Pounding Rice
190. Ancient Cannon Taken from Insurgents
191. Arsenal Grounds in Cavite, Chapel in Front of Commandant's House
192. Bridge Crossing the River at Tambobeng, Manila Province
193. Cane Bridge Over Arm of Bay at Ilo-Ilo, Philippines
194. Sergeant Dan Hewitt, Hero of Caloocan
195. View on Pagsanjan River in the Province of La Laguna
196. Royal Street in Ilo-Ilo, Island of Panay, Philippines
197. Native Dwelling in the Suburbs of Manila
198. The Insurgent Leaders in the Philippines
199. Isabelo Artacho
200. Baldomero Aguinaldo
201. Severino de las Alas
202. Antonio Montenegro
203. Vito Belarmino
204. Pedro Paterno
205. Emilio Aguinaldo
206. Church of San Augustin, Manila
207. Schooner Anchored in Ilo-Ilo Harbor, Philippines
208. Major-General Thomas M. Anderson and Staff, in Command of 1st
     Division, 8th Army Corps, at Manila
209. Major-General Thomas M. Anderson, Commander of 1st Division,
     8th Army Corps, at Manila







CHAPTER I

Admiral Dewey on His Flagship.

A Stormy Day on Manila Bay--Call on Admiral Dewey--The Man in White--He
Sticks to His Ship--How He Surprised Spaniards--Every Man Did His
Duty on May-Day--How Dewey Looks and Talks--What He Said About War
with Germany in Five Minutes--Feeds His Men on "Delicious" Fresh Meat
from Australia--Photography Unjust to Him.

Steaming across Manila Bay from Cavite to the city on an energetic
ferry-boat, scanning the wrecks of the Spanish fleet still visible
where the fated ships went down, one of them bearing on a strip of
canvas the legible words "Remember the 'Maine,'" the talk being of
Dewey's great May-day, we were passing the famous flag-ship of the
squadron that was ordered to destroy another squadron, and did it,
incidentally gathering in hand the keys of an empire in the Indies
for America, because the American victor was an extraordinary man,
who saw the immensity of the opportunity and improved it to the utmost,
some one said: "There is the Admiral now, on the quarter-deck under the
awning--the man in white, sitting alone!" The American Consul at Manila
was aboard the ferry-boat, and said to the captain he would like to
speak to the Admiral. The course was changed a point, and then a pause,
when the Consul called, "Admiral!" And the man in white stepped to
the rail and responded pleasantly to the greeting--the Consul saying:

"Shall we not see you ashore now?"

"No," said the man in white, in a clear voice; "I shall not go ashore
unless I have to."

Some one said: "This would be a good chance to go. Come with us."

The man in white shook his head, and the ferryman ordered full speed,
the passengers all looking steadily at the white figure until it
became a speck, and the fresh arrivals were shown the objects of
the greatest interest, until the wrecks of the Oriental fleet of the
Spaniards were no longer visible, and there was only the white walls
to see of Cavite's arsenal and the houses of the navy-yard, and the
more stately structures of Manila loomed behind the lighthouse at
the mouth of the Pasig, when the eyes of the curious were drawn to
the mossback fort that decorates as an antiquity the most conspicuous
angle of the walls of "the walled city."

There was a shade of significance in the few words of the Admiral
that he would not go ashore until he must. He has from the first been
persistent in staying at Manila. There has been nothing that could
induce him to abandon in person the prize won May 1st. His order
from the President was to destroy the Spanish fleet. It was given
on the first day of the legal existence of the war, counting the day
gained, in crossing the Pacific Ocean from the United States to the
Philippines, when the 180th degree of longitude west from Greenwich
is reached and reckoned. It was thus the President held back when the
war was on; and the next day after Dewey got the order at Hongkong
he was on the way. The Spaniards at Manila could not have been more
astonished at Dewey's way of doing, if they had all been struck by
lightning under a clear sky. They had no occasion to be "surprised,"
having the cable in daily communication with Madrid, and, more than
that, a Manila paper of the last day of April contained an item of
real news--the biggest news item ever published in that town! It
was from a point on the western coast of the island of Luzon, and
the substance of it that four vessels that seemed to be men-of-war,
had been sighted going south, and supposed to be the American fleet.

What did the Spaniards suppose the American fleet they knew well
had left Hongkong was going south for? If Admiral Dewey had been a
commonplace man he would have paused and held a council of war nigh the
huge rock Corregidor at the mouth of Manila Bay. There is a channel
on either side of that island, and both were reputed to be guarded
by torpedoes. The Spaniards had an enormous stock of munitions of
war--modern German guns enough to have riddled the fleet of American
cruisers--and why did they not have torpedoes? They had the Mauser
rifle, which has wonderful range, and ten millions of smokeless powder
cartridges. Marksmen could sweep the decks of a ship with Mausers at
the distance of a mile, and with the smokeless cartridges it would have
been mere conjecture where the sharpshooters were located. There are
rows of armor-piercing steel projectiles from Germany still standing
around rusting in the Spanish batteries, and they never did any more
than they are doing. It is said--and there is every probability of
the truth of the story--that some of these bolts would not fit any
gun the Spaniards had mounted. The Admiral paid no attention to the
big rock and the alleged torpedoes, but steamed up the bay near the
city where the Spaniards were sleeping. He was hunting the fleet he
was ordered to remove, and found it very early in the morning. Still
the thunder of his guns seems to thrill and electrify the air over the
bay, and shake the city; and the echoes to ring around the world, there
is no question--not so much because the Americans won a naval victory
without a parallel, as that Dewey improved the occasion, showing that
he put brains into his business. They say--that is, some people seem to
want to say it and so do--that Dewey is a strange sort of man; as was
said of Wolfe and Nelson, who died when they won immortality. Dewey
lives and is covered with glory. It has been held that there were
not enough Americans hurt in the Manila fight to make the victory
truly great. But the same objection applies to the destruction of
Cervera's fleet when he ran away from Santiago. General Jackson's
battle at New Orleans showed a marvelously small loss to Americans;
but it was a good deal of a victory, and held good, though won after
peace with England had been agreed upon. The capture of Manila is
valid, too. Spain surrendered before the town did. If Dewey had been an
every-day kind of man, he would have left Manila when he had fulfilled
the letter of his orders, as he had no means of destroying the Spanish
army, and did not want to desolate a city, even if the Spaniards held
it. He remained and called for more ships and men, and got them.

"How is it?" "Why is it?" "How can it be?" are the questions Admiral
Dewey asks when told that the American people, without exception,
rejoice to celebrate him--that if one of the men known to have been
with him May 1st should be found out in any American theater he would
be taken on the stage by an irresistible call and a muscular committee
of enthusiasts, and the play could not go on without "a few words"
and the "Star Spangled Banner," "Hail Columbia," "Yankee Doodle,"
"Dixey" and "My Country, 'tis of Thee"; that the hallelujah note
would be struck; that cars are chalked "for Deweyville"; that the
board fences have his name written, or painted, or whittled on them;
that there are Dewey cigars; that blacksmith-shops have the name
Dewey scratched on them, also barn doors; and that if there are two
dwelling-houses and a stable at a cross-roads it is Deweyville,
or Deweyburg or Deweytown; that there is a flood of boy babies
named Dewey, that the girls sing of him, and the ladies all admire
him and the widows love him, and the school children adore him. The
Admiral says: "I hear such things, and altogether they amaze me--the
newspapers, the telegrams, the letters become almost unreal, for I
do not comprehend what they say of my first day's work here. There
was not a man in the fleet who did not do his duty."

The Admiral is told that he need not think to stay away until the
people who have him on their minds and in their hearts are tired of
their enthusiasm; that he cannot go home undiscovered and without
demonstrations that will shake the earth and rend the skies; that
the boys will drag the horses from his carriage, and parade the
streets with him as a prisoner, and have it out with him, giving
him a good time, until it will be a hard time, and he might as well
submit to manifest destiny! His country wanted another hero, and he
was at the right place at the right time, and did the right thing
in the right way; and the fact answers all questions accounting for
everything. Still he has a notion of staying away until the storm is
over and he can get along without being a spectacle. Why, even the
ladies of Washington are wild about him. If he should appear at the
White House to call on the President, the scene would be like that
when Grant first met Abraham Lincoln.

One rough day on the bay I took passage in a small steam-launch
to visit the Olympia, where the Admiral's flag floated, to call on
him. There was plenty of steam, and it was pleasant to get out a good
way behind the breakwater, for the waves beyond were white with anger,
and the boat, when departing from partial shelter, had proceeded
but two or three hundred yards when it made a supreme effort in two
motions--the first, to roll over; the second, to stand on its head. I
was glad both struggles were unsuccessful, and pleased with the order:
"Slow her up." The disadvantages of too much harbor were evident. The
slow-ups were several, and well timed, and then came the rise and
fall of the frisky launch beside the warship, the throwing of a
rope, the pull with a hook, the stand off with an oar, the bounding
boat clearing from four to ten feet at a jump; the clutch, the quick
step, the deft avoidance of a crushed foot or sprained ankle, with a
possible broken leg in sight, the triumphant ascent, the safe landing,
the sudden sense that Desdemona was right in loving a man for the
dangers he had passed, the thought that there should be harbors less
fluctuating, a lively appreciation of the achievements of pilots in
boarding Atlantic liners. The broad decks of the Olympia, built by
the builders of the matchless Oregon, had a comforting solidity under
my feet. The Admiral was believed to be having a nap; but he was wide
awake, and invited the visitor to take a big chair, which, after having
accompanied the launch in the dance with the whitecaps, was peculiarly
luxurious. The Admiral didn't mind me, and had a moment's surprise
about an observer of long ago strolling so far from home and going
forth in a high sea to make a call. I confessed to being an ancient
Wanderer, but not an Ancient Mariner, and expressed disapprobation
of the deplorable roughness of the California Albatross, a brute of
a bird--a feathered ruffian that ought to be shot.

The Admiral would be picked out by close attention as the origin of
some millions of pictures; but he is unlike as well as like them. Even
the best photographs do not do justice to his fine eyes, large, dark
and luminous, or to the solid mass of his head with iron-brown hair
tinged with gray. He is a larger man than the portraits indicate;
and his figure, while that of a strong man in good health and form and
well nourished, is not stout and, though full, is firm; and his step
has elasticity in it. His clean-shaven cheek and chin are massive, and
drawn on fine lines full of character--no fatty obscuration, no decline
of power; a stern but sunny and cloudless face--a good one for a place
in history; no show of indulgence, no wrinkles; not the pallor of
marble, rather the glint of bronze--the unabated force good for other
chapters of history. It would be extremely interesting to report the
talk of the Admiral; but there were two things about him that reminded
me of James G. Blaine, something of the vivid personality of the loved
and lost leader; something in his eye and his manner, more in the
startling candor with which he spoke of things it would be premature
to give the world, and, above all, the absence of all alarm about
being reported--the unconscious consciousness that one must know this
was private and no caution needed. A verbatim report of the Admiral
would, however, harm no one, signify high-toned candor and a certain
breezy simplicity in the treatment of momentous matters. Evidently
here was a man not posing, a hero because his character was heroic, a
genuine personage--not artificial, proclamatory, a picker of phrases,
but a doer of deeds that explain themselves; a man with imagination,
not fantastic but realistic, who must have had a vision during the
night after the May-day battle of what might be the great hereafter;
beholding under the southern constellations the gigantic shadow of
America, crowned with stars, with the archipelagoes of Asia under
her feet and broad and mighty destinies at command.

It was the next day that he anchored precisely where his famous ship
was swinging when I sat beside him; and his words to the representative
of three centuries of Spanish misrule had in them an uncontemplated
flash from the flint and steel of fixed purpose and imperial
force. "Fire another gun at my ships and I will destroy your city."

We can hardly realize in America how flagrant Europeanism has been in
the Manila Bay; how the big German guns bought by Spain looked from
their embrasures; how a powerful German fleet persisted in asserting
antagonism to Americanism, and tested in many ways the American
Admiral's knowledge of his rights and his country's policy until
Admiral Dewey told, not the German Admiral, as has been reported,
but his flag lieutenant, "Can it be possible that your nation means
war with mine? If so, we can begin it in five minutes." The limit
had been reached, and the line was drawn; and Dewey's words will go
down in our records with those of Charles Francis Adams to Lord John
Russell about the ironclads built in England for the Confederacy:
"My Lord, I need not point out to your lordship that this is war."

Perhaps the German Admiral had exceeded the instructions of his
Imperial Government, and the peremptory words of the American Admiral
caused a better understanding, making for peace rather than for war.

Next to the Americans the English have taken a pride in Admiral Dewey,
and they are in the Asiatic atmosphere our fast friends. They do
not desire that we should give up the Philippines. On the contrary,
they want us to keep the islands, and the more we become interested
in those waters and along their shores, the better. They know that
the world has practically grown smaller and, therefore, the British
Empire more compact; and they find Russia their foe. They see that with
the Pacific Coast our base of operations looking westward, we have
first the Hawaiian Islands for producers and a coal station, naval
arsenal, dockyards for the renovation and repair and replenishment
of our fleets; and they see that we have reserved for ourselves
one of the Ladrones, so that we will have an independent route to
the Philippines. The Japanese have cultivated much feeling against
our possession of Hawaii, the animus being that they wanted it for
themselves; and likewise they are disturbed by our Pacific movement,
anticipating the improvement of the most western of the Alutian
Islands, an admirable station overlooking the North Pacific; all
comprehending with Hawaii, the Alutian Island found most available,
the Ladrone that we shall reserve and the Philippines, we shall have
a Pacific quadrilateral; and this is not according to the present
pleasure and the ambition for the coming days, of Japan. England
would have approved our holding all the islands belonging to the
Spanish, including the Canaries, and Majorca and Minorca and their
neighboring isles in the Mediterranean, and take a pride in us. She
has been of untold and inestimable service to us in the course of the
Spanish War, and her ways have been good for us at Manila, while the
Germans have been frankly against us, the Russians grimly reserved,
and the French disposed to be fretful because they have invested in
Spanish bonds upon which was raised the money to carry on the miserable
false pretense of war with the Cubans. One day while I was on the fine
transport Peru, in the harbor of Manila, the American Admiral's ship
saluted an English ship-of-war coming in that had saluted his flag,
and also displayed American colors in recognition that the harbor of
Manila was an American port. That was the significance of the flashes
and thundering of the Admiral's guns and the white cloud that gathered
about his ship that has done enough for celebrity through centuries.

Admiral Dewey created the situation in the Philippines that the
President wisely chose by way of the Paris Conference to receive the
deliberate judgment of the Senate and people of the United States. Dewy
has been unceasingly deeply concerned about it. His naval victory
was but the beginning. He might have sailed away from Manila May 2d,
having fulfilled his orders; but he had the high and keen American
spirit in him, and clung. He needed a base of operations, a place upon
which to rest and obtain supplies. He had not the marines to spare
to garrison a fort save at Cavite, twelve miles from Manila; and he
needed chickens, eggs, fresh meat and vegetables; and it was important
that the Spanish Army should be occupied on shore. Hence, Aguinaldo,
who was in Singapore, and the concentration of insurgents that had
themselves to be restrained to make war on civilized lines. One of
the points of the most considerable interest touching the Filipinos is
that the smashing defeat of the fleet of Spain in Manila Bay heartened
them. They have become strong for themselves. The superiority of
the Americans over the Spaniards as fighting men is known throughout
the islands Spain oppressed; and the bonds of the tyrants have been
broken. It should not be out of mind that the first transports with
our troops did not reach Manila for six weeks, and that the army was
not in shape to take the offensive until after General Merritt's
arrival, late in July. All this time the American Admiral had to
hold on with the naval arm; and it was the obvious game of Spain,
if she meant to fight and could not cope with the Americans in the
West Indies, to send all her available ships and overwhelm us in
the East Indies. At the same time the German, French, Russian and
Japanese men-of-war represented the interest of the live nations of
the earth in the Philippines. As fast as possible Admiral Dewey was
re-enforced; but it was not until the two monitors, the Monterey and
Monadnock, arrived, the latter after the arrival of General Merritt,
that the Admiral felt that he was safely master of the harbor. He
had no heavily armored ships to assail the shore batteries within
their range, and might be crippled by the fire of the great Krupp
guns. It was vital that the health of the crews of his ships should
be maintained, and the fact that the men are and have been all summer
well and happy is not accidental. Admiral Dewey took the point of
danger, if there was one, into his personal keeping, by anchoring the
Olympia on the Manila side of the bay, while others were further out
and near Cavite; and throughout the fleet there was constant activity
and the utmost vigilance. There was incessant solicitude about what
the desperate Spaniards might contrive in the nature of aggressive
enterprise. It seemed incredible to Americans that nothing should
be attempted. How would a Spanish fleet have fared for three months
of war with us in an American harbor? There would have been a new
feature of destructiveness tried on the foe at least once a week.

The Spaniards ashore seemed to be drowsy; but the Americans were
wide awake, ready for anything, and could not be surprised; so
that we may commend as wisdom the Spanish discretion that let them
alone. The ship that was the nearest neighbor of Admiral Dewey for
months of his long vigil flew the flag of Belgium. She is a large,
rusty-looking vessel, without a sign of contraband of war, or of
a chance of important usefulness about her; but she performed a
valuable function. I asked half a dozen times what her occupation
was before any one gave a satisfactory answer. Admiral Dewey told
the story in few words. She was a cold-storage ship, with beef and
mutton from Australia, compartments fixed for about forty degrees
below zero. Each day the meat for the American fleet's consumption was
taken out. There was a lot of it on the deck of the Olympia thawing
when I was a visitor; and the beef was "delicious." I am at pains
to give Dewey's word. While the Spaniards ashore were eating tough,
lean buffalo--the beasts of burden in the streets, the Americans
afloat rejoiced in "delicious" beef and mutton from Australia. It
was explained that the use of cold-storage meat depended upon giving
it time to thaw, for if it should be cooked in an icy state it would
be black and unpalatable, losing wholly its flavor and greatly its
nourishing quality. Australia is not many thousand miles from the
Philippines--and one must count miles by the thousands out there. The
Belgians have a smart Consul at Manila who is a friend of mankind.

One of the incidents in the battle of Manila--all are fresh in
the public memory--is that Admiral Dewey did not make use of the
conning-tower--a steel, bomb proof, for the security of the officer
in command of the ship--the Captain, of course, and the commander of
the fleet, if he will.

This retreat did not prove, in the battle of Yalu and the combats
between the Chileans and Peruvians, a place of safety; but as a rule
there is a considerable percentage of protection in its use. Admiral
Dewey preferred to remain on the bridge--and there were four fragments
of Spanish shells that passed close to him, striking within a radius
of fifteen feet. The Admiral, when told there had been some remark
because he had not occupied the conning-house in the action, walked
with me to the tower, the entrance to which is so guarded that it
resembles a small cavern of steel--with a heavy cap or lid, under
which is a circular slit, through which observations are supposed to
be made. "Try it," the Admiral said, "and you find it is hard to get
a satisfactory view." He added, when I had attempted to look over
the surroundings: "We will go to the bridge;" and standing on it he
annotated the situation, saying: "Here you have the whole bay before
you, and can see everything." I remarked: "The newspaper men are
very proud of the correspondent of the Herald who was with you on the
bridge;" and the Admiral said: "Yes; Stickney was right here with us."

There were many reasons for the officer commanding the American
fleet that day to watch closely the developments. The Spaniards had,
for their own purposes, even falsified the official charts of the
bay. Where our vessels maneuvered and the flagship drew twenty-two
feet of water and had nine feet under the keel, the chart called for
fifteen feet only!

It is not a secret that the President wanted Admiral Dewey, if
it was not in his opinion inconsistent with his sense of duty,
to go to Washington. Naturally the President would have a profound
respect for the Admiral's opinion as to the perplexing problem of the
Philippines. The Admiral did not think he should leave his post. He
could cover the points of chief interest in writing, and preferred
very much to do so, and stay right where he was "until this thing is
settled." The opinion of the Admiral as to what the United States
should do with, or must do about, the political relations of the
Philippines with ourselves and others, have not been given formal
expression; but it is safe to say they are not in conflict with his
feeling that the American fleet at Manila should be augmented with
gunboats, cruisers and two or three battle-ships. It was, in the
opinion of the illustrious Admiral, when the Peace Commission met in
Paris, the time and place to make a demonstration of the sea power
of the United States.

The personal appearance of Admiral Dewey is not presented with
attractive accuracy in the very familiar portrait of him that has
been wonderfully multiplied and replenished. The expression of the
Admiral is not truly given in the prints and photos. The photographer
is responsible for a faulty selection. The impression prevails that the
hero is "a little fellow." There is much said to the effect that he
is jaunty and has excess of amiability in his smile. He weighs about
180 pounds, and is of erect bearing, standing not less than five feet
ten inches and a quarter. His hair is not as white as the pictures
say. The artist who touched up the negative must have thought gray
hair so becoming that he anticipated the feast of coming years. The
figure of the Admiral is strong, well carried, firm, and his bearing
that of gravity and determination, but no pose for the sake of show,
no pomp and circumstance, just the Academy training showing in his
attitude--the abiding, unconscious grace that is imparted in the
schools of Annapolis and West Point--now rivaled by other schools in
"setting up." The Admiral is of solidity and dignity, of good stature
and proportions; has nothing of affectation in manners or insincerity
in speech; is a hearty, stirring, serious man, whose intensity is
softened by steady purposes and calm forces, and moderated by the
play of a sense of humor, that is not drollery or levity, but has a
pleasing greeting for a clever word, and yields return with a flash
in it and an edge on it.



CHAPTER II

Life in Manila.

Character of the Filipinos--Drivers Lashing Laboring Men in
the Streets--What Americans Get in Their Native Air--The Logic
of Destiny--Manila as She Fell into Our Hands--The Beds in the
Tropics--A Spanish Hotel--Profane Yells for Ice--Sad Scenes in the
Dining Room--Major-General Calls for "Francisco"--A Broken-Hearted
Pantry Woman.

The same marvelous riches that distinguish Cuba are the inheritance
of Luzon. The native people are more promising in the long run than
if they were in larger percentage of the blood of Spain, for they
have something of that indomitable industry that must finally work
out an immense redemption for the eastern and southern Asiatics. When,
I wonder, did the American people get the impression so extensive and
obstinate that the Japanese and Chinese were idlers? We may add as
having a place in this category the Hindoos, who toil forever, and,
under British government, have increased by scores of millions. The
southern Asiatics are, however, less emancipated from various
indurated superstitions than those of the East; and the Polynesians,
spread over the southern seas, are a softer people than those of the
continent. However, idleness is not the leading feature of life of the
Filipinos, and when they are mixed, especially crossed with Chinese,
they are indefatigable. On the Philippine Islands there is far less
servility than on the other side of the sea of China, and the people
are the more respectable and hopeful for the flavor of manliness that
compensates for a moderate but visible admixture of savagery. We of
North America may be proud of it that the atmosphere of our continent,
when it was wild, was a stimulant of freedom and independence. The red
Indians of our forests were, with all their faults, never made for
slaves. The natives of the West Indies, the fierce Caribs excepted,
were enslaved by the Spaniards, and perished under the lash. Our
continental tribes--the Seminoles and the Comanches, the Sioux and
Mohawks, the Black Feet and the Miamis--from the St. Lawrence to
Red River and the oceans, fought all comers--Spaniards, French and
English--only the French having the talent of polite persuasion and
the gift of kindness that won the mighty hunters, but never subjugated
them. We may well encourage the idea that the quality of air of the
wilderness has entered the soil. When, in Manila, I have seen the men
bearing burdens on the streets spring out of the way of those riding
in carriages, and lashed by drivers with a viciousness that no dumb
animal should suffer, I have felt my blood warm to think that the men
of common hard labor in my country would resent a blow as quickly as
the man on horseback--that even the poor black--emancipated the other
day from the subjugation of slavery by a masterful and potential race,
stands up in conscious manhood, and that the teachings of the day are
that consistently with the progress of the country--as one respects
himself, he must be respected--and that the air and the earth have the
inspiration and the stimulus of freedom. The Chinese and Japanese are
famous as servants--so constant, handy, obedient, docile, so fitted to
minister to luxury, to wait upon those favored by fortune and spurred
to execute the schemes for elevation and dominance, and find employment
in the enterprise that comprehends human advancement. It must be
admitted that the Filipinos are not admirable in menial service. Many
of them are untamed, and now, that the Americans have given object
lessons of smiting the Spaniards, the people of the islands that
Magellinos, the Portuguese, found for Spain, must be allowed a measure
of self-government, or they will assert a broader freedom, and do it
with sanguinary methods. As Americans have heretofore found personal
liberty consistent with public order--that Republicanism was more
stable than imperialism in peaceable administration, and not less
formidable in war, it seems to be Divinely appointed that our paths
of Empire may, with advantage to ourselves, and the world at large,
be made more comprehensive than our fathers blazed them out. But
one need not hesitate to go forward in this cause, for we have only
gone farther than the fathers dreamed, because, among their labors of
beneficence, was that of building wiser than they knew, and there is
no more reason now why we should stop when we strike the salt water
of the seas, and consent to it that where we find the white line of
surf that borders a continent we shall say to the imperial popular
Republic, thus far and no farther shalt thou go, and here shall thy
proud march be stayed--than there was that George Washington, as the
representative of the English-speaking people, should have assumed that
England and Virginia had no business beyond the Allegheny Mountains,
and, above all, no right to territory on the west of the Allegheny
and Kanawha, and north of the Ohio river, a territory then remote,
inhabited by barbarians and wanted by the French, who claimed the
whole continent, except the strip along the Atlantic possessed by the
English colonies. Washington was a believer in the acquisition of the
Ohio country. He was a man who had faith in land--in ever more land. It
is the same policy to go west now that it was then. Washington crossed
the Allegheny and held the ground. Jefferson crossed the Mississippi,
and sent Louis and Clark to the Pacific; and crossing the great western
ocean now is but the logic of going beyond the great western rivers,
prairies and mountains then. We walk in the ways of the fathers when
we go conquering and to conquer along the Eastward shores of Asia.

One of the expanding and teeming questions before the world now,
and the authority and ability to determine it, is in the hands of
the Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the United States, is whether
Manila shall become an American city, with all the broad and sweeping
significance attaching thereto. Manila was not dressed for company
when I saw her, for she had just emerged from a siege in which
the people had suffered much inconvenience and privation. The water
supply was cut off, and the streets were not cleaned. The hotels were
disorganized and the restaurants in confusion. The trees that once cast
a grateful shade along the boulevards, that extended into the country,
rudely denuded of their boughs, had the appearance of the skeletons
of strange monsters. The insurgent army was still in the neighborhood
in a state of uneasiness, feeling wronged, deprived, as they were,
of an opportunity to get even with the Spaniards, by picking out
and slaying some of the more virulent offenders. There was an immense
monastery, where hundreds of priests were said to be sheltered, and the
insurgents desired to take them into their own hands and make examples
of them. The Spaniards about the streets were becoming complacent. They
had heard of peace, on the basis of Spain giving up every thing,
but the Philippines, and there were expectations that the troops
withdrawn from Cuba might be sent from Havana to Manila, and then,
as soon as the Americans were gone, the islanders could be brought to
submission by vastly superior forces. There were more rations issued to
Spanish than to American soldiers, until the division of the Philippine
Expedition with Major-General Otis arrived, but the Americans were
exclusively responsible for the preservation of the peace between the
implacable belligerents, and the sanitary work required could not at
once be accomplished, but presently it was visible that something was
done every day in the right direction. There was much gambling with
dice, whose rattling could be heard far and near on the sidewalks,
but this flagrant form of vice was summarily suppressed, we may say
with strict truth, at the point of the bayonet. The most representative
concentration of the ingredients of chaos was at the Hotel Oriental,
that overlooked a small park with a dry fountain and a branch of the
river flowing under a stone bridge, with a pretty stiff current,
presently to become a crowded canal. It is of three lofty stories
and an attic, a great deal of the space occupied with halls, high,
wide and long. The front entrance is broad, and a tiled floor runs
straight through the house. Two stairways, one on either side, lead to
the second story, the first steps of stone. In the distance beyond,
a court could be seen, a passable conservatory--but bottles on a
table with a counter in front declared that this was a barroom, as
it was. The next thing further was a place where washing was done,
then came empty rooms that might be shops; after this a narrow and
untidy street, and then a livery stable--a sort of monopolistic cab
stand, where a few ponies and carriages were to be found--but no one
understood or did anything as long as possible, except to say that
all the rigs were engaged now and always. However, a little violent
English language, mixed with Spanish, would arouse emotion and excite
commotion eventuating in a pony in harness, and a gig or carriage,
and a desperate driver, expert with a villainous whip used without
occasion or remorse.

The cool place was at the front door, on the sidewalk, seated on a
hard chair, for there was always a breeze. The Spanish guests knew
where the wind blew, and gathered there discussing many questions
that must have deeply interested them. But they had something to eat,
no authority or ability to affect any sort of change, and unfailing
tobacco, the burning of which was an occupation. The ground floor of
the hotel, except the barroom, the washroom, the hall, the conservatory
and the hollow square, had been devoted to shop keeping, but the shop
keepers were gone, perhaps for days and perhaps forever! Stone is
not used to any great extent in house interiors, except within a few
feet of the surface of the earth. Of course, there is no elevator in
a Spanish hotel. That which is wanted is room for the circulation of
air. Above the first flight of stairs the steps have a deep dark red
tinge, and are square and long, so that each extends solidly across
the liberal space allotted to the stairway. The blocks might be some
stone of delightful color, but they are hewn logs, solid and smooth,
of a superb mahogany or some tree of harder wood and deeper luxuriance
of coloring. The bedrooms are immensely high, and in every way ample,
looking on great spaces devoted to wooing the air from the park and the
river. The windows are enormous. Not satisfied with the giant sliding
doors that open on the street, revealing windows--unencumbered with
sash or glass, there are sliding doors under the window sills, that
roll back right and left and offer the chance to introduce a current
of air directly on the lower limbs. One of the lessons of the tropics
is the value of the outer air, and architecture that gives it a chance
in the house. It is a precious education. The artificial light within
must be produced by candles, and each stupendous apartment is furnished
with one tallowy and otherwise neglected candle stick, and you can
get, with exertion, a candle four inches long. There is a wardrobe,
a wash stand, with pitcher and basin, and a commode, fans, chairs,
and round white marble table, all the pieces placed in solitude, so
as to convey the notion of lonesomeness. The great feature is the
bed. The bedstead is about the usual thing, save that there is no
provision for a possible or impossible spring mattress, or anything
of that nature. The bed space is covered with bamboo, platted. It is
hard as iron, and I can testify of considerable strength, for I rested
my two hundred pounds, and rising a few pounds, on this surface, with
no protection for it or myself for several nights, and there were no
fractures. There is spread on this surface a Manila mat, which is a
shade tougher and less tractable than our old style oilcloth. Upon
this is spread a single sheet, that is tucked in around the edges
of the mat, and there are no bed clothes, absolutely none. There
is a mosquito bar with only a few holes in it, but it is suspended
and cannot under any circumstances be used as a blanket. There is a
pillow, hard and round, and easy as a log for your cheek to rest upon,
and it is beautifully covered with red silk. There is a small roll,
say a foot long and four inches in diameter, softer than the pillow,
to a slight extent, and covered with finer and redder silk, that is
meant for the neck alone. The comparatively big red log is to extend
across the bed for the elevation it gives the head, and the little and
redder log, softer so that you may indent it with your thumb, saves the
neck from being broken on this relic of the Spanish inquisition. But
there is a comforter--not such a blessed caressing domestic comforter
as the Yankees have, light as a feather, but responsive to a tender
touch. This Philippine comforter is another red roll that must be a
quilt firmly rolled and swathed in more red silk; and it is to prop
yourself withal when the contact with the sheet and the mat on the
bamboo floor of the bedstead, a combination iniquitous as the naked
floor--becomes wearisome. It rests the legs to pull on your back, and
tuck under your knees. In the total absence of bed covering, beyond
a thin night shirt, the three red rolls are not to be despised. The
object of the bed is to keep cool, and if you do find the exertion
of getting onto--not into--the bed produces a perspiration, and the
mosquito bar threatens suffocation, reliance may be had that if you
can compose yourself on top of the sheet (which feels like a hard wood
floor, when the rug gives way on the icy surface and you fall) and
if you use the three rolls of hard substance, covered with red silk,
discreetly and considerately, in finding a position, and if you permit
the windows--no glass--fifteen feet by twelve, broadcast, as it were,
to catch the breath of the river and the park; if you can contrive
with infinite quiet, patience and pains to go to sleep for a few
hours, you will be cool enough; and when awakened shivering there is
no blanket near, and if you must have cover, why get under the sheet,
next the Manila mat, and there you are! Then put your troublesome and
probably aching legs over the bigger red roll, and take your repose! Of
course, when in the tropics you cannot expect to bury yourself in
bedclothing, or to sleep in fur bags like an arctic explorer. The
hall in front of your door is twelve feet wide and eighty long, lined
with decorative chairs and sofas, and in the center of the hotel is
a spacious dining room. The Spaniard doesn't want breakfast. He wants
coffee and fruit--maybe a small banana--something sweet, and a crumb
of bread. The necessity of the hour is a few cigarettes. His refined
system does not require food until later. At 12 o'clock he lunches,
and eats an abundance of hot stuff--fish, flesh and fowl--fiery
stews and other condolences for the stomach. This gives strength to
consider the wrongs of Spain and the way, when restored to Madrid,
the imbeciles, who allowed the United States to capture the last
sad fragments of the colonies, sacred to Spanish honor, shall be
crushed by the patriots who were out of the country when it was
ruined. It will take a long time for the Spaniards to settle among
factions the accounts of vengeance. One of the deeper troubles of the
Spaniards is that they take upon themselves the administration of the
prerogatives of him who said "Vengeance is mine." The American end of
the dining room contains several young men who speak pigeon Spanish,
and Captains Strong and Coudert are rapidly becoming experts, having
studied the language in school, and also on the long voyage out. There
are also a group of resident Englishmen and a pilgrim from Norway,
but at several tables are Americans who know no Spanish and are mad
at the Spaniards on that provocation among other things.

There is, however, a connecting link and last resort in the person
of a young man--a cross between a Jap and Filipino. He is slender
and pale, but not tall. His hair is roached, so that it stands up
in confusion, and he is wearied all the time about the deplorable
"help."' It is believed he knows better than is done--always a source
of unhappiness. His name is Francisco; his reputation is widespread. He
is the man who "speaks English"--and is the only one--and it is not
doubted that he knows at least a hundred words of our noble tongue. He
says, "What do you want?" "Good morning, gentlemen"; "What can I do for
you?" "Do you want dinner?" "No, there is no ice till 6 o'clock." He
puts the Americans in mind of better days. Behind this linguist is
a little woman, whose age might be twenty or sixty, for her face is
so unutterably sad and immovable in expression that there is not a
line in it that tells you anything but that there is to this little
woman a bitterly sad, mean, beastly world. She must be grieving over
mankind. It is her duty to see that no spoon is lost, and not an orange
or banana wasted, and her mournful eyes are fixed with the intensity
of despair upon the incompetent waiters, who, when hard pressed by wild
shouts from American officers, frantic for lack of proper nourishment,
fall into a panic and dance and squeal at each other; and then the
woman of fixed sorrow, her left shoulder thin and copper-colored,
thrust from her low-necked dress, her right shoulder protected, is in
the midst of the pack, with a gliding bound and the ferocity of a cat,
the sadness of her face taking on a tinge of long-suffering rage. She
whirls the fools here and there as they are wanted. Having disentangled
the snarl, she returns to the door from which her eyes command both
the pantry and the dining-room to renew her solemn round of mournful
vigilance. The Americans are outside her jurisdiction. She has no more
idea what they are than Christopher Columbus, when he was discovering
America, knew where he was going. When Francisco does not know what
the language (English) hurled at him means he has a far-away look,
and may be listening to the angels sing, for he is plaintive and
inexpressive. He looks so sorry that Americans cannot speak their
own language as he speaks English! But there are phrases delivered by
Americans that he understands, such as, "Blankety, blank, blank--you
all come here." Francisco does not go there, but with humble step
elsewhere, affecting to find a pressing case for his intervention,
but when he can no longer avoid your eye catching him he smiles a
sweet but most superior smile, such as becomes one who speaks English
and is the responsible man about the house.

There never was one who did more on a capital of one hundred words. His
labors have been lightened slightly, for the Americans have picked up a
few Spanish words, such as, "Ha mucher, mucher--don't you know? Hielo,
hielo!" Hielo is ice, and after the "mucher" is duly digested the
average waiter comes, by and by, with a lump as big as a hen's egg
and is amazed by the shouts continuing "hielo, hielo!" pronounced
much like another and wicked word.

"Oh, blanketination mucher mucher hielo!" The Filipinos cannot
contemplate lightly the consumption of slabs of ice. The last words
I heard in the dining-room of the Hotel Oriental were from a soldier
with two stars on each shoulder: "Francisco, oh, Francisco," and the
little woman with left shoulder exposed turned her despairing face
to the wall, her sorrow too deep for words or for weeping.



CHAPTER III

From Long Island To Luzon.

Across the Continent--An American Governor-General Steams Through
the Golden Gate--He Is a Minute-Man--Honolulu as a Health Resort--The
Lonesome Pacific--The Skies of Asia--Dreaming Under the Stars of the
Scorpion--The Southern Cross.

Spain, crowded between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic, was the
world's "West" for many centuries, indeed until Columbus found a
further West, but he did not go far enough to find the East Indies. The
United States is now at work in both the East and West Indies.

Our Manila expeditions steamed into the sunsets, the boys pointing
out to each other the southern cross. The first stage of a journey,
to go half round the world on a visit to our new possession, was by
the annex boat from Brooklyn, and a rush on the Pennsylvania train,
that glimmers with gold and has exhausted art on wheels, to Washington,
to get the political latitude and longitude by observation of the two
domes, that of the Capitol, and the library, and the tremendous needle
of snow that is the monument to Washington, and last, but not least,
the superb old White House.

The next step was across the mountains on the Baltimore and Ohio,
the short cut between the East and the West, traversed so often by
George Washington to get good land for the extension of our national
foundations. The space between Cincinnati and Chicago is cleared on the
"Big Four" with a bound through the shadow of the earth, between two
rare days in June, and the next midnight, the roaring train flew high
over the Missouri River at Omaha, and by daylight far on the way to
Ogden. The country was rich in corn and grass, and when one beholds the
fat cattle, lamentations for the lost buffalo cease. It is a delight
to see young orchards and farmhouses, and cribs and sheds fortified
against tornadoes by groves, laid out with irritating precision to
confront the whirling storms from west and south. The broad bad lands
in which the tempests are raised devour the heart of the continent.

I made note of the 888-mile post beyond Omaha, but the 1,000-mile
telegraph pole and tree glided away while I was catching the lights
and shadows on a fearfully tumbled landscape. The alkali has poisoned
enormous tracts, and the tufts of sagebrush have a huge and sinister
monotony. Looking out early in the morning there was in our track
a "gaunt grey wolf" with sharp ears, unabashed by the roar of the
train. His species find occasional scraps along the track and do
not fear the trains. Then I saw something glisten in the herbage,
and it was a rattlesnake, if it were not a whisky bottle.

The gigantic lumps of tawny earth, with castellated crags of stone,
ghostly ruins one would say of cities that perished thousands of years
before the bricks were made for Babylon. Profound beds for vanished
torrents yawned into a scrap of green valley, and the glitter of a
thread of water. A town blossomed from a coal mine, and there was
an array of driven wells with force pumps to quench the thirst of
seething and raging locomotives. A turn in the line and a beautiful
cloud formation like billows of white roses, massive, delicately
outlined fantastic spires like marble mountains, carved--ah! the
cloud comes out clear as if it were a wall of pearl, and there are
the everlasting mighty hills with their brows of exquisite snow!

These are lofty reservoirs from which the long days glowing with
sunshine send down streams of water at whose touch the deserts
bloom. The eye is refreshed as we make a closer acquaintance of
the mountains. Where water flows and trees "wag their high tops"
there is hope of homes. There are canyons that cause one to smile
at remembrances of what were considered the dizzy gorges of the
Alleghenies. There is a glow as of molten lead in one corner of a misty
valley far away. It is Salt Lake, the Dead Sea of America. Beyond
this at an immense elevation is a lake with the tinge of the indigo
sky of the tropics. If one could stir a portion of the Caribbean Sea
into Lake Geneva, the correct tint could be obtained. Thirty miles
of snow sheds announce progress in the journey to the Pacific. There
is still heat and dust, but beside the road are villages; and there
are even fountains.

Each stream is a treasure, and its banks are rich with
verdure. There are sleek cows on bright grass. The mountains
are no longer forbidding. They take on robes of loveliness. The
valleys broaden and on the easy slopes there are orchards where the
oranges glisten. There are clusters of grapes. We have come upon that
magic land, California. There is golden music in the name. This is a
conquest. The war in which it was won was not one of philanthropy. We
gathered an empire.

General Merritt never minded the weather, whether the wind blew or
not, and instead of holding his ship for several hours after the
appointed time, wanted to know five minutes after 10 o'clock whether
the time for starting was not 10 o'clock and by whom the boat was
detained. At ten minutes after 10 the gangplank was swung free, with
a desperate man on it who scrambled on with the help of long legs and
a short rope. As the ship swung from the dock and got a move on there
were thousands of men and women exalted with emotion, and there were
crowded steamers and tugs toppling with swarming enthusiasts resounding
with brass bands and fluttering with streaming flags. The ladies were
especially frantic. Spurts of white smoke jetted from forts and there
were ringing salutes. Steam whistles pitched a tune beyond the fixed
stars. The national airs with thrilling trumpet tones pierced the
din, and a multitude of voices joined with the bands giving words and
tone to the magnetic storm. How many miles the Newport was pursued I
cannot conjecture. There were tall ladies standing on the high decks
of tugs that were half buried in the foam of the bay, but as long
as they could hold a "Star Spangled Banner" in one hand, and a few
handkerchiefs in another, their skirts streaming in grace and defiance
before the rising gale, they sang hosannas, and there were attitudes
both of triumph and despair as the fair followers, dashed with spray,
gave up the chase, passionately kissing their hands god-speed and
good-by. This was going to the Indies through the Golden Gate!

A breakage of dishes, that sounded as though the ship were going
to pieces, belied the prophesy that beyond the bar there was to
be no moaning; and the Pacific would not be pacified. However,
the reputation of the ocean was good enough to go to sleep on,
but the berths squirmed in sympathy with the twisting and plunging
ship. It was not a "sound of revelry by night," to which the wakeful
listened through the dismal hours, and in the morning there was a
high sea--grand rollers crowned with frothy lace, long black slopes
rising and smiting like waves of liquid iron.

The Pacific was an average North Atlantic, and it was explained by the
tale that the peaceful part of this ocean is away down South where the
earth is most rotund, and the trade winds blow on so serenely that they
lull the navigators into dreams of peace that induce a state of making
haste slowly and a willingness to forget and be forgotten, whether--


Of those who husbanded the golden grain
Or those who flung it to the winds like rain,


The gulls are not our snowy birds of the Atlantic. We are lonesome
out here, and the Albatross sweeps beside us, hooded like a cobra,
an evil creature trying to hoodoo us, with owlish eyes set in a frame
like ghastly spectacle glasses.

General Merritt's blue eyes shone like diamonds through the stormy
experiences while the young staff officers curled up as the scientists
did on the floor, and smiled a sort of sickly smile! The highest
compliment that can be paid them is that the group of officers
and gentlemen surrounding the commander of the expedition to the
Philippines, express his own character.

It was funny to find that the private soldiers were better served
with food than the General and his staff. There was reform, so as
to even up the matter of rations, but the General was not anxious
and solicitous for better food. His idea of the correct supper after
a hard day's service is a goodly sized sliced onion with salt, meat
broiled on two sticks, hard tack, a tin cup of coffee, for luxuries a
baked potato, a pipe of tobacco, a nip of whisky, a roll in a blanket
and a sleep until the next day's duties are announced by the bugle.

As the gentlemen of the staff got their sea legs, and flavored
the narration of their experiences with humor, I found myself in a
cloudy state and mentioned a small matter to the brigadier surgeon,
who whipped out a thermometer and took my temperature, and that man of
science gave me no peace night or day, and drove me from the ship into
Paradise--that is to say I was ordered to stay at Honolulu. Through
a window of the Queen's hospital I saw lumps of tawny gold that were
pomegranates shaking in the breeze, another tree glowed with dates,
and a broad, vividly green hedge was rich with scarlet colors. I was
duly examined by physicians, who were thorough as German specialists. I
had, in the course of a few hours, a nap, a dish of broth, a glass
of milk, a glass of ice water and an egg nog. That broth flowed like
balm to the right spot. It was chicken broth. When I guzzled the egg
nog I would have bet ten to one on beating that fever in a week, and
the next morning about 4:30, when there was competitive crowing by a
hundred roosters, I was glad of the concert, for it gave assurance of
a supply of chickens to keep up the broth and the eggs that disguised
the whiskey.

Two days later I gave up the egg nog because it was too good for
me. I knew I did not deserve anything so nice, and suspected it was a
beneficence associated with a cloud on my brow. I had the approval of
the hospital physician as to egg nog, and he cut off a lot of dainties
sent by the Honolulu ladies, who must have imagined that I was one
of the heroes of the war. Their mission is to make heroes happy. I
was detained under the royal palms, and other palms that were planted
by the missionaries, four weeks, and got away on the ship Peru with
Major-General Otis, and when we had gone on for a fortnight, as far
as from the Baltic to Lake Erie, we saw some rocks that once were
Spanish property.

As we left Honolulu the air was already a-glitter with Star Spangled
Banners. There are three great points to be remembered as to the
annexation of Hawaii:

1. There is not to be a continuance of the slavery of Asiatics in
the new possession.

2. "Manhood suffrage" is not to be extended to Asiatics, often actually
as under strictly conventional constitutional construction.

3. The archipelago is to be a United States territory, but not a
State of the United States. Ex-President Harrison says in his most
interesting book: "This Country of Ours," which should be one of our
national school books:

"Out of the habit of dealing with the public domain has come the common
thought that all territory that we acquire must, when sufficiently
populous, be erected into States. But why may we not take account
of the quality of the people as well as of their numbers, if future
acquisitions should make it proper to do so? A territorial form
of government is not so inadequate that it might not serve for an
indefinite time."

It is to be remarked of the Hawaiian Islands that they did not possess
the original riches of timber that distinguished the West Indies,
especially Cuba, where Columbus found four varieties of oranges. One
of the features of Hawaiian forestry is the Royal Palm, but it was
not indigenous to the islands. The oldest of the stately royalists
is not of forty years' growth, and yet they add surprising grace to
many scenes, and each year will increase their height and enhance
their beauty.

Hawaiians will be saved from extinction by miscegenation. There will
be no harm done these feeble people by the shelter of the flag of the
great republic. The old superstitions prevail among them to an extent
greater than is generally understood. I had the privilege of visiting
an American home, the background of which was a rugged mountain
that looked like a gigantic picture setting forth the features of
a volcanic world. Far up the steep is a cave in which the bones of
many of the old savages were deposited in the days of civil war and
inhuman sacrifices. The entrance was long ago--in the days the Hawaii
people describe as "Before the Missionaries." The hole going to the
holy cavern was closed, but there is still pious watching over the
place of bones, and if there are climbers of the mountain not to be
trusted with the solemn secrets of ancient times, they are stalked
by furtive watchmen of the consecrated bones, and no doubt the ever
alert sentinels would resist violation of the sepulchre in the rocks;
and the natives are careful to scatter their special knowledge that
the spot is haunted by supernatural shapes and powers. The Americans
living in the midst of these mysteries are rather proud of the ghosts
they never see, but have to put up with the haunting guard still
ministering to the gods that dwelt in the shrines where the shadows
of extinct volcanoes fall, long before the masterful missionaries
planted their first steps in the high places.

After twenty-two days' steaming from San Francisco--Queen's Hospital
time not counted--we were directly south of China's Yellow Sea,
and within a few hours of sighting the isle of Luzon.

Only at Honolulu, all the way from San Francisco, was there a sail or a
smoke not of a vessel of the Philippine expedition. All the long days
and nights the eye swept the horizon for companionship, finding only
that of our associates in adventure, and very little of them. Even the
birds seem to shrink from the heart of the watery world spread between
America and Asia; and the monsters of the deep are absent. One day,
about a thousand miles from California, a story spread of a porpoise
at play, but the lonely creature passed astern like a bubble. Bryant
sang of the water fowl that flew from zone to zone, guided in certain
flight on the long way over which our steps are led aright, but the
Pacific zones are too broad for even winged wanderers. The fish that
swarm on our coast do not seem to find home life or sporting places
in this enormous sea. Only the flying fish disturb the silky scene and
flutter with silver wings over the sparkling laces that glisten where
the winds blow gently, and woo the billows to cast aside the terrors
of other climes and match the sky of blue and gold in beauty; but,
unlike the stars, the waves do not differ in glory, and the spread
of their splendor, when they seem to roll over a conquered universe,
appeals to the imagination with the solemn suggestion not that order
rules but that old chaos settles in solemn peace. The days terminate
on this abyss in marvelous glories. The glowing spectacle is not
in the west alone, but the gorgeous conflagration of the palaces we
build in dreams spreads all around the sky. The scene one evening in
the vicinity of the sun departing in Asia to light up the morning
of the everlasting to-morrow touching America with magical riches,
was that of Niagara Falls ten thousand times magnified and turned
to molten gold, that burned with inconceivable luster, while the
south and north and east were illuminated with strange fires and
soft lights, fading and merged at last in the daffodil sky. Then
the west became as a forest of amazing growth, and the ship entered
its dusky recesses like a hunter for game such as the world never
saw--and we looked upon the slow-fading purple islands that are the
northern fringes of the greater one of the Philippines, and studied
the rather faint and obscure Southern Cross and the stately sheen of
the superb constellation of the Scorpion. It is a pity to have to say
that the Cross of the South is a disappointment--has to be explained
and made impressive by a diagram. It is more like a kite than a
cross; has a superfluous star at one corner, and no support at all
of the idea of being like a cross unless it is worked up and picked
into the fancy. The North Star shines on the other side of the ship,
and the Great Dipper dips its pointers after midnight, into the mass
of darkness that is the sea when the sun and moon are gone.

The voyage from Honolulu to the farther Pacific was not so long that we
forgot the American send-off we got in that Yankee city. The national
airs sounded forth gloriously and grand. Flags and hankerchiefs
fluttered from dense masses of spectators, and our colors were radiant
above the roofs. There was, as usual, a mist on the mountains, and
over Pearl Harbor glowed the arch of the most vivid rainbow ever
seen, and Honolulu is almost every day dipped in rainbows. This
was a wonder of splendor. The water changed from a sparkling green
to a darkly luminous blue. From the moment the lofty lines of the
coast--our mountains now--faded, till the birds came out of the west,
the Pacific Ocean justified its name. The magnificent monotony of its
stupendous placidity was not broken except by a few hours of ruffled
rollers that tell of agitations that, if gigantic, are remote.

The two thousand and one hundred miles from California to Honolulu
seemed at first to cover a vast space of the journey from our Pacific
coast to the Philippines, but appeared to diminish in importance
as we proceeded and were taught by the persistent trade winds that
blew our way, as if forever to waft us over the awful ocean whose
perpetual beauty and placidity were to allure us to an amazing abyss,
from which it was but imaginative to presume that we, in the hands of
infinite forces, should ever be of the travelers that return. Similar
fancies beset, as all the boys remember--the crews of the caravels
that carried Columbus and his fortunes. There were the splendors of
tropical skies to beguile us; the sea as serene as the sky to enchant
us! What mighty magic was this that put a spell upon an American army,
seeking beyond the old outlines of our history and dreams, to guide
us on unfamiliar paths? What was this awakening in the soft mornings,
to the thrilling notes of the bugle? The clouds were not as those
we knew in other climes and years. We saw no penciling of smoke on
the edges of the crystal fields touched up with dainty ripples too
exquisite to be waves--that which is a delight for a moment and passes
but to come again, in forms too delicate to stay for a second, save
in those pictures that in the universe fill the mind with memories
that arc like starlight. The glancing tribes of flying fish became
events. We followed the twentieth parallel of longitude north of the
equator, right on, straight as an arrow's flight is the long run of the
ship--her vapor and the bubbles that break from the waters vanishing,
so that we were as trackless when we had passed one breadth after
another of the globe, as the lonesome canoes of the Indians on the
Great Lakes.



CHAPTER IV

Interview with General Aguinaldo.

The Insurgent Leader's Surroundings and Personal Appearance--His
Reserves and Ways of Talking--The Fierce Animosity of the Filipinos
Toward Spanish Priests--A Probability of Many Martyrs in the Isle
of Luzon.

Practically all persons in the more civilized--and that is to say the
easily accessible--portions of the Philippine Islands, with perhaps
the exception of those leading insurgents who would like to enjoy the
opportunities the Spaniards have had for the gratification of greed
and the indulgence of a policy of revenge, would be glad to see the
Americans remain in Manila, and also in as large a territory as they
could command.

Spaniards of intelligence are aware that they have little that is
desirable to anticipate in case the country is restored to them along
with their Mausers and other firearms, great and small, according to
the terms of capitulation. They get their guns whether we go and leave
them or we stay and they go. It is obvious that the insurgents have
become to the Spaniards a source of anxiety attended with terrors. The
fact that they allowed themselves to be besieged in Manila by an
equal number of Filipinos is conclusive that their reign is over, and
they are not passionately in favor of their own restoration. Their
era of cruel and corrupt government is at an end, even if we shall
permit them to make the experiment. Their assumed anxiety to stay,
is false pretense. They will be hurt if they do not go home.

The exasperation of the Filipinos toward the church is a phenomenon,
and they usually state it with uncandid qualifications of the
inadequate definition of the opinions and policy made by General
Aguinaldo. Representations of my representative character as an
American journalist, that gave me an importance I do not claim or
assume to have, caused the appearance at my rooms, in Manila, of
insurgents of high standing and comprehensive information, and of
large fortunes in some cases. I was deeply impressed by their violent
radicalism regarding the priests. At first they made no distinction,
but said flatly the priests were the mischiefmakers, the true tyrants,
and next to the half-breed Filipinos crossed with Chinese--who are
phenomenal accumulators of pecuniary resources--the money-makers,
who profited wrongfully by the earnings of others.

And so "the priests must go," they said, and have no choice except
that of deportation or execution. In few words, if they did not go
away they would be killed. When close and urgent inquiry was made, the
native priests were not included in the application of this rule. The
Spanish priests were particularly singled out for vengeance, and with
them such others as had been "false to the people" and treacherous
in their relations to political affairs.

The number to be exiled or executed was stated at 3,000. The priests
are panicky about this feeling of the natives, as is in evidence in
their solicitude to get away. They at least have no hope of security if
the Spaniards should regain the mastery of the islands. Two hundred and
fifty of them in vain sought to get passage to Hongkong in one boat. I
was informed on authority that was unquestionable that the eviction
or extermination of the Spanish priests was one of the inevitable
results of Filipine independence--the first thing to be done.

It was with three objects in view that I had an interview with General
Aguinaldo: (1) To ascertain exactly as possible his feeling and policy
toward the United States and its assertion of military authority;
(2) to inquire about his position touching the priests, (3) and to
urge him to be at pains to be represented not only at Washington, but
at Paris. As regards the latter point, it was clear that the people
of the Philippines, whatever they might be, ought to be represented
before the Paris conference. No matter what their case was, it should
be personally presented, even if the representatives were witnesses
against rather than for themselves. In the interest of fair play
and the general truth the Philippine population should put in an
appearance at the seat of the government of the United States for the
information of the President, and at the scene of the conference to
testify; and I was sure it would appear in all cases that they were
at least better capable of governing themselves than the Spaniards
to govern them. There could be no form of government quite so bad
as that of the fatal colonial system of Spain, as illustrated in the
Philippines and in the Americas.

General Aguinaldo was neither remote nor inaccessible. His headquarters
were in an Indian village, just across the bay, named Bacoor, and
in less than an hour a swift steam launch carried Major Bell, of the
bureau of information, a gallant and most industrious and energetic
officer, and myself, to water so shallow that we had to call canoes to
land in front of a church that before the days of Dewey was riddled
by the fire of Spanish warships because occupied by insurgents. The
walls and roof showed many perforations. The houses of the village
were of bamboo, and there were many stands along the hot and dusty
street on which fruit was displayed for sale.

The General's house was about as solid a structure as earthquakes
permit, its roof of red tile instead of the usual straw. His rooms
were in the second story, reached by a broad stairway, at the top
of which was a landing of liberal dimensions and an ante-room. The
General was announced at home and engaged in writing a letter to
General Merritt--then his rather regular literary exercise. There
were a dozen insurgent soldiers at the door, and as many more at the
foot and head of the stairs, with several officers, all in military
costume, the privates carrying Spanish Mausers and the officers wearing
swords. We were admitted to an inner room, with a window opening on
the street, and told the General would see us directly. Meanwhile
well-dressed ladies of his family passed through the audience room
from the General's office to the living rooms, giving a pleasant
picture of domesticity.

The door from the study opened and a very slender and short young
man entered with a preoccupied look that quickly became curious. An
attendant said in a low voice, "General Aguinaldo." He was unexpectedly
small--could weigh but little over 100 pounds--dressed in pure white,
and his modesty of bearing would have become a maiden. The first
feeling was a sort of faint compassion that one with such small
physical resources should have to bear the weighty responsibilities
resting upon him. Major Bell had often met him, and introduced
me. The General was gratified that I had called, and waited for the
declaration of my business. He had been informed of my occupation;
the fact that I had recently been in Washington and expected soon
to be there again; was from Ohio, the President's state, a friend of
his, and had written a book on Cuba, a task which gave me, as I had
visited the Island of Cuba during the war, an acquaintance with the
Spanish system of governing colonies.

The interpreter was a man shorter than the General, but not quite so
slight. His hair was intensely black and he wore glasses. He is an
accomplished linguist, speaks English with facility and is acknowledged
by the priests to be the equal of any of them in reading and speaking
Latin. It is to be remarked that while Aguinaldo is not a man of
high education he has as associates in his labors for Philippine
independence a considerable number of scholarly men. It is related
that in a recent discussion between a priest and an insurgent, the
latter stated as a ground of rebellion that the Spaniards did nothing
for the education of the people, and was asked, "Where did you get
your education?" He had been taught by the Jesuits.

My first point in talking with Aguinaldo was that the people of
the Philippines ought to be strongly represented in Paris, and of
the reasons briefly presented, the foremost was that they sought
independence, and should be heard before the commission by which
their fate would be declared for the present, so far as it could
be, by a tribunal whose work was subject to revision. The general's
information was that the Paris conference would be opened September
15, an error of a fortnight, and his impression was that the terms
regarding the Philippines would be speedily settled, so that there
could not be time to send to Paris, but there had been a determination
reached to have a man in Washington.

It is to be taken into account that this interview was before anything
had been made known as to the mission which General Merritt undertook,
and that in a few days he set forth to perform, and that the terms
of the protocol had not been entirely published in Manila. I told
the general it was not possible that the Philippine problem could
speedily be solved, and made known to him that the transport China,
which holds the record of quick passage on the Pacific, was to sail
for San Francisco in three days, and he would do well to have his men
for Washington and Paris go on her if permission could be obtained,
as there was no doubt it could, and I mentioned the time required to
reach Washington and Paris--that one could be on a trans-Atlantic
steamer in New York six hours after leaving Washington, that the
Philippine commissioners going to Paris should make it a point to
see the President on the way, and the whole matter one of urgency,
but it was certainly not too late to act.

The General said it had been thought a representative of the islands
and of the cause of the people should go to Washington, but the man
was in Hongkong. He could, however, be telegraphed, so that he could
catch the China at Nagasaka, Japan, where she would have to stop two
days to take coal. The Washington commissioner might go to Paris, but
instructions could not reach him before he left Hongkong, as it would
not be desirable to telegraph them. Upon this I stated if it suited
his convenience and he would send instructions by me, I was going on
the China, and would charge myself with the special confidential care
of his dispatches and deliver them to the commissioner at the coaling
station, when he should join the ship; and if it was the desire of
the General to have it done I would telegraph the President that
Philippine commissioners were on the way. These suggestions were
received as if they were agreeable, and esteemed of value.

The conversation turned at this point to the main question of the
future government of the Philippines, and I inquired what would
be satisfactory to the General, and got, of course, the answer,
"Philippine independence." But I said after the United States had sent
a fleet and destroyed the Spanish fleet and an army in full possession
of Manila she was a power that could not be ignored; and what would be
thought of her assuming the prerogative of Protector? She could not
escape responsibility. His views as to the exact line of demarkation
or distinction between the rights of the United States and those of
the people of the islands should be perfectly clear, for otherwise
there would be confusion and possibly contention in greater matters
than now caused friction.

I endeavored to indicate the idea that there might be an adjustment on
the line that the people of the Philippines could manage their local
matters in their own way, leaving to the United States imperial
affairs, the things international and all that affected them,
the Filipinos looking to the administration of localities. I had
asked questions and stated propositions as if it were the universal
consent that General Aguinaldo was the dictator for his people and
had the executive word to say; but when it came to drawing the fine
lines of his relations with the United States as the embodiment of a
revolutionary movement, he became shy and referred to those who had
to be consulted.

His words were equivalent to saying his counselors must, in all matters
of moment, be introduced. It came to the same thing at last as to his
commissioner or commissioners to Washington or Paris, one or both, and
he also asserted the purpose of having the congress elected assemble at
a railroad town--Moroles, about fifty miles north of Manila--a movement
it is understood that is under the guidance of others than the General,
the bottom fact being that if there should be a Philippine Republic
Aguinaldo's place, in the judgment of many who are for it, would be
not that of chief magistrate, but the head of the army. There are
others and many of them of the opinion that he is not a qualified
soldier. The congress assembled at Moroles, and has made slow progress.

It may as well be remembered, however, that the distinctions of civil
and military power have been always hard to observe, in Central and
South American states, whose early Spanish education has been outgrown
gradually, and with halting and bloody steps. General Aguinaldo, then
engaged in evolving a letter to General Merritt, has since issued
proclamations that yield no share to the United States in the native
government of the islands. But there are two things definitely known,
as if decreed in official papers, and probably more so; that the
Filipinos of influential intelligence would be satisfied with the
direction of local affairs and gladly accept the protectorate of the
United States on the terms which the people of the United States may
desire and dictate.

The greater matter is that whenever it is the fixed policy of
the United States to accept the full responsibility of ruling the
Philippines, neither Aguinaldo nor any other man of the islands
would have the ability to molest the steady, peaceable, beneficent
development of the potentiality of our system of justice to the people,
and the preservation by and through the popular will of the union
of liberty under the law, and order maintained peaceably or forcibly
according to needs.

In continuation of his explanation that he had to refer matters
to others called his counselors, disclaiming the presumption in my
questions of his personal responsibility for the conduct of the native
insurrection, General Aguinaldo said with the greatest deliberation
and the softest emphasis of any of his sayings, that the insurgents
were already suspicious of him as one who was too close a friend
of the Americans, and yielded too much to them, and that there was
danger this feeling might grow and make way with his ability to do
all that he would like in the way of keeping the peace. There were,
he said, inquiries to the effect: What had the insurgents got for
what they had done in the capture of Manila? Were they not treated
by the Americans with indifference?

Major Bell interposed to say that the Americans were in the Philippines
not as politicians, but as soldiers, and had the duty of preserving
order by military occupation, and it was not possible there could
be maintained a double military authority--two generals of equal
powers in one city under martial law. There must be one master and
no discussion. The United States could take no secondary attitude
or position--would treat the insurgents with great consideration,
but they of necessity were exclusively responsible for the carrying
out of the provisions of the capitulation.

This was exactly to the point, and the interpreter cut his rendering
of it, using but few words, and they did not cheer up the General
and those about him. Evidently they want to know when and where
they realize. It had been noticeable that the greater importance
Aguinaldo attaches to what he is saying the lower his voice and the
more certainly he speaks in a half whisper with parted lips, show-in
teeth and tongue; and he has a surprising faculty of talking with
the tip of his tongue, extended a very little beyond his lips. There
was something so reserved as to be furtive about his mouth, but his
eyes were keen, straight and steady, showing decision, but guarding
what he regarded the niceties of statement. However, his meaning that
there were insurgents who were finding fault with him was not so much
indicative of a rugged issue as a confession of impending inabilities.

He had nothing to say in response to Major Bell's explicit remark
about the one-man and one-country military power, but the action of
the insurgents in removing their headquarters--or their capital, as
they call it--to a point forty miles from Manila, proves that they
have come to an understanding that the soldiers of the United States
are not in the Philippines for their health entirely, or purely in
the interest of universal benevolence. The Filipinos must know, too,
that they could never themselves have captured Manila. It is not
inapt to say that the real center of the rebellion against Spain is,
as it has been for years, at Hongkong.

I reserved what seemed the most interesting question of the interview
with the Philippine leader to the last. It was whether a condition
of pacification was the expulsion of the Catholic priests as a
class. This was presented with reference to the threats that had
been made in my hearing that the priests must go or die, for they
were the breeders of all trouble. Must all of them be removed in
some way or another? If not, where would the line be drawn? The
lips of the General were parted and his voice quite low and gentle,
the tongue to a remarkable degree doing the talking, as he replied,
plainly picking words cautiously and measuring them. The able and
acute interpreter dealt them out rapidly, and his rendering gave
token that the Filipinos have already had lessons in diplomacy--even
in the Spanish style of polite prevarication--or, if that may be a
shade too strong, let us say elusive reservation--the use of language
that is more shady than silence, the framing of phrases that may
be interpreted so as not to close but to continue discussion and
leave wide fields for controversy. The General did not refer to his
counselors, or the congress that is in the background and advertised
as if it were a new force.

The words of the interpreter for him were:

"The General says the priests to whom objection is made, and with whom
we have a mortal quarrel, are not our own priests, but the Spaniards'
and those of the orders. We respect the Catholic church. We respect
our own priests, and, if they are friends of our country, will protect
them. Our war is not upon the Catholic church, but upon the friars,
who have been the most cruel enemies. We cannot have them here. They
must go away. Let them go to Spain. We are willing that they may go
to their own country. We do not want them. There is no peace until
they go."

I said my information was that the objectionable Orders expressly
proscribed by the insurgents were the Dominicans, Augustines,
Franciscans and Recollects, but that the Jesuits were not
included. This was fully recited to the General, and with his eyes
closing and his mouth whispering close to the interpreter's cheek he
gave his answer, and it was quickly rendered:

"The Jesuits, too, must go. They also are our enemies. We do not want
them. They betray. They can go to Spain. They may be wanted there,
not here; but not here, not here."

The question whether the friars must make choice between departure and
death was not met directly, but with repetitions--that they might be at
home in Spain, but could not be a part of the independent Philippines;
and, significantly, they should be willing to go when wanted, and
would be. Two Catholic priests--Americans, not Spaniards--were at this
moment waiting in the ante room, to ask permission for the priests
Aguinaldo has in prison to go back to Spain, and the General could
not give an answer until he had consulted his council. Probably he
would not dare to part with the priests, and an order from him would
be disregarded. They have many chances of martyrdom, and some of them
have already suffered mutilation.

Something had been said about my cabling the President as to the
Filipinos' determination to send a representative to Paris, and I had
tendered my good offices in bearing instructions to a commissioner from
Hongkong to meet the China at Nagasaki, the Japanese railway station,
where the American transports coal for their long voyage across the
Pacific. But that matter had been left in the air. General Aguinaldo
had said he would be obliged if I would telegraph the President,
and I thought if the decision was that there was to be a Philippine
representative hurried to Paris, it was something the President would
be glad to know. I was aware there might be a difficulty in getting
permission for a special messenger to go on the China to Japan to
meet the commissioners going from Hongkong, and I would be willing
to make the connection, as I had offered the suggestion. But it was
necessary to be absolutely certain of General Aguinaldo's decision
before I could cable the President; therefore, as I was, of course,
in an official sense wholly irresponsible, I could communicate with
him without an abrasion of military or other etiquette. It was the
more needful, as it would be a personal proceeding, that I should be
sure of the facts. Therefore I asked the General, whose time I had
occupied more than an hour, whether he authorized me to telegraph
the President that a commission was going to Paris, and desired me
to render any aid in conveying information.

The General was troubled about the word "authorized," and instead of
saying so concluded that I must have a deep and possibly dark design
and so he could not give me the trouble to cable. The assurance that
it would not be troublesome did not remove the disquiet. I could not
be troubled, either, as a bearer of dispatches. The General could
not authorize a telegram without consulting. In truth, the General
had not made up his mind to be represented in Paris, holding that it
would be sufficient to have an envoy extraordinary in Washington.

Others, without full consideration, in my opinion, concur in
this view. I can imagine several situations at Paris in which a
representative Filipino would be of service to the United States,
simply by standing for the existence of a state of facts in the
disputed islands. I dropped the matter of being a mediator, having
planted the Paris idea in the mind of the Philippine leader, who is of
the persuasion that he is the dictator of his countrymen, for the sake
of his country, until he wishes to be evasive, and then he must consult
others who share the burdens of authority, and told him when taking
my leave I would like to possess a photograph with his autograph and
the Philippine flag. In a few minutes the articles were in my hands,
and passing out, there were the American priests in the ante-room,
the next callers to enter the General's apartment. Their business was
to urge him to permit the Catholic priests held as prisoners by the
insurgents--more than 100, perhaps nearly 200 in number--to go home.

When the news came that General Merritt had been ordered to Paris, and
would pass through the Red sea en route, taking the China to Hongkong
to catch a peninsular and oriental steamer, I telegraphed the fact to
General Aguinaldo over our military wires and his special wire, and
his commissioner, duly advised, became, with General Merritt's aid,
at Hongkong a passenger on the China.

He is well known to the world as Senor Filipe Agoncillo, who visited
Washington City, saw the President and proceeded to Paris.



CHAPTER V

The Philippine Mission.

Correspondence With Aguinaldo About It--Notes by Senor Felipe
Agoncillo--Relations Between Admiral Dewey and Senor Aguinaldo--Terms
of Peace Made by Spanish Governor-General with Insurgents, December,
1897--Law Suit Between Aguinaldo and Artacho--Aguinaldo's Proclamation
of May 24, 1898.

When General Merritt decided to hold the China for a day to take
him to Hongkong on the way to Paris, I telegraphed Aguinaldo of the
movements of the ship, arid received this dispatch from the General:

"War Department, United States Volunteer Signal Corps, sent from
Bakoor August 29, 1898.--To Mr. Murat Halstead, Hotel Oriente, Manila:
Thankful for your announcing China's departure. We are to send a person
by her if possible, whom I recommend to you. Being much obliged for
the favor.

"_A. G. Escamilla_," "Private Secretary to General Aguinaldo."

On the same day the General sent the following personal letter:

"Dear Sir: The bearer, Dr. G. Apacible, is the person whom was
announced to you in the telegram.

"I am desirous of sending him to Hongkong, if possible, by the China,
recommending him at the same time to your care and good will. Thanking
you for the favor, I'm respectfully yours,

_Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy_.

"Mr. Murat Halstead, Manila.

"Bakoor, 29th August, 1898."

General Aguinaldo proceeded vigorously to make use of his knowledge
that the China would go to Hongkong for General Merritt and sent his
secretary and others to me at the Hotel Oriente, but they arrived
after I had left the house. They came to the China and General Merritt
had not arrived and did not appear until within a few minutes of
the start. Then the deputation from the insurgent chieftain had an
interview with him, asking that two of their number should go to
Hongkong on the China to express fully the views of the insurgent
government to to the commissioner, Don Felipe Agoncillo, chosen to
represent the Filipinos at Washington and Paris and to ask that he be
allowed to go to the United States on the China. When the committee saw
General Merritt he was taking leave of Admiral Dewey, and the General,
who had not heard of this movement until that moment--the question
being entirely new--invited the opinion of the Admiral, who said there
was "certainly no objection," and on the contrary, it would be very
well to permit the passage of the deputation to Hongkong and of the
commissioner appointed from that city to Washington. General Merritt
at once in half a dozen words gave the order, and the journey began.

General Greene, who reads and translates Spanish with facility
and whose Spanish speech is plain, treated with marked courtesy
the Filipino committee to Hongkong and thence the commissioner
and his secretary from Hongkong to San Francisco, on the way to
Washington and Paris. General Greene, while according distinction
to the representatives of the insurgents, stated to them that his
attentions were personal and he could not warrant them official
recognition at Washington or anything more than such politeness as
gentlemen receive from each other. The commissioner was Don Felipe
Agoncillo, and his secretary, Sixto Lopez.

Saturday, September 24, the Salt Lake newspapers contained stories to
the effect that the Germans had entered into an alliance offensive and
defensive with the Aguinaldo government and would furnish equipments
for an army of 150,000 men. We were on the Union Pacific Railroad at
the time, and I called the attention of Don Felipe Agoncillo to this
remarkable intelligence and asked him what he thought of it. He said
emphatically that it was "Nothing," "No true," "Nothing at all,"
and he laughed at the comic idea. There was also in the Salt Lake
newspapers a statement that the Aguinaldo 'government' had sent
to President McKinley a letter strongly expressing good-will and
gratitude. There did not seem to be much news in this for Don Felipe,
but it gave him much pleasure, and he, not perhaps diplomatically
but enthusiastically, pronounced it good.

_What Agoncillo Approved_.

The dispatch marked with his approbation by the Philippine commissioner
was the following from Washington, under date of September 23:

"The President doubtless would be glad to hear any views these
Filipinos might care to set forth, being fresh from the islands and
thoroughly acquainted with the wishes of the insurgents. But it would
be plainly impolitic and inconsistent for the President, at this
date and pending the conclusion of the peace conference at Paris,
to allow it to be understood, by according a formal reception to the
delegates, that he had thereby recognized the Philippine government
as an independent nationality. His attitude toward the Filipinos
would be similar to that assumed by him toward the Cubans. As the
Filipinos have repeatedly, by public declaration, sought to convey
the impression that the United States representatives in Manila have
at some time during the progress of the war recognized Aguinaldo as
an independent ally, and entered into formal co-operation with him,
it may be stated that the government at Washington is unaware that
any such thing has happened. Admiral Dewey, who was in command of all
the United States forces during the most critical period, expressly
cabled the Secretary of the Navy that he had entered into no formal
agreement with Aguinaldo. If General Otis followed his instructions,
and of that there can be no doubt, he also refrained from entering
into any entangling agreements. As for Consul-General Wildman, any
undertaking he may have assumed with Aguinaldo must have been upon
his own personal and individual responsibility, and would be without
formal standing, inasmuch as he has not the express authorization
from the State Department absolutely requisite to negotiations in such
cases. Therefore, as the case now stands, the peace commissioners are
free to deal with the Philippine problem at Paris absolutely without
restraint beyond that which might be supposed to rise from a sense
of moral obligation to avoid committing the Filipinos again into the
hands of their late rulers."

Senor Agoncillo, the commissioner of the Philippine insurgents at
Paris, made, in conversations on the steamer China, when crossing
the Pacific Ocean from "Nagasaka to San Francisco, this statement in
vindication of Aguinaldo, and it is the most complete, authoritative
and careful that exists of the relations between Admiral Dewey and
the insurgent leader:

_Brief Notes By Senor Agoncillo_.

"On the same day that Admiral Dewey arrived at Hongkong Senor
Aguinaldo was in Singapore, whither he had gone from Hongkong, and
Mr. Pratt, United States Consul-General, under instructions from the
said Admiral, held a conference with him, in which it was agreed that
Senor Aguinaldo and other revolutionary chiefs in co-operation with the
American squadron should return to take up arms against the Spanish
government of the Philippines, the sole and most laudable desire of
the Washington government being to concede to the Philippine people
absolute independence as soon as the victory against the Spanish arms
should be obtained.

"By virtue of this argument Senor Aguinaldo proceeded by the first
steamer to Hongkong for the express purpose of embarking on the Olympia
and going to Manila; but this intention of his was not realized,
because the American squadron left Hongkong the day previous to
his arrival, Admiral Dewey having received from his government an
order to proceed immediately to Manila. This is what Mr. Wildman,
United States Consul-General in Hongkong, said to Senor Aguinaldo
in the interview which took place between them. A few days after the
Spanish squadron had been totally destroyed in the Bay of Manila by
the American squadron, the latter obtaining a most glorious triumph,
which deserved the fullest congratulations and praise of the Philippine
public, the McCullough arrived at Hongkong and her commander said
to Senor Aguinaldo that Admiral Dewey needed him (le necesitaba)
in Manila and that he brought an order to take him on board said
transport, as well as other revolutionary chiefs whose number should
be determined by Senor Aguinaldo, and, in fact, he and seventeen
chiefs went to Cavite on the McCullough.

"Senor Aguinaldo began his campaign against the Spaniards the very
day that he received the 1,902 Mauser guns and 200,000 cartridges,
which came from Hongkong. The first victory which he obtained
from the Spaniards was the surrender or capitulation of the Spanish
General, Senor Pena, who was the Military Governor of Cavite, had his
headquarters in the town of San Francisco de Malabon, and his force
was composed of 1,500 soldiers, including volunteers.

"The revolutionary army in six days' operations succeeded in getting
possession of the Spanish detachments stationed in the villages of
Bakoor, Imus, Benakayan, Naveleta, Santa Cruz de Malabon, Rosario
and Cavite Viejo.

"On June 9 last the whole province of Cavite was under the control
of the provisional revolutionary government, including many Spanish
prisoners and friars, 7,000 guns, great quantities of ammunition and
some cannon.

"At the same time that the province of Cavite was being conquered
other revolutionary chiefs were carrying on campaigns in the Batangas,
Laguna, Tayabas, Nueva Eziza, Bulcau, Batangas, Pampanga and Morong,
which were under control of the revolutionary army by June 12, and
such progress was made by the Philippine revolution in the few days
of campaign against the Spaniards that by August 3 last it held under
conquest fifteen important provinces of the island of Luzon; these
provinces are being governed by laws emanating from the provisional
revolutionary government and in all of them perfect order and complete
tranquility reign.

"It is to be noted that the Spanish government has sent to Senor
Aguinaldo various emissaries, who invited him to make common cause with
Spain against the United States, promising him that the government of
the Spanish nation would concede to him anything he might ask for the
Philippine people. But Senor Aguinaldo has invariably replied to those
emissaries, that it was too late and that he could not consider any
proposition from the Spanish government, however beneficial it might
be to the Philippines, because he had already pledged his word of honor
in favor of certain representatives of the government at Washington.

"In view of this positive resolution of Senor Aguinaldo there began
forthwith the intrigues of the Spanish enemy directed against the
life of Senor Aguinaldo.

_Peace Convention of December, 1896._

"Senor Aguinaldo, in his own name and in that of the other chiefs
and subordinates, obligated himself to lay down their arms, which,
according to an inventory, were to be turned over to the Spanish
government, thus terminating the revolution. His Excellency the
Governor and Captain-General, Don Fernando Primo de Rivera, as the
representative of His Majesty's government in the Philippines,
obligated himself on his side (1) to grant a general amnesty to
all those under charges or sentenced for the crime of rebellion
and sedition and other crimes of that category; (2) to introduce
into the Philippines all reforms necessary for correcting in an
effective and absolute manner the evils which for so many years
had oppressed the country, in political and administrative affairs;
and (3) an indemnity of $800,000, payable at the following dates:
A letter of credit of the Spanish Filipine Bank for $400,000 against
the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank in Hongkong was to be delivered to
Senor Aguinaldo on the same day that he should leave Biak-va-Bato,
where he had established his headquarters, and should embark on the
steamer furnished by the Spanish government (this letter of credit
was in point of fact delivered); $200,000 was to be paid to the said
Senor Aguinaldo as soon as the revolutionary general, Senor Ricarte,
should receive his telegram ordering him to give up his arms, with an
inventory thereof, to the commissioner designated by his excellency
the Governor and Captain-General, Don Fernando Primo de Rivera; and
the remaining $200,000 should be due and payable when the peace should
be a fact, and it should be understood that peace was a fact when
the Te Deum should be sung by order of his excellency the Governor
and Captain-General of the Philippines.

"Senor Aguinaldo complied in every respect, so far as he was concerned,
with the peace agreement. But the Spanish government did not observe
a similar conduct, and this has been deplored and still is deeply
deplored by the Philippine people. The general amnesty which was
promised has remained completely a dead letter. Many Filipinos are
still to be found in Fernando Po and in various military prisons in
Spain suffering the grievous consequences of the punishment inflicted
upon them unjustly and the inclemencies of the climate to which they
are not accustomed. Some of these unfortunates, who succeeded in
getting out of those prisons and that exile, are living in beggary
in Spain, without the government furnishing them the necessary means
to enable them to return to the Philippines.

"In vain has the Philippine public waited for the reforms also
promised. After the celebration of the compact of June and the
disposition of the arms of the revolutionists the Governor-General
again began to inflict on the defenseless natives of the country
arbitrary arrest and execution without judicial proceedings solely
on the ground that they were merely suspected of being secessionists;
proceedings which indisputably do not conform to the law and Christian
sentiments.

"In the matter of reforms the religious orders again began to obtain
from the Spanish government their former and absolute power. Thus
Spain pays so dearly for her fatal errors in her own destiny!

"In exchange for the loftiness of mind with which Senor Aguinaldo has
rigidly carried out the terms of the peace agreement, General Primo de
Rivera had the cynicism to state in the congress of his nation that
he had promised no reform to Senor Aguinaldo and his army, but that
he had only given them a piece of bread in order that they might be
able to maintain themselves abroad. This was reechoed in the foreign
press, and Senor Aguinaldo was accused in the Spanish press of having
allowed himself to be bought with a handful of gold, selling out his
country at the same time. There were published, moreover, in those
Spanish periodicals caricatures of Senor Aguinaldo which profoundly
wounded his honor and his patriotism.

"Senor Aguinaldo and the other revolutionists who reside in Hongkong
agreed not to take out one cent of the $400,000 deposited in the
chartered bank and the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, the only amount
which Senor Aguinaldo received from the Spanish government on account
of the stipulated indemnity, but to use it for arms in order to
carry on another revolution in the Philippines, in case the Spanish
government should fail to carry out the peace agreement, at least
in so far as it refers to general amnesty and reforms. All the above
named revolutionists, Senor Aguinaldo setting the example, resolved to
deny themselves every kind of comfort during their stay in Hongkong,
living in the most modest style, for the purpose of preventing a
reduction by one single cent of the above named sum of $400,000,
which they set aside exclusively for the benefit of their country.

_Law Suit between Don J. Artacho and Don E. Aguinaldo._

"Senor Artacho, induced by the father solicitor of the Dominicans
and the Consul-General of Spain, filed in the courts of that colony
a summons against Don E. Aguinaldo, asking for a division of the
above-mentioned $400,000 between those revolutionary chiefs who resided
in Hongkong. Artacho and three others, who joined the revolution in
its last days and rendered little service to it, were the only ones who
desired a division of this money; whereas forty-seven revolutionaries,
many of whom were most distinguished chiefs, were opposed to it,
supporting the resolution which Senor Aguinaldo had previously taken
in regard to it. Senor Aguinaldo, in order to avoid all scandal, did
everything possible to avoid appearing in court answering the summons
of Artacho, who, realizing that his conduct had made himself hated by
all Filipinos, agreed in a friendly arrangement to withdraw his suit,
receiving in exchange $5,000; in this way were frustrated the intrigues
of the solicitor of the Dominican order and of the Spanish Consul,
who endeavored at any cost to destroy the $400,000 by dividing it up.

"Artacho is now on trial before a judicial court on charges preferred
by various revolutionists for offenses which can be proved; he has
no influence in the revolutionary party."

_Proclamation of General Aguinaldo_.

_May 24th_, 1898.

Filipinos:

The Great Nation North America, cradle of true liberty and friendly on
that account to the liberty of our people, oppressed and subjugated
by the tyranny and despotism of those who have governed us, has
come to manifest even here a protection which is decisive, as well
as disinterested, towards us considering us endowed with sufficient
civilization to govern by ourselves this our unhappy land. To maintain
this so lofty idea, which we deserve from the now very powerful
Nation North America, it is our duty to detest all those acts which
belie such an idea, as pillage, robbery and every class of injury to
persons as well as to things. With a view to avoiding international
conflicts during the period of our campaign, I order as follows:

Article I. The lives and property of all foreigners, including Chinese
and all Spaniards who either directly or indirectly have joined in
taking arms against us are to be respected.

Article II. The lives and property of those who lay down their arms
are also to be respected.

Article III. Also are to be respected all sanitary establishments and
ambulances, and likewise the persons and things which may be found
either in one or the other, including the assistants in this service,
unless they show hostility.

Article IV. Those who disobey what is prescribed in the preceding
articles will be tried by summary court and put to death, if such
disobedience shall cause assassination, fire, robbery and violation.

Given at Cavite, the 24th of May, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo._

It is to be remarked of this semi-official statement that Admiral
Dewey did not make any promises he could not fulfill to Aguinaldo;
did not assume to speak for the President or the army of the United
States, but gave guns and ammunition to the insurgents, who aided
him in maintaining a foothold on the shore. The insurgents did not
win Dewey's victory, but aided to improve it. Without the aid of the
American army Manila might have been destroyed, but could not have
been captured intact. General Merritt settled the question of the
status of the insurgent army with respect to the capture of Manila in
a summary and sound way when he said there could be but one military
authority in a military government, and as the commanding general of
the Philippine expedition of the United States, he was that authority.



CHAPTER VI

The Proclamations of General Aguinaldo.

June 16th, 1898, Establishing Dictatorial Government--June 20th, 1898,
Instructions for Elections--June 23d, 1898, Establishing Revolutionary
Government--June 23d, 1898, Message to Foreign Powers--June 27th,
1898, Instructions Concerning Details--July 23d, 3898, Letter From
Senor Aguinaldo to General Anderson--August 1st, 1898, Resolutions
of Revolutionary Chiefs Asking for Recognition--August 6th, 1898,
Message to Foreign Powers Asking Recognition.

One of the most critical questions in the situation of the Philippines
is the precise position of the leader of the insurgents, General
Aguinaldo. His utterances in his official character of leader of
the natives who for years have been in rebellion against Spain, have
been but fragmentary, as they have come before the people. We give
for the public information the consecutive series of proclamations.

No. 1.

To the Philippine Public:

Circumstances have providentially placed me in a position for which I
can not fail to recognize that I am not properly qualified, but since
I can not violate the laws of Providence nor decline the obligations
which honor and patriotism impose upon me, I now salute you, Oh,
My Beloved People!

I have proclaimed in the face of the whole world that the aspiration
of my whole life, the final object of all my efforts and strength is
nothing else but your independence, for I am firmly convinced that
that constitutes your constant desire and that independence signifies
for us redemption from slavery and tyranny, regaining our liberty
and entrance into the concert of civilized nations.

I understand on the other hand that the first duty of every government
is to interpret faithfully popular aspirations. With this motive,
although the abnormal circumstances of the war have compelled me
to institute this Dictatorial Government which assumes full powers,
both civil and military, my constant desire is to surround myself with
the most distinguished persons of each Province, those who by their
conduct, deserve the confidence of their province to the end that the
true necessities of each being known by them, measures may be adopted
to meet these necessities and apply the remedies in accordance with
the desires of all.

I understand moreover the urgent necessity of establishing in each
town a solid and robust organization, the strongest bulwark of public
security and the sole means of securing that union and discipline
which are indispensable for the establishment of the Republic, that
is Government of the people for the people, and warding off the
international conflicts which may arise.

Following out the foregoing considerations I decree as follows:

Article I. The inhabitants of every town where the forces of the
Spanish government still remain, will decide upon the most efficacious
measures to combat and destroy them, according to the resources and
means at their disposal, according to prisoners of war the treatment
most conformable to humanitarian sentiments and to the customs observed
by civilized nations.

Article II. As soon as the town is freed from Spanish domination,
the inhabitants most distinguished for high character, social position
and honorable conduct both in the center of the community and in the
suburbs, will come together in a large meeting in which they will
proceed to elect by a majority of votes, the chief of the town and
a head man for each suburb, considering as suburbs not only those
hitherto known as such, but also the center of the community.

All those inhabitants who fulfill the conditions above named, will
have the right to take part in this meeting and to be elected,
provided always that they are friendly to Philippine independence
and are twenty years of age.

Article III. In this meeting shall also be elected by a majority of
votes, three Delegates; one of police and internal order, another of
justice and civil registry and another of taxes and property.

The delegate of police and internal order will assist the Chief in
the organization of the armed force, which for its own security each
town must maintain, according to the measure of its resources and in
the preservation of order, government and hygiene of its population.

The delegate of justice and civil registry will aid the Chief in
the formation of courts and in keeping books of registry of births,
deaths and marriage contracts, and of the census.

The delegate of taxes and property will aid the chief in the collection
of taxes, the administration of public funds, the opening of books
of registry of cattle and real property, and in all work relating to
encouragement of every class of industry.

Article IV. The Chief, as President, with the head men and the above
mentioned delegates, will constitute the popular assemblies who will
supervise the exact fulfillment of the laws in force and the particular
interests of each town.

The head man of the center of the community will be the Vice President
of the assembly, and the delegate of justice its secretary.

The head men will be delegates of the Chief within their respective
boundaries.

Article V. The Chiefs of each town after consulting the opinion of
their respective assemblies, will meet and elect by majority of votes
the Chief of the Province and three councilors for the three branches
above mentioned.

The Chief of the Province as President, the Chief of the town which
is the capital of the Province, as Vice President, and the above
named councilors will constitute the Provincial Council, which will
supervise the carrying out of the instructions of this government
in the territory of the Province, and for the general interest of
the Province, and will propose to this government the measures which
should be adopted for the general welfare.

Article VI. The above named chiefs will also elect by majority of
votes three representatives for each one of the Provinces of Manila
and Cavite, two for each one of the Provinces classified as terminal
in Spanish legislation, and one for each one of the other Provinces
and Politico-Military commands of the Philippine Archipelago.

The above named representatives will guard the general interests of the
Archipelago and the particular interests of their respective Provinces,
and will constitute the Revolutionary Congress, which will propose to
this government the measures concerning the preservation of internal
order, and external security of these islands, and will be heard by
this government on all questions of grave importance. The decision
of which will admit of delay or adjournment.

Article VII. Persons elected to any office whatsoever in the form
prescribed in the preceding article can not perform the functions
of the same without the previous confirmation by this government,
which will give it in accordance with the certificates of election.

Representatives will establish their identity by exhibiting the above
named certificates.

Article VIII. The Military Chiefs named by this government in each
Province will not intervene in the government and administration of
the Province, but will confine themselves to requesting of the Chiefs
of Provinces and towns the aid which may be necessary both in men
and resources, which are not to be refused in case of actual necessity.

Nevertheless, when the Province is threatened or occupied by the
enemy in whole or in part, the military chief of highest rank therein
may assume powers of the Chief of the Province, until the danger
has disappeared.

Article IX. The government will name for each Province a commissioner,
specially charged with establishing therein the organization prescribed
in this decree, in accordance with instructions which this government
will communicate to him. Those military chiefs who liberate the
towns from the Spanish domination are commissioners by virtue of
their office.

The above named commissioners will preside over the first meetings
held in each town and in each Province.

Article X. As soon as the organization provided in the decree has been
established all previous appointments to any civil office, whatsoever,
no matter what their origin or source, shall be null and void, and
all instructions in conflict with the foregoing are hereby annulled.

Given at Cavite, the 18th of June, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo_.

No. 2.

For the execution and proper carrying out of what is prescribed in the
decree of this government concerning the management of the Provinces
and towns of the Philippine Archipelago, I decree as follows:

_Instructions_.

Concerning the Management of the Provinces and towns.

(Then follow 45 rules concerning the elections, formation of the
police, the courts and the levying and collection of taxes.)

Given at Cavite, 20th of June, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo_.

No. 3.

_Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy_,

President of the Revolutionary Government of the Philippines, and
General in Chief of Its Army.

This government desiring to demonstrate to the Philippine people that
one of its ends is to combat with a firm hand the inveterate vices
of the Spanish administration, substituting for personal luxury
and that pompous ostentation which have made it a mere matter of
routine, cumbrous and slow in its movements, another administration
more modest, simple and prompt in performing the public service:
I decree as follows:


_Chapter I._

_Of the Revolutionary Government_.

Article I. The dictatorial government will be entitled hereafter
the revolutionary government, whose object is to struggle for the
independence of the Philippines until all nations, including the
Spanish, shall expressly recognize it, and to prepare the country so
that a true republic may be established.

The dictator will be entitled hereafter President of the Revolutionary
Government.

Article II. Four secretaryships of government are created; one of
foreign affairs, navy and commerce; another of war and public works;
another of police and internal order, justice, education and hygiene;
and another of finance, agriculture, and manufacturing industry.

The government may increase this number of secretaryships, when it
shall find in practice that this distribution is not sufficient for
the multiplied and complicated necessities of the public service.

Article III. Each secretaryship shall aid the President in the
administration of questions concerning the different branches which
it comprises.

At the head of each one shall be a secretary who shall not be
responsible for the decrees of the Presidency, but shall sign them
with the President, to give them authority.

But if it shall appear that the decree has been promulgated on the
proposition of the secretary of the department, the latter shall be
responsible conjointly with the President.

Article IV. The secretaryship of foreign affairs will be divided
into three bureaus, one of diplomacy, another of navy and another
of commerce.

The first bureau will study and dispose of all questions pertaining to
the management of diplomatic negotiations with other powers and the
correspondence of this government with them. The second will study
all questions relating to the formation and organization of our navy
and the fitting out of such expeditions as the necessities of the
revolution may require; and the third will have charge of everything
relating to internal and external commerce, and the preliminary
work which may be necessary for making treaties of commerce with
other nations.

Article V. The secretaryship of war will be divided into two bureaus;
one of war, properly speaking, and the other of public works.

The first bureau will be subdivided into four sections: One
of campaigns, another of military justice, another of military
administration, and another of military health.

The section of campaigns will have charge of the appointment and
formation of the certificates of enlistment and service of all who
serve in the revolutionary militia; of the direction of campaigns;
the preparation of plans, works of fortification, and preparing
reports of battles; of the study of military tactics for the army
and the organization of the general staff, artillery and cavalry;
and finally, of the determination of all other questions concerning
the business of campaigns and military operations.

The section of military justice will have charge of everything relating
to courts of war and military tribunals; the appointment of judges and
counsel and the determination of all questions of military justice; the
section of military administration will he charged with the furnishing
of food and other supplies necessary for the use of the army; and the
section of military health will have charge of everything relating
to the hygiene and healthfulness of the militia.

Article VI. The other secretaryships will he divided into such bureaus
as their branches may require and each bureau will be subdivided into
sections according to the nature and importance of the work it has
to do.

Article VII. The secretary will inspect and supervise all the work of
his secretaryship and will determine all questions with the President
of the government.

At the head of each bureau will be a director and in each section an
officer provided with such number of assistants as may be specified.

Article VIII. The President will appoint the secretaries of his own
free choice and in concert with them will appoint all the subordinate
officials of each secretaryship.

In order that in the choice of persons it may be possible to avoid
favoritism, it must be fully understood that the good name of the
country and the triumph of the revolution require the services of
persons truly capable.

Article IX. The secretaries may be present at the revolutionary
congress in order that they may make any motion in the name of
the President or may be interpolated publicly by any one of the
representatives; but when the question which is the object of the
motion shall be put to vote or after the interpolation is ended they
shall leave and shall not take part in the vote.

Article X. The President of the government is the personification of
the Philippine people, and in accordance with this idea it shall not
he possible to hold him responsible while he fills the office.

His term of office shall last until the revolution triumphs, unless,
under extraordinary circumstances, he shall feel obliged to offer his
resignation to congress, in which case congress will elect whomsoever
it considers most fit.


_Chapter II._

_Of the Revolutionary Congress._

Article XI. The Revolutionary Congress is the body of representatives
of the Provinces of the Philippine Archipelago elected in the manner
prescribed in the decrees of the 18th, present month.

Nevertheless, if any Province shall not be able as yet to elect
representatives because the greater part of its towns shall have not
yet succeeded in liberating themselves from Spanish domination, the
government shall have power to appoint as provisional representatives
for this Province those persons who are most distinguished for high
character and social position, in such numbers as are prescribed by
the above named decree, provided always that they are natives of the
Province which they represent or have resided therein for a long time.

Article XII. The representatives having met in the town which is the
seat of the revolutionary government, and in the building which may
be designated, will proceed to its preliminary labors, designating
by plurality of votes a commission composed of five individuals
charged with examining documents accrediting each representative,
and another commission, composed of three individuals, who will
examine the documents which the five of the former commission exhibit.

Article XIII. On the following day the above named representatives will
meet again and the two commissions will read their respective reports
concerning the legality of the said documents, deciding by an absolute
majority of votes on the character of those which appear doubtful.

This business completed, it will proceed to designate, also by absolute
majority, a President, a Vice President, and two secretaries, who
shall be chosen from among the representatives, whereupon the congress
shall be considered organized, and shall notify the government of
the result of the election.

Article XIV. The place where congress deliberates is sacred and
inviolable, and no armed force shall enter therein unless the
President thereof shall ask therefor in order to establish internal
order disturbed by those who can neither honor themselves nor its
august functions.

Article XV. The powers of congress are: To watch over the general
interest of the Philippine people, and the carrying out of the
revolutionary laws; to discuss and vote upon said laws; to discuss and
approve prior to their ratification treaties and loans; to examine and
approve the accounts presented annually by the secretary of finance, as
well as extraordinary and other taxes which may hereafter be imposed.

Article XVI. Congress shall also be consulted in all grave and
important questions, the determination of which admits of delay or
adjournment; but the President of the government shall have power to
decide questions of urgent character, but in that case he shall give
account by message to said body of the decision which he has adopted.

Article XVII. Every representative shall have power to present to
congress any project of a law, and every secretary on the order of
the President of the government shall have similar power.

Article XVIII. The sessions of congress shall be public, and only
in cases which require reserve shall it have power to hold a secret
session.

Article XIX. In the order of its deliberations, as well as in the
internal government of the body the instructions which shall be
formulated by the congress itself shall be observed. The President
shall direct the deliberations and shall not vote except in case of
a tie, when he shall have the casting vote.

Article XX. The President of the government shall not have power
to interrupt in any manner the meeting of congress, nor embarrass
its sessions.

Article XXI. The congress shall designate a permanent commission of
justice which shall be presided over by the auxilliary vice president
or each of the secretaries, and shall be composed of those persons
and seven members elected by plurality of votes from among the
representatives.

This commission shall judge on appeal the criminal cases tried by
the Provincial courts; and shall take cognizance of and have original
jurisdiction in all cases against the secretaries of the government,
the chiefs of Provinces and towns, and the Provincial judges.

Article XXII. In the office of the secretary of congress shall be kept
a book of honor, wherein shall be recorded special services rendered
to the country, and considered as such by said body. Every Filipino,
whether in the military or civil service, may petition congress for
notation in said book, presenting duly accredited documents describing
the service rendered by him on behalf of the country, since the
beginning of the present revolution. For extraordinary services, which
may be rendered hereafter, the government will propose said notation
accompanying the proposal with the necessary documents justifying it.

Article XXIII. The congress will also grant, on the proposal of the
government rewards in money, which can be given only once to the
families of those who were victims of their duty and patriotism,
as a result of extraordinary acts of heroism.

Article XXIV. The acts of congress shall not take effect until
the President of the government orders their fulfillment and
execution. Whenever the said President shall be of the opinion that
any act is unsuitable or against public policy, or pernicious, he
shall explain to congress the reasons against its execution, and if
the latter shall insist on its passage the President shall have power
to oppose his veto under his most rigid responsibility.

_Chapter III._

_Of Military Courts and Justice._

Article XXV. When the chiefs of military detachments have notice that
any soldier has committed or has perpetrated any act of those commonly
considered as military crimes, he shall bring it to the knowledge of
the commandant of the Zone, who shall appoint a judge and a secretary,
who shall begin suit in the form prescribed in the instructions dated
the 20th of the present month. If the accused shall be of the grade of
lieutenant or higher, the said commandant shall himself be the judge,
and if the latter shall be the accused, the senior commandant of the
Province shall name as judge an officer who holds a higher grade,
unless the same senior commandant shall himself have brought the
suit. The judge shall always belong to the class of chiefs.

Article XXVI. On the conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the senior
commandant shall designate three officers of equal or higher rank to
the judge and the military court shall consist of the said officers,
the judge, the councilor and the President. The latter shall be the
commandant of the Zone, if the accused be of the grade of sergeant or
less, and the senior commandant if he be of the grade of lieutenant
or higher. This court shall conduct the trial in the form customary
in the Provincial courts, but the judgment shall be appealable to
the higher courts of war.

Article XXVII. The superior court shall be composed of six members,
who shall hold rank not less than brigadier generals, and the judge
advocate. If the number of generals present in the capitol of the
revolutionary government shall not be sufficient the deficiency
shall be supplied by representatives designated and commissioned by
congress. The president of the court shall be the general having the
highest rank of all, and should there be more than one having equal
rank, the president shall be elected from among them by absolute
majority of votes.

Article XXVIII. The superior court shall have jurisdiction in all
cases affecting the higher commandants, the commandants of Zones and
all officers of the rank of major or higher.

Article XXIX. Commit Military Crimes: 1st. Those who fail to grant the
necessary protection to foreigners, both in their persons and property,
and those who similarly fail to afford protection to hospitals and
ambulances, including persons and effects which may be found in
possession of one or the other, and those engaged in the service of
the same, provided always they commit no hostile act. 2d. Those who
fail in the respect due to the lives, money and jewels of enemies who
lay down their arms, and of prisoners of war. 3d. Filipinos who place
themselves in the service of the enemy acting as spies or disclosing
to them secrets of war and the plans of revolutionary positions and
fortifications, and those who present themselves under a flag of
truce without justifying properly their office and their personality;
and 4th, those who fail to recognize a flag of truce duly accredited
in the forms, prescribed by international law.

Will Commit also Military Crimes: 1st. Those who conspire against
the unity of the revolutionists, provoking rivalry between chiefs and
forming divisions and armed bands. 2d. Those who solicit contributions
without authority of the government and misappropriate the public
funds. 3d. Those who desert to the enemy, or are guilty of cowardice
in the presence of the enemy, being armed; and, 4th, those who seize
the property of any person who has done no wrong to the revolution,
violate women and assassinate or inflict serious wounds on unarmed
persons and commit robberies or arson.

Article XXX. Those who commit the crimes enumerated will be considered
as declared enemies of the revolution, and will incur the penalties
prescribed in the Spanish penal code, and in the highest grade.

If the crime shall not be found in the said code, the offender shall
be imprisoned until the revolution triumphs unless the result of this
shall be an irreparable damage, which in the judgment of the tribunal
shall be a sufficient cause for imposing the penalty of death.

_Additional Clauses._

The government will establish abroad a revolutionary committee,
composed of a number not yet determined of persons most competent
in the Philippine Archipelago. This committee will be divided into
three delegations; one of diplomacy, another of the navy and another
of the army.

The delegation of diplomacy will manage and conduct negotiations with
foreign cabinets with a view to the recognition of the belligerency
and independence of the Philippines.

The delegation of the navy will be charged with studying and
organizing the Philippine navy and preparing the expenditures which
the necessities of the revolution may require.

The delegation of the army will study military tactics and the best
form of organization for the general staff, artillery and engineers
and whatever else may be necessary in order to fit out the Philippine
Army under the conditions required by modern progress.

Article XXXII. The government will issue the necessary instructions
for the proper execution of the present decree.

Article XXXIII. All decrees of the dictatorial government in conflict
with the foregoing are hereby annulled.

Given at Cavite, the 23d of June, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo._

_Instructions._

Desiring to bring about a proper execution of the decree dated the 23d
of the present month, and to provide that the administrative measures
shall not result hereafter in the paralysis of public business,
but that, on the contrary, it shall constitute the best guarantee of
the regularity, promptitude and fitness in the transaction of public
business, I give the following instructions and decree:

(Then follow ten rules concerning the details of installing the
government.)

Cavite, the 27th of June, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo._

_Message of the President of the Philippine Revolution._

If it is true, as it is true, that political revolutions properly
understood, are the violent means which people employ to recover the
sovereignty which naturally belongs to them, usurped and trampled
upon by a tyrannical and arbitrary government, no revolution can be
more righteous than that of the Philippines, because the people have
had recourse to it after having exhausted all the pacific means which
reason and experience could suggest.

The ancient Kings of Castile felt obliged to consider the Philippines
as a brother people, united to the Spanish in a perfect participation
of aims and interests, so much so that when the Constitution of
1812 was promulgated, at Cadiz, on account of the War of Spanish
Independence, these islands were represented in the Spanish Cortez;
but the interests of the Monastic corporations which have always
found unconditional support in the Spanish Government, overcame this
sacred duty and the Philippines remained excluded from the Spanish
Constitution, and the people at the mercy of the discretionary or
arbitrary powers of the Governor-General.

In this condition the people claimed justice, begged of the metropolis
the recognition and restitution of their secular rights by means
of reforms which should assimilate in a gradual and progressive
manner, the Philippines to the Spaniards; but their voice was quickly
throttled and their sons received as the reward of their self-denial,
deportation, martyrdom and death. The religious corporations with
whose interests, always opposed to those of the Philippine people, the
Spanish Government has been identified, scoffed at these pretensions
and answered with the knowledge of that Government that Spanish
liberties have cost blood.

What other recourse then remained to the people for insisting as in
duty bound on regaining its former rights? No alternative remained
except force and, convinced of that, it has had recourse to revolution.

And now it is not limited to asking assimilation to the Spanish
Political Constitution, but it asks a definite separation from it;
it struggles for its independence in the firm belief that the time
has arrived in which it can and ought to govern itself.

There has been established a Revolutionary Government, under wise
and just laws, suited to the abnormal circumstances through which
it is passing, and which, in proper time, will prepare it for a true
Republic. Thus taking as a sole model for its acts, reason, for its
sole end, justice, and, for its sole means, honorable labor, it calls
all Filipinos its sons without distinction of class, and invites them
to unite firmly with the object of forming a noble society, not based
upon blood nor pompous titles, but upon the work and personal merit
of each one; a free society, where exist neither egotism nor personal
politics which annihilate and crush, neither envy nor favoritism which
debase, neither fanfaronade nor charlatanism which are ridiculous.

And it could not be otherwise. A people which has given proofs of
suffering and valor in tribulation and in danger, and of hard work and
study in peace, is not destined to slavery; this people is called to
be great, to be one of the strongest arms of Providence in ruling the
destinies of mankind; this people has resources and energy sufficient
to liberate itself from the ruin and extinction into which the Spanish
Government has plunged it, and to claim a modest but worthy place in
the concert of free nations.

Given at Cavite the 23d of June, 1898.

_Emilio Aguinaldo._

_To Foreign Governments._

The Revolutionary Government of the Philippines, on its establishment,
explained, through the message dated the 23d of June last, the
true causes of the Philippine Revolution, showing, according to
the evidence, that this popular movement is the result of the laws
which regulate the life of a people which aspires to progress and to
perfection by the sole road of liberty.

The said Revolution now rules in the Provinces of Cavite, Batangas,
Mindoro, Tayabas, Laguna, Morong, Bulacan, Bataan, Pampanga,
Neuva-Ecija, Tarlac, Pangasinan, Union, Infanta, and Zambales, and
it holds besieged the capital of Manila.

In these Provinces complete order and perfect tranquility reign,
administered by the authorities elected by the Provinces in accordance
with the organic decrees dated the 18th and 23d of June last.

The Revolution holds, moreover, about 9,000 prisoners of war, who
are treated in accordance with the customs of war between civilized
nations and humane sentiments, and at the end of the war it has more
than 30,000 combatants organized in the form of a regular army.

In this situation the chiefs of the towns comprised in the above
mentioned Provinces, interpreting the sentiments which animate
those who have elected them, have proclaimed the Independence of the
Philippines, petitioning the Revolutionary Government that will entreat
and obtain from foreign Governments recognition of its belligerency
and its independence, in the firm belief that the Philippine people
have already arrived at that state in which they can and ought to
govern themselves.

This is set forth in the accompanying documents, subscribed by the
above named chiefs.

Wherefore, the undersigned, by virtue of the powers which belong to
him as President of the Revolutionary Government of the Philippines
and in the name and representation of the Philippine people, asks
the support of all the powers of the civilized world, and earnestly
entreats them to proceed to the formal recognition of the belligerency
of the Revolution and the Independence of the Philippines; since they
are the means designated by Providence to maintain the equilibrium
between peoples, sustaining the weak and restraining the strong,
to the end that by these means shall shine forth and be realized the
most complete justice in the indefinite progress of humanity.

Given at Bacoor, in the Province of Cavite, the 6th day of August,
1898. The President of the Revolutionary Government,
_Emilio Aguinaldo_.

_Statement_.

The undersigned chiefs of towns comprising the Provinces hereinafter
named, elected as such in the manner prescribed by the decree of the
18th and the instructions dated the 20th of June last, after having
been confirmed in their respective offices by the President of the
Government and having taken the prescribed oath before him, have met
in full assembly previously called for that purpose for the purpose
of discussing the solemn proclamation of Philippine independence.

The discussion took place with the prudence and at the length which
so important a question demands and, after suitable deliberation,
the following declarations were unanimously adopted:

The Philippine Revolution records on the one hand brilliant feats of
arms, realized with singular courage by an improvised army almost
without arms, and on the other the no less notable fact that the
people, after the combat, have not entered upon great excesses nor
pursued the enemy further; but have treated him, on the contrary,
with generosity and humanity, returning at once to their ordinary
and tranquil life.

Such deeds demonstrate, in an indisputable manner, that the Philippine
people was not created, as all believed, for the sole purpose of
dragging the chains of servitude, but that it has a perfect idea of
order and justice, shuns a savage life, and loves a civilized life.

But what is most surprising in this people is that it goes on giving
proofs that it knows how to frame laws, commensurate with the progress
of the age, to respect them and obey them, demonstrating that its
national customs are not repugnant to this progress; that it is not
ambitious for power nor honors nor riches aside from the rational
and just aspirations for a free and independent life, and inspired
by the most lofty idea of patriotism and national honor; and that in
the service of this idea and for the realization of that aspiration
it has not hesitated in the sacrifice of life and fortune.

These admirable--and more than admirable, these wonderful--deeds
necessarily engender the most firm and ineradicable convictions of
the necessity of leaving the Philippines free and independent, not
only because they deserve it, but because they are prepared to defend,
to the death, their future and their history.

Filipinos are fully convinced that if individuals have need of
material, moral and intellectual perfection in order to contribute
to the welfare of their fellows peoples require to have fullness of
life; they need liberty and independence in order to contribute to the
indefinite progress of mankind. It has struggled and will struggle,
with decision and constancy, without ever turning back or retrograding
before the obstacles which may arise in its path, and with unshakable
faith that it will obtain justice and fulfill the laws of Providence.

And neither will it be turned aside from the course it has hitherto
followed by the unjustifiable imprisonment, tortures, assassinations,
and the other vandal acts committed by the Spaniards against the
persons of peaceful and defenseless Filipinos. The Spaniards believe
themselves released from every legal obligation toward the Filipinos
for the sole reason that the belligerency of the Revolution has
not been recognized, taking no account of the fact that over and
above every law, whether written or prescriptive, are placed with
imprescriptible characters, culture, national honor and humanity. No;
the Filipinos have no need ever to make use of reprisals because they
seek independence with culture, liberty with unconditional respect
for the law, as the organ of justice, and a name purified in the
crucible of human sentiments.

In virtue of the foregoing considerations the undersigned, giving
voice to the unanimous aspiration of the people whom they represent,
and performing the offices received from them and the duties pertaining
to the powers with which they are invested,

Proclaim solemnly in the face of the whole world the Independence of
the Philippines;

Recognize and respect Senor Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy as President
of the Revolutionary Government, organized in the manner prescribed by
decree of the 23d and instructions of the 27th of June last, and beg
the said President that he will ask and obtain from foreign Governments
the recognition of its belligerency and independence, not only because
this act constitutes a duty of justice, but also because to no one
is it permitted to contravene natural laws nor stifle the legitimate
aspiration of a people for its amelioration and dignification.

Given in the Province of Cavite the 1st day of August, of the year
of our Lord 1898, and the first year of Philippine independence.

Follow the signatures of the local Presidents of the Provinces of
Cavite and many others.

The undersigned, Secretary of the Interior, certifies, That the present
document is a literal copy of the original, which is deposited in
the Secretaryship under his charge; in proof of which he signs it,
with the approval of the President of the Revolutionary Government
in Bacoor, the 6th day of August, 1898.

El Presidente del G. R.,
_Emilio Aguinaldo_.
El Secretano del Interior,
_Leandro Ibarra_.



_Letter from Senor Aguinaldo to General Anderson._

July 23d, 1898.

To Brigadier-General T. M. Anderson, U. S. A., etc., etc., Cavite.

In answer to the letter of your Excellency dated the 22nd of the
present month, I have the honor to manifest to you the following:

That even supposing that the effects existing in the storehouse
of Don Antonio Osorio were subject to capture, when I established
myself in the plaza (town) of Cavite, Admiral Dewey authorized me
to dispose of everything that I might find in the same, including
the arms which the Spanish left in the arsenal. But as he was aware
that said effects belonged to the personal property (ownership) of
a Filipino, who traded with them by virtue of a contribution to the
Spanish Government, I would not have touched them had not the owner
placed them at my disposition for the purposes of the war.

I came from Hong Kong to prevent my countrymen from making common
cause with the Spanish against the North Americans, pledging, before,
my word to Admiral Dewey to not give place to (to allow) any internal
discord because (being) a judge of their desires I had the strong
conviction that I would succeed in both objects; establishing a
government according to their desires.

Thus it is that at the beginning I proclaimed the dictatorship,
and afterwards, when some of the Provinces had already liberated
themselves from Spanish domination, I established a revolutionary
government that to-day exists, giving it a democratic and popular
character, as far as the abnormal circumstances of war permitted,
in order that they (the Provinces) might be justly represented and
administered to their satisfaction.

It is true that my government has not been acknowledged by any of
the foreign powers; but we expect that the great North American
nation, which struggled first for its independence and afterwards
for the abolition of slavery, and is now actually struggling for the
independence of Cuba, would look upon it with greater benevolence
than any other nation. Because of this we have always acknowledged
the right of preference as to our gratitude.

Debtor to the generosity of the North Americans, and to the favors
which we have received through Admiral Dewey, and being more desirous
than any other of preventing any conflict which would have as a result
foreign intervention which must be extremely prejudicial not alone to
my nation, but also to that of Your Excellency, I consider it my duty
to advise you of the undesirability of disembarking North American
troops in the places conquered by the Filipinos from the Spanish,
without previous notice to this government, because as no formal
agreement yet exists between the two nations, the Philippine people
might consider the occupation of its territories by North American
troops as a violation of its rights.

I comprehend that without the destruction of the Spanish squadron the
Philippine revolution would not have advanced so rapidly; because
of this I take the liberty of indicating to Your Excellency the
necessities that before disembarking troops you should communicate
in writing to this government the places that are to be occupied,
and also the object of the occupation, that the people may be advised
in due form and (thus) prevent the commission of any transgression
against friendship. I can answer for my people, because they have
given me evident proofs of their absolute confidence in my government,
but I cannot answer for that which another nation, whose friendship
is not well guaranteed, might inspire in it (the people); and it
is certain that I do this not as a menace, but as a further proof
of the true and sincere friendship which I have always professed to
the North American people in the complete security that it will find
itself completely identified with our cause of liberty.

I am, with respect,

Your obedient servant,

_Emilio Aguinaldo_.



CHAPTER VII

Interview with the Archbishop of Manila.

Insurgents' Deadly Hostility to Spanish Priests--The Position of
the Archbishop as He Defined It--His Expression of Gratitude to the
American Army--His Characterization of the Insurgents--A Work of
Philippine Art--The Sincerity of the Archbishop's Good Words.

The intense feeling by the Philippine insurgents against the Spanish
priests made it seem very desirable to see the Archbishop of Manila,
and he informed two American priests that he would have pleasure in
making an expression of his views to me to be placed before the people
of the United States. He had been charged with extreme vindictiveness
and the responsibility of demanding that the city should be defended to
the last extremity, when actually, in the consultation of dignitaries
that took place, and the surrender of the capital was demanded by
General Merritt and Admiral Dewey, he declared the situation hopeless
and that it was a plain duty to prevent the sacrifice of life. He was
overruled by the peculiar folly that has caused Spain in the course
of the war to inflict heavy and avoidable losses upon herself. Indeed,
the war originated in the Spanish state of mind that it was necessary
to open fire and shed blood for the honor of the arms of Spain. The
Spanish officers knew they could not save Manila from the hands of the
Americans while the command of the sea by our fleet was indisputable
and we had unlimited reserves to draw upon to strengthen the land
forces, irrespective of the swarms of insurgents pressing in the
rear and eager to take vengeance for centuries of mismanagement
and countless personal grievances. It was the acknowledgment of the
Spanish Captain-General, when he received the peremptory summons from
Merritt and Dewey to give up the city, that there was no place of
refuge for the women and children, the sick and the wounded; and yet
it was insisted that the honor of Spain required bloodshed--not much,
perhaps, but enough to prove that the army of Spain was warlike. When
the American army had been reinforced so as to have 8,000 men ready to
take the field, General Merritt and Admiral Dewey had a conference and
agreed to send the Spaniards in authority a formal notification that
in forty-eight hours they would bombard and assail the defenses of
the city of Manila if it were not surrendered. The Spanish reply was
that the Americans could commence operations at once, but there was
no place where the women and children, the wounded and the sick could
go to find a place of security. This was tantamount to a declaration
that the Spaniards were sliding into a surrender, but wanted to make
a claim to the contrary.

The residence of the Archbishop is within the walled city and a very
substantial edifice, the stone work confined to the lower story and
hardwood timber freely used in massive form instead of stone. His grace
was seated at a small table in a broad hall, with a lamp and writing
material before him. He is imposing as a man of importance and his
greeting was cordial to kindliness. He said his acknowledgments were
personally due the American people for the peace of mind he had enjoyed
during the occupation of the city by the army of the United States,
for its establishment of order and the justice in administration
that relieved good citizens from oppression and alarm. He was glad
to have Americans know his sensibility on this subject, and wanted
me to convey his sentiments to the President.

When asked what it was that caused the insurgents to be so ferocious
against the priests and resolved on their expulsion or destruction he
said the rebels were at once false, unjust and ungrateful. They had
been lifted from savagery by Catholic teachers, who had not only been
educators in the schools but teachers in the fields. The same Catholic
Orders that were singled out for special punishment had planted in
the islands the very industries that were sources of prosperity,
and the leaders of the insurgents had been largely educated by the
very men whom now they persecuted. Some of the persecutors had been in
Europe and became revolutionists in the sense of promoting disorder as
anarchists. It was the antagonism of the church to murderous anarchy
that aroused the insurgents of the Philippines to become the deadly
enemies of priests and church orders. It was true in Spain, as in the
Philippines, that the anarchists were particularly inflamed against
the church. His grace did not seem to have heard of the American
anarchist, but the European revolutionist has received a large share
of his attention.

He produced a box of cigars, also a bottle of sherry, and chatted
comfortably and humorously. There was one thing then that he had in
his heart--that his anxiety for peace and appreciation of order as
enjoyed under the American military government should be recorded and
responsibly reported to the people of the United States. The American
priests had informed him that I was a friend of long standing of
President McKinley, and he again enjoined that I should declare his
sentiments to the President. A beautiful work of wood carving was
shown on an easel, which had a frame of hard wood, the whole, easel and
frame, with elaborately wrought ornamentation, cut out of one tree. It
was at once strong and graceful, simple and decorative. The picture was
a gold medallion, raised on a plate of silver, an excellent likeness
of his grace. It was evident that the refinements of art were known to
"these barbarians of the Philippines," for their works testified.

His grace announced that he would return my call, and his convenience
being consulted, the time was fixed for him to appear at 11 o'clock
the next day, Sunday, and he came accordingly, accompanied by three
priests, the chaplain of the First California, Father Daugherty
who sailed with General Merritt to Manila, and Father Boyle, the
superintendent of the famous observatory founded by the Jesuits, who
was a typical Irishman of a strong and humorously hearty type. Father
Boyle had one of the most perfect methods of speaking English in the
Irish way that I have ever heard, and admitted that he had resided in
England long enough to be born there; and this was great fun. It is
not too much to say that the institution he represented is illustrious.

The cathedral of Manila is within the walled city and of immense
proportions. It was shattered by an earthquake, and in its
reconstruction wood rather than marble was used for the supporting
pillars within, but no one would find out that the stately clusters
of columns were not from the quarries rather than the forests, unless
personally conducted to the discovery. Here 2,000 Spanish soldiers,
held under the articles of capitulation, were quartered, consumed
their rations and slept, munching and dozing all around the altar and
pervading the whole edifice. The other great churches, five in number,
in the walled city, were occupied in the same way. The Archbishop
was anxious to have the soldiers otherwise provided with shelter,
and if not all of them could be restored to their ordinary uses it
was most desirable, in his opinion, the cathedral should be.

It is estimated that 2,000 of the American soldiers in the
expeditionary force are Catholics, and Father Daugherty was anxious to
preach to them in English. During the call upon me by the Archbishop
this subject was discussed, and the suggestion made that the Americans
had tents in great number that they did not occupy and that would
probably not be preserved by keeping them stored in that hot and trying
climate. They might be pitched on the Luneta, which is beside the sea,
and the town thus relieved of 13,000 men, who, herded in churches,
produced unsanitary conditions. This seemed reasonable, and the policy
of the change would have a tendency to develop an element of good-will
not to be despised and rejected. It might be that the cathedral alone
could be cleared without delay or prejudice with a pleasant effect,
and if so why not? His grace was certainly diplomatic and persuasive
in stating the case, and his attendants were animated with zeal that
the Americans should have the credit of re-opening the cathedral
for worship. It was true the Spanish garrison first occupied it,
but if the necessity that its ample roof should protect soldiers
from the torrential rains had existed perhaps it had ceased to be
imperative. The matter was duly presented to the military authorities,
and the objection found to immediate action that the Spanish prisoners
of war should not for the time be located outside the walled city. They
must be held where they could be handled.

Coincident with the call of the Archbishop came Captain Coudert,
of the distinguished family of that name in New York, and his grace
was deeply interested in that young man and warmly expressed his
gratification in meeting an American officer of his own faith. The
Archbishop is a man of a high order of capacity, and his influence
has been great. His position is a trying one, for it would be quite
impossible for him to remain in Manila if the insurgents should
become the masters of the situation. The claim of hostile natives
that the Spanish priests have an influence in matters of state that
make them a ruling class is one that they urge when expressing their
resolve that the Friars must go. The Spanish policy, especially in
the municipal governments, has been to magnify the office of the
priests in political functions. The proceedings of a meeting of the
people in order to receive attention or to have legal standing must
be certified by a priest. It is the Spanish priest that is wanted in
matters of moment, and the laws make his presence indispensable. The
Spanish priests are, therefore, identified in the public mind with
all the details of misgovernment. The civilized Filipinos profess
christianity and faith in the native priests, carefully asserting
the distinction. In his conversation with me, General Aguinaldo
repeatedly referred to the necessity of consulting his advisers,
and said he had to be careful not to offend many of his followers,
who thought he had gone very far in his friendship for the United
States. He gave emphasis to the assertion that they were "suspicious"
of him on that account. It was my judgment at first that the General,
in stopping short when a question was difficult and referring to
the Council he had to consult, was showing a capacity for finesse,
that he really had the power to do or to undo, though he has not a
personal appearance of possible leadership. Now this, even, has been
modified. His Council seems to be the real center of power. When I
was talking with Aguinaldo there were two American priests waiting to
propose the deportation of his prisoners who were priests, and he had
to refer that question. The Council has decided to keep the priests
in confinement, and it is remarked that the General desired to give
up his prisoners and was false in saying he favored sending them
to Spain. There are misapprehensions in this association. He has no
doubt thought well of holding fast his most important hostages. If
he personally desired to release the priests, he probably would
not venture to do it. He is not so silly as to believe in his own
inviolability by bullets, and digestion of poisons; and those who are
such savages as to confide in these superstitions are not unlikely
to try experiments just to strengthen their faith. The potentiality
of Aguinaldo as a personage is not so great as has been imagined,
and if he attempts a rally against the American flag he will be found
full of weakness.

The Archbishop, I was told, had much pleasure in meeting an American
he was assured would attempt to be entirely just, and present
him according to his own declarations to the people of the United
States. He knew very well, unquestionably, the stories circulated
in the American camps, that his voice had been loudest and last
in urging hopeless war, in telling impossible tales of visionary
Spanish reinforcements, and denouncing the Americans as "niggers"
and "pigs." It is a fact that Spaniards have cultivated the notion
among the rural Filipinos, that Americans are black men, and pigs
is their favorite epithet for an American. The radical enemies of
His Grace are, no doubt, responsible for unseemly stories about his
animosities, for that he and those around him were sincere in their
respect for, and gratitude toward the American army of occupation,
for its admirable bearing and good conduct, was in itself too obviously
true to be doubted.



CHAPTER VIII

Why We Hold the Philippines.

The Responsibility of Admiral Dewey--We Owe It to Ourselves to Hold
the Philippines--Prosperity Assured by Our Permanent Possession--The
Aguinaldo Question--Character Study of the Insurgent Leader--How
Affairs Would Adjust Themselves for Us--Congress Must Be Trusted to
Represent the People and Firmly Establish International Policy.

If Admiral Dewey, after obeying the order of the President to destroy
the Spanish fleet at Manila, had steamed away and sought a station
to get coal to drive him somewhere else, there would have been no
Philippine question on the other side of the world from Washington
City. The Admiral desired to keep open telegraphic communication,
and made a proposition to that effect, but the Spanish authorities
curtly refused. Then the cable was cut by order of the Admiral, a
section removed, and both ends marked by buoys. Reflection caused the
Spaniards to regret that they had not consented to keep open the cable,
that it might be used under restrictions by both belligerents. They
mentioned their change of mind, and were told they were too late. The
American Admiral may have been apprehensive, and he had reason to be,
that the Spaniards, knowing they would be crushed in the West Indies
if they risked a decisive naval engagement there, might send all their
available ships of war to the Philippines, and secure a superiority
of force, possibly to destroy their enemies at Manila. It is clear
now that this is what the Spaniards ought to have tried to do. The
Americans were committed to the blockade of Cuba, occupying all
the vessels of war they had at hand, and the whole fleet of Spain
could have been in the Suez Canal, on the way to Manila when the
movement was known to our navy department. Then Admiral Dewey would,
of course, have been warned by way of Hong Kong and a dispatch boat,
that he should put to sea and take care of his men and ships. The
result might have been the temporary restoration of the Philippines to
Spain. Our Admiral, six hundred miles from Hongkong, the closest cable
connection, could not afford to leave Manila in direct communication
with Madrid. It was for this reason and not that he desired to keep
out of way or orders, as some able publicists have kindly promulgated,
that the Admiral cut the cable.

The gravest of his responsibilities came upon him after his victory
freed the harbor of declared enemies, and placed the great city at
his mercy. If the Spaniards used their big Krupp guns against his
ships, he could bombard the city and burn it. He held the keys to the
Philippines, with Manila under his guns, and the question before him
then was the same before the country now. The question that incessantly
presses is, whether the Dewey policy is to be confirmed, and the logic
of the stay in the harbor, and the dispatch of troops to take the town
made good. We hold the keys of the Philippines. Shall we continue to
do so? This question transcends in immediate importance--inevitable
consequence--remote as well as near, all the war with Spain has
raised. So broad a matter should not be rested on narrow grounds, nor
decided with haste. It ought to be scrutinized in all its bearings,
and all susceptibilities and material affairs regarded, for it will
affect all the people for all time.

What are the Philippines? They are the richest prize of soil and
climate that has been at hazard in the world for many years--one that
would be seized, if it could be done without war, by any of the great
nations other than our own without hesitation. The only scruple we need
entertain, the sole reason for deliberation, is because it is a duty of
the government to be sure when there are imperial considerations to be
weighed, that the people should be consulted. It was on this account
distinctly, that the President knew the issue of the permanency of
the possession of the Philippines was one of peculiar novelty and
magnitude, that he permitted it to exist. Spain must have been as
acquiescent in this as in yielding the independence of Cuba, and the
concession to us without any intermediate formality of Porto Rico. It
is not inconsistent with the policy of magnanimity that is generally
anticipated after the victory of a great power over a lesser one,
that we should hold the Philippines. We have only to keep the power
we have in peace, and let it work as a wholesome medicine, and all
the islands of the group of which Manila is the central point, will
be ours without conflict. In our system there is healing for wounds,
and attraction for the oppressed. The holding of the islands by Spain
would signify the continued shedding of blood, and drainage of the
vital resources of the peninsula. As against Spain the Philippines
will be united and desperate unto death, while they would without
coercion walk hand in hand with us, and become the greatest of our
dependencies--not states, but territories.

It would be an act of mercy to Spain to send her soldiers and priests
from the Philippines, home. Even if we consent that she may keep
her South Sea possession, she will lose it as she has all the rest,
for the story of the Philippines is that of Spanish South and Central
America, and the modern story of Cuba is the old one of all countries
South and West of the Gulf of Mexico and around by way of the Oceans
to Argentina, Mexico, Venezuela, Peru, Chili, and the rest had the
same bloody stream of history to trace, and sooner or later the
tale must all be told. Since Spain has already surrendered Cuba and
Porto Rico, the record of the Philippines is the last chapter of her
colonial experiences, by which she has dazzled and disgusted the world,
attaining from the plunder of dependencies wealth that she invested
in oppressive warfare to sustain a depraved despotism and display
a grandeur that was unsound, sapping her own strength in colonial
enterprises that could not be other than without profit, because the
colonies were the property of the crown, and the prey of caste.

The Spanish nation was forbidden by their government, not of the
people or for the people, to profit by the colonies, and the viceroys,
the captain-generals, and the whole official class were corrupted,
and inefficient in all things, except methods of tyranny to procure
a harvest of gold and silver not from the mines of the metals alone,
but from the industries, whatever they were. The people at large were
allowed no share in their own earnings, beyond a subsistence so scanty
that deep humiliation and grievous hardship were the fateful rewards
of labor.

It was because the colonial policy of Spain impoverished and degraded
the Spaniards at home, through the injustice, greed and profligacy
of those abroad, that the huge structure, once so great an imposition
upon mankind, a rotten fabric so gilt that the inherent weakness was
disguised, has finally fallen into universal and irretrievable ruin.

It is well Spain should retain the Canaries and the Balearic group,
for they are as Spanish as any peninsular province, and legitimately
belong therefore to the kingdom. The application of this principle
excludes Spain from the Philippines, and their des- [NOTE: gap in
original] been committed by the failure of war to our hands. There
is no nation that will dispute our peaceable possession of the
Philippines. Any other nation's proprietorship will be challenged.
Our authoritative presence in the islands will be a guarantee of peace.
Any other assertion of supremacy will be the signal for war. Our
assumption of sovereignty over the islands would quickly establish
tranquility. Any other disposition of the burning questions now
smoldering will cause an outburst of the flames of warfare. The
Spaniards in Manila have been transient. They are not rooted in the
soil. They all come and go like Captain-Generals, a mere official
class, with the orders of the Church participating actively in secular
concerns, more active as politicians than as teachers of religion. In
the view of the native population it is as indispensable that the
priests of Spain shall return to their native land as that the soldiers
should go. The deportation of these people would remove classes of
consumers and not affect unfavorably a productive industry, or the
prosperity of a self-sustaining community, and there would be but
rare instances of the severance of family ties.

It will be said of the affirmation that, the avowal of the possession
of the Philippines as a responsibility without end would be a peace
measure, and anything else make for war, does not take into account
the attitude of the Philippine Dictator, by proclamation, General
Aguinaldo, and his followers. We desire to speak with respect of the
General, for he has shown in trying times, under strong temptations,
the presence in his character of personal integrity in public matters,
and reference is made to his refusal to consent to the division among
insurgents alleged to be leaders, of the money paid by the Spaniards
for the disarmament of the rebels, when two years ago there was an
agreement upon the terms of a truce. This money transaction has
been referred to as the sale of their cause by Aguinaldo and his
associates, as if they, as individuals, had pocketed the usufruct
of the bargain. The money was paid by Spain as an earnest of her
sincerity, the Captain-General representing the force and good faith
of the kingdom, in granting reforms to the Philippines. On condition
of insurgent disarmament the people of the island were to be allowed
representation in the Spanish Cortes, the orders of the Church were
to be removed from relations to the Government that were offensive
to the people. There was a long list of articles of specification
of the reforms that were to be granted, the usual liberality of
words of promise always bestowed by Spain upon her colonists. The
representatives of Spain denied nothing that was asked; and to
give weight to the program of concessions, there was paid in hand to
Aguinaldo, through a transaction between banks in Manila and Hongkong,
four hundred thousand dollars, the first installment of eight hundred
thousand dollars agreed upon. [1] The Spaniards probably understood
that they were bribing the insurgents and paying a moderate sum to
cheaply end the war; and it did not cost the authorities of Spain
anything, for they exacted the money from the Manila Bank of Spain,
and still owe the bank. Aguinaldo's understanding, acted upon,
was different. He accepted the money as a war fund, and has held and
defended it for the purchase of arms, and resumed hostilities when all
promises of reform were broken, and nothing whatever done beyond the
robbery of the bank to bribe the rebel chiefs, which was the Spanish
translation. Of course, it was claimed by the enemies of Aguinaldo
that he was bought and paid for, but he has maintained the fund,
though there were those professors of rebellion, who made claims
to a share of the money. The second installment of the money that
the rebels were to have been paid is yet an obligation not lifted,
and the hostilities were revived as soon as the craft of the Spanish
negotiators in promising everything because they meant to do nothing,
became obvious. The actual proceedings in this case can be summed up
in a sentence: The Spaniards took four hundred thousand dollars out
of the Bank of Spain and gave it to the insurgents, for a temporary
armistice. General Aguinaldo, though he appears very well in refusing
to employ the money paid by Spain as a bribe for himself, has not
the elements of enduring strength as the leader of the insurgents. As
against the Spaniards he can keep the field, and carry on a destructive
guerilla warfare, hopeless on both sides, like that going on in Cuba,
when that island was invaded by the American army. But as against
American rule the Philippines would cease to be insurgents. The
islanders will not be controlled by sentimentalism. Government by the
United States would differ from that by Spain, as the two nations are
different in character, in the nature of their political institutions,
in their progressive movement. America is all active and free, and her
freedom would be extended to the islanders. The transformation would
be one from the paralysis of despotism to the life of liberty. The
words despotism and freedom would instantly have a distinct business
meaning. Make known in the city of Manila that the Americans will
abandon it, and the reviving hopes of the men of affairs would be
instantly clouded, and the depression deepen into despondency and
despair. Let it be the news of the day that the Americans will stay,
and the intelligence of the city would regard its redemption as
assured, every drooping interest revive, and an era of prosperity
unknown under the dismal incompetency of Spain, open at once. It is
legitimate that there should be freedom of speech as to the details
of the proceedings. If our Government should do what Admiral Dewey
did when he was the master of Manila, because he had annihilated the
Spanish fleet and had the power to destroy the city--cast anchor and
stay where we are already in command--the task is neither so complex
nor costly as its opponents claim. Our territorial system is one easy
of application to colonies. We have had experience of it from the
first days of our Government. There is no commandment that a Territory
shall become a State in any given time, or ever. We can hold back a
Territory, as we have Arizona and New Mexico, or hasten the change
to Statehood according to the conditions, and the perfect movement of
the machinery requires only the presence in Congress of dominant good
sense. Congress is easily denounced, but no one has found a substitute
for it, and it is fairly representative of the country. Congress will
never gamble away the inheritance of the people. It will probably,
in spite of all shortcomings, have its average of ability and utility
kept up. Congress may go wrong, but will not betray. Our outlying
possessions must be Territories until they are Americanized, and we
take it Americans know what that word means. If a specification is
wanted as a definition, we have to say the meaning is just what has
happened in California since our flag was there. In the case of the
Philippines, if we stick, and we do not see how we can help doing so,
the President will, in regular course, appoint a Territorial Governor,
and as a strong Government capable of quick and final decisions must
be made, the Governor should be a military man, and have a liberal
grant, by special Act of Congress, of military authority. He should
be a prompt, and all around competent administrator. He will not have
to carry on war offensive or defensive. He need not be in a hurry
to go far from Manila. He will not be molested there. The country
will gravitate to him. The opponents of the Republican form of
Government, as it is in the United States and the Territories of the
Nation will become insignificant in the Philippines. They will have
no grievances, except some of them may not be called at once to put
on the trappings of personal potentiality. General Aguinaldo would
find all the reforms the Spanish promised when they paid him four
hundred thousand dollars to prove their good intentions, free as the
air. He could not make war against the benignancy of a Government,
Republican in its form and its nature, which simply needs a little
time, some years maybe, before erasing the wrongs that have had a
growth of centuries. The American Governor-General need not send out
troops to conquer districts, coercing the people. The people will soon
be glad to see the soldiers of the United States, the representatives
of the downfall and departure of the instruments of Spain. Aguinaldo
and his party have a Congress. It might be an approved beginning of
a Territorial Legislature, and the insurgent General might be the
presiding officer. There would be abundant reason for the auspicious
exercise of all his rights in the public service. As for the cost
of the Philippines under our Government, that would fall upon the
treasury of the United States. There can be no doubt that it would be
for several years a considerable sum, but the public men who favored
peace for the liberation of Cuba, did not make counting the cost
the most prominent feature of the war they advocated, but accepted
the fact that the national honor and fame, the glory of heroism and
deeds of daring and sacrifice, are priceless, and their achievement
beyond price. There is to be said under this head, that the Philippine
Islands are of natural riches almost without parallel. The great isle
of Luzon teems with productions that have markets the world over,
and it is commonplace for the savages in the mountains to come out
of their fastnesses with nuggets of gold to make purchases. Cotton,
sugar, rice, hemp, coffee and tobacco, all tropical fruits and woods,
are of the products. There is profusion of the riches that await the
freedom of labor and the security of capital, and the happiness of the
people. Under American government the Philippines would prosper, and it
would be one of our tasks to frame legislation. The laws of Congress
would be the higher code of law, and the Philippines would desire,
and be invited, of course, to send their ablest men to be Territorial
representatives in the Congress of the United States. In the name
of peace, therefore, and in behalf of the dignity and authority of
this Nation--in mercy to the Spaniards, in justice to the Filipinos,
it is due ourselves, and should have the favor of all who would see
our country expand with the ages, and walking in the footsteps of
Washington and Jefferson, finding the path of empire that of freedom
and taking our place as a great Power, accepting the logic of our
history, and the discharge of the duties of destiny--we should hold
on to the Philippines--and when the great distance of those islands
from this continent is mentioned, remember that the Pacific may now
be crossed in as few days as was the Atlantic forty years ago.

The labor questions and the silver questions even come into the
Philippines problem to be scanned and weighed. In Eastern Asia,
which we have invaded, and a part of which we have appropriated for
a time, the people use silver for the measure of value, and in the
islands that interest us, as they do not deal in the mysteries of
rupees, but in dollars, the facts in the case are plainly within the
common understanding. In Manila the Mexican dollar goes in ordinary
small exchanges, payment of wages and settlement of bills, for fifty
cents; but the banks sell the Mexicans twenty-one of them for ten gold
dollars--an American eagle! So far as the native people go, labor and
produce are counted in silver, and the purchaser, or employer gets
as much for a silver dollar as for a gold dollar. The native will
take ten dollars in gold for ten dollars only in all settlements
of accounts, and would just as willingly--even more so, accept ten
Mexican dollars as ten American dollars in gold coin. Salaries are
paid and goods delivered according to the silver standard. Of course,
in due time this state of things will pass away, if we hold to the
gold standard, but as the case stands the soldiers and sailors of
our army and fleet, paid under the home standard, receive double pay,
and get double value received for clothing, tobacco and whatever they
find they want--indeed, for the necessaries and luxuries of life. The
double standard in this shape is not distasteful to the boys.

We have both theories and conditions confronting us in these aspects
of the silver and labor questions. The Oriental people are obdurate
in their partiality for silver. It is the cheaper labor that adheres
to the silver standard, partially, it is held, because silver is the
more convenient money for the payment of small sums. But labor cannot
be expected, at its own expense, to sustain silver for the profit of
capital, or rather of the middle man between labor and capital. Labor,
so far as it is in politics in this country, should not, without
most careful study and deliberation, conclude that its force in
public affairs would be abated, and its policy of advancing wages
antagonized by the absorption of the Philippines in our country. On
the contrary, the statesmanship that is representative of labor may
discover that it is a great fact, one of the greatest of facts,
that the various countries and continents of the globe are being
from year to year more and more closely associated, and that to
those intelligently interested, without regard to the application
of their views of justice or expediency, in the labor and silver
questions--the convictions, the fanaticisms, of the vast silver
nations--and enormous multitudes of the people of Asia, touching the
silver standard--and the possible progress of labor, as a guiding as
well as plodding ability increases incessantly in interest, and must
grow in inheritance. As the conditions of progressive civilization are
developed our interests cannot be wholly dissevered from those of the
Asiatics. We would be unwise to contemplate the situation of to-day
as one that can or should perpetuate itself. Suppose we accept, the
governing responsibility in the Philippines. It is not beyond the range
of reasonable conjecture that American labor can educate the laborers
of the Philippines out of their state of servitude as cheap laborers,
and lead them to co-operate rather than compete with us, and not to
go into the silver question further than to consent that it exists,
and is in the simplest form of statement, whether the change in the
market value of the two money metals is natural or artificial. It is
necessary in common candor to state that the most complete solution
of the money metal embarrassments would be through the co-operation
of Asia and America. Europe is for gold, Asia for silver, and the
Americas divided. Japan is an object lesson, her approximation to
the gold standard has caused in the Empire an augmentation of the
compensation of labor. This is not wholly due to the change in the
standard. The war with China, the increase in the army and navy, and
the absorption of laborers in Formosa, the new country of Japan, have
combined with the higher standard of value, to elevate wages. All facts
are of primary excellence in the formation of the policies of nations.



CHAPTER IX

The Philippine Islands As They Are.

Area and Population--Climate--Mineral Wealth--Agriculture--Commerce
and Transportation--Revenue and Expenses--Spanish Troops--Spanish
Navy--Spanish Civil Administration--Insurgent Troops--Insurgent Civil
Administration--United States Troops--United States Navy--United
States Civil Administration--The Future of the Islands.

General Frank V. Greene made an exhaustive study of all reports
of an official character regarding the area, population, climate,
resources, commerce, revenue and expenses of the Philippines Islands,
and prepared a memorandum for the general information that is the
most thorough and complete ever made, and is the latest and highest
authority on all the subjects to which it relates, and they include
the solid information the business men of the United States want
respecting our Asiatic associations. The memorandum is herewith
submitted in substance, and all the particulars of public concern.


Area and Population.

These islands, including the Ladrones, Carolinas and Palaos, which
are all under the Government of Manila, are variously estimated at
from 1,200 to 1,300 in number. The greater portion of these are small
and of no more value than the islands off the coast of Alaska. The
important islands are less than a dozen in number, and 90 per cent. of
the Christian population live on Luzon and the five principal islands
of the Visayas group.

The total population is somewhere between 7,000,000 and 9,000,000. This
includes the wild tribes of the mountains of Luzon and of the islands
in the extreme south. The last census taken by the Spanish Government
was on December 31, 1887, and this stated the Christian population
to be 6,000,000 (in round numbers). This is distributed as follows:


                                           Per
                  Area.   Population.   Sq. Mile.
        Luzon    44,400    3,426,000       79
        Panay     4,700      735,000      155
        Cebu      2,400      504,000      210
        Leyte     3,300      279,000       71
        Bohol     1.300      245,000      188
        Negros    3,300      242,000       73
                 ======    =========      ===
                 59,800    5,422,000       91


The density of population in these six islands is nearly 50 per
cent. greater than in Illinois and Indiana (census of 1890), greater
than in Spain, about one-half as great as in France, and one-third
as great as in Japan and China, the exact figures being as follows:


                     Area.     Population.       Per Sq. Mile.
    Illinois        56,000       3,826,351            68
    Indiana         35,910       2,192,494            61
                    ------       ---------           ---
                    91,910       6,018,755            64

    Spain          197,670      17,565,632            88
    France         204,092      38,517,975           189
    Japan          147,655      42,270,620           286
    China        1,312,328     383,253,029           292


The next most important islands, in the order of population, are:


                 Area.         Population.    Per Sq. Mile.
    Mindanao     34,000        209,000            6
    Samar         4,800        186,000           38
    Mindoro       4,000         67,000           17
    Nomblon         600         35,000           58
    Masbate       1,400         21,000           15
                 ------        -------           --
                 44,800        518,000           11


Various smaller islands, including the Carolinas, Ladrones and Palaos,
carry the total area and Christian population to--


                140,000       6,000,000          43


This is considerably greater than the density of population in the
States east of the Rocky Mountains. Owing to the existence of mountain
ranges in all the islands, and lack of communication in the interior,
only a small part of the surface is inhabited. In many provinces the
density of population exceeds 200 per square mile, or greater than
that of any of the United States, except Massachusetts and Rhode
Island. The total area of the Philippines is about the same as that
of Japan, but its civilized population is only one-seventh.

In addition to the Christian population, it is estimated (in the
Official Guide) that the islands contain the following:


    Chinese (principally in Manila)                 75,000
    Moors or Mohametans in Paragon and Jok         100,000
    Moors or Mohametans in Mindanao and Basilan    209,000
    Heathen in the Philippines                     830,000
    Heathen in the Carolinas and Palaos             50,000
                                                 ---------
                                                 1,264,000


The Official Guide gives a list of more than thirty different races,
each speaking a different dialect; but five-sixths of the Christian
population are either Tagalos or Visayas. All the races are of the
Malay type. Around Manila there has been some mixture of Chinese and
Spanish blood with that of the natives, resulting in the Mestizos or
Half-breeds, but the number of these is not very great.

As seen in the provinces of Cavite and Manila, the natives (Tagalos)
are of small stature, averaging probably 5 feet 4 inches in height,
and 120 pounds in weight for the men, and 5 feet in height, and 100
pounds in weight for the women. Their skin is coppery brown, somewhat
darker than that of the mulatto. They seem to be industrious and
hard-working, although less so than the Chinese. By the Spaniards they
are considered indolent, crafty, untruthful, cowardly and cruel, but
the hatred between the Spaniards and the native races is so intense
and bitter that the Spanish opinion of the natives is of little
or no value. To us they seem industrious and docile, but there are
occasional evidences of deceit and untruthfulness in their dealings
with us. The bulk of the population is engaged in agriculture, and
there were hardly any evidences of manufactures, arts or mining. The
greater number seemed to be able to read and write, but I have been
unable to obtain any exact figures on this subject. They are all
devout Roman Catholics, although they hate the monastic orders.

In Manila (and doubtless also in Cebu and Iloilo) are many thousands of
educated natives, who are merchants, lawyers, doctors and priests. They
are well informed and have accumulated property. They have not traveled
much, but there is said to be quite a numerous colony of rich Filipinos
in Madrid, as well as in Paris and London. The bibliography of the
Philippines is said to number 4,500 volumes, the greater part of which
have been written by Spanish priests and missionaries. The number of
books on the subject in the English language is probably less than
a dozen.


Climate.

The climate is one of the best known in the tropics. The islands extend
from 5 to 21 deg. north latitude, and Manila is in 14d. 35m. The
thermometer during July and August rarely went below 79 or above
85. The extreme ranges in a year are said to be 61 and 97, and the
annual mean, 81. There are three well-marked seasons, temperate
and dry from November to February, hot and dry from March to May,
and temperate and wet from June to October. The rainy season reaches
its maximum in July and August, when the rains are constant and very
heavy. The total rainfall has been as high as 114 inches in one year.

Yellow fever appears to be unknown. The diseases most fatal among
the natives are cholera and smallpox, both of which are brought from
China. Low malarial fever is brought on by sleeping on the ground
or being chilled by remaining, without exercise, in wet clothes;
and diarrhea is produced by drinking bad water or eating excessive
quantities of fruit. Almost all of these diseases are preventable
by proper precautions, even by troops in campaign. The sickness in
our troops was very small, much less than in the cold fogs at camp
in San Francisco.


Mineral Wealth.

Very little is known concerning the mineral wealth of the islands. It
is stated that there are deposits of coal, petroleum, iron, lead,
sulphur, copper and gold in the various islands, but little or
nothing has been done to develop them. A few concessions have been
granted for working mines, but the output is not large. The gold
is reported on Luzon, coal and petroleum on Cebu and Iloilo, and
sulphur on Leyte. The imports of coal in 1894 (the latest year for
which the statistics have been printed) were 91,511 tons, and it came
principally from Australia and Japan. In the same year the imports
of iron of all kinds were 9,632 tons.

If the Cebu coal proves to be good quality there is a large market
for it in competition with the coal from Japan and Australia.


Agriculture.

Although agriculture is the chief occupation of the Philippines,
yet only one-ninth of the surface is under cultivation. The soil is
very fertile, and even after deducting the mountainous areas, it is
probable that the area of cultivation can be very largely extended,
and that the islands can support a population equal to that of Japan
(42,000,000).

The chief products are rice, corn, hemp, sugar, tobacco, cocoanuts
and cacao. Coffee and cotton were formerly produced in large
quantities--the former for export and the latter for home consumption;
but the coffee plant has been almost exterminated by insects, and the
home made cotton clothes have been driven out by the competition of
those imported from England. The rice and corn are principally produced
in Luzon and Mindoro, and are consumed in the islands; the rice crop
is about 765,000 tons; it is insufficient for the demand and 45,000
tons of rice were imported in 1894, the greater portion from Saigon,
and the rest from Hongkong and Singapore; also 8,669 tons (say 60,000
barrels) of flour, of which more than two-thirds came from China and
less than one-third from the United States.

The cacao is raised in the southern islands, the best quality of it
in Mindanao. The production amounts to only 150 tons, and it is all
made into chocolate and consumed in the islands.

The sugar cane is raised in the Visayas. The crop yielded, in 1894,
about 235,000 tons of raw sugar, of which one-tenth was consumed in
the islands and the balance, or 210,000 tons, valued at $11,000,000,
was exported, the greater part to China, Great Britain and Australia.

The hemp is produced in southern Luzon, Mindoro, the Visayas and
Mindanao. It is nearly all exported in bales. In the year 1894 the
amount was 96,000 tons, valued at $12,000,000.

Tobacco is raised in all the islands, but the best quality and the
greatest amount in Luzon. A large amount is consumed in the islands,
smoking being universal among the women as well as the men, but the
best quality is exported. The amount, in 1894, was 7,000 tons of leaf
tobacco, valued at $1,400,000, and 1,400 tons of manufactured tobacco,
valued at $1,750,000. Spain takes 30 per cent, and Egypt 10 per cent
of the leaf tobacco. Of the manufactured tobacco, 70 per cent, goes to
China and Singapore, 10 per cent. to England, and 5 per cent. to Spain.

Cocoanuts are grown in southern Luzon and are used in various ways. The
products are largely used in the islands, but the exports, in 1894,
were valued at $2,400,000.

Cattle, goats and sheep have been introduced from Spain, but they
are not numerous. Domestic pigs and chickens are seen around every
hut in the farming districts.

The principal beast of burden is the carabac or water buffalo, which
is used for ploughing rice fields, as well as drawing heavy loads on
sledges or on carts.

Large horses are almost unknown, but there are great numbers of native
ponies, from nine to twelve hands high, but possessing strength and
endurance far beyond their size.



Commerce and Transportation.

The internal commerce between Manila and the different islands is quite
large, but I was unable to find any official records giving exact
figures concerning it. It is carried on almost entirely by water,
in steamers of 500 to 1,000 tons. There are regular mail steamers,
once in two weeks, on four routes, viz.; Northern Luzon, Southern
Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao; also a steamer every two months to the
Carolines and Ladrones, and daily steamers on Manila Bay. These lines
are all subsidized. To facilitate this navigation extensive harbor
works have been in progress at Manila for several years, and a plan for
lighting the coasts has been made, calling for forty-three principal
lights, of which seventeen have already been constructed in the most
substantial manner, besides sixteen lights of secondary importance.

There is only one line of railway, built by English capital, running
from Manila north to Dagupan, a distance of about 120 miles. The roads
in the immediate vicinity of Manila are macadamized and in fairly
good order; elsewhere they are narrow paths of soft, black soil,
which becomes almost impassable in the rainy season. Transportation
is then effected by sledges, drawn through the mud by carabacs. There
are telegraph lines connecting most of the provinces of Luzon with
Manila, and cables to the Visayas and southern islands, and thence
to Borneo and Singapore, as well as a direct cable from Manila to
Hongkong. The land telegraph lines are owned by the Government, and
the cables all belong to an English company, which receives a large
subsidy. In Manila there is a narrow gauge street railway, operated
by horse-power, about eleven miles in total length; also a telephone
system, and electric lights.

Communications with Europe are maintained by the Spanish Trans-Atlantic
Company (subsidized), which sends a steamer every four weeks from
Manila and Barcelona, making the trip in about twenty-seven days. The
same company also sends an intermediate steamer from Manila to
Singapore, meeting the French Messagoric each way. There is also a
non-subsidized line running from Manila to Hongkong every two weeks,
and connecting there with the English, French and German mails for
Europe, and with the Pacific mail and Canadian Pacific steamers for
Japan and America.

There has been no considerable development of manufacturing industries
in the Philippines. The only factories are those connected with the
preparation of rice, tobacco and sugar. Of the manufactures and arts,
in which Japan so excels, there is no evidence.

The foreign commerce amounted, in 1894, to $28,558,552 in imports,
and $33,149,984 in exports, 80 per cent, of which goes through
Manila. About 60 per cent. of the trade is carried in British vessels,
20 per cent. in Spanish and 10 per cent. in German.

The value of the commerce with other countries in 1894 was as follows:

In Millions of Dollars (Silver).


                         Imports.      Exports.
    Spain                10.5           2.9
    Great Britain         7.1           8.7
    China                 4.6           6.8
    Germany               1.9           ---
    Saigon                 .9           ---
    United States          .7           7.4
    France                 .7           1.2
    Singapore              .4           1.7
    Japan                  .2           1.2
    Australia              .1           2.6
    Other Countries       1.5            .6
                         ----          ----
                         25.6          33.1


It is interesting to note that next to Great Britain we are the
largest customers of the Philippines, and that they export to us
nearly three times as much as to Spain. On the other hand Spain sells
to the Philippines fifteen times as much as we do.

The articles of import and their value in 1894 were as follows:

In Millions of Dollars (Silver).


               Spain.  Great  China. Germany. United   Other        Total.
                       Britain.               States.  Countries
Cotton Goods    3.9     4.O      .4      .3     --       .7         9.3
Cotton Yarns    1.2      .9      .2      .1     --       .1         2.5
Wines           1.8     --      --      --      --       .1         1.9
                                                        Russia.
Mineral Oils    --      --       .2     --       .4      .8         1.4
Iron             .2      .7     --       .2     --       .1         1.2
Rice            --      --      1.0     --      --       .1         1.1
Flour           --      --       .7     --       .2     --           .9
Sweet Meats      .5     --      --      --      --       .3          .8
Paper            .4     --      --       .1     --       .2          .7
Linen Goods      .1      .1      .1     --      --       .3          .6
Hats             .1     --      --       .3     --       .2          .6
Other Articles  2.3     1.4     2.O      .9      .1      .9         7.6
                --      --      --      --      --      --          --
               10.5     7.1     4.6     1.9      .7     3.8         28.6


The articles of export and their value in 1894 were as follows:

In Millions of Dollars (Silver).

                    Spain   Great   China   United  Austra- Other     Total
                            Britain         States  lia     Countries
Hemp                --      5.3      .9     6.6      .6     1.1 [2]   14.5
Sugar                .4     2.7     4.O      .7     1.9     1.3 [3]   11.O
Man'f. Tobacco       .2      .1      .7      ..      .1      .7 [4]    1.3
Leaf Tobacco        1.1      ..      ..      ..      ..      .3        1.4
Coffee               .3      ..      .1      ..      ..      ..         .4
Cocoanuts            ..      .6      .1      ..      ..      ..         .7
Other Articles       .9      ..      1.O      .1     ..     1.3        3.3
                    --      --      --      --      --      --         --
                    2.9     8.7     6.8     7.4     2.6     4.7       33.16


With these islands in our possession and the construction of railroads
in the interior of Luzon, it is probable that an enormous extension
could be given to this commerce, nearly all of which would come to
the United States. Manila cigars of the best quality are unknown in
America. They are but little inferior to the best of Cuba, and cost
only one-third as much. The coffee industry can be revived and the
sugar industry extended, mainly for consumption in the far East. The
mineral resources can be explored with American energy, and there is
every reason to believe that when this is done the deposits of coal,
iron, gold and lead will be found very valuable. On the other hand,
we ought to be able to secure the greater part of the trade which now
goes to Spain in textile fabrics, and a considerable portion of that
with England in the same goods and in iron.


Revenue and Expenses.

The budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1897, was as follows:


    Income.

    1st. Direct Taxes                         $8,496,170
    2nd. Indirect Taxes (Customs)              6,200,550
    3rd. Proceeds of Monopolies                1,222,000
    4th. Lottery                               1,000,000
    5th. Income of Government Property           257,000
    6th. Sundry Receipts                         298,300
                                             -----------
    Total                                    $17,474,020


    Expenses.

    1st. General Expenses, Pensions and Interest  $1,506,686
    2nd. Diplomatic and Consular Service              74,000
    3rd. Clergy and Courts                         1,876,740
    4th. War Department                            6,035,316
    5th. Treasury Department                       1,392,414
    6th. Navy Department                           3,562,716
    7th. Civil Administration                      2,195,378
    8th. Education                                   614,395
                                                 -----------
    Total                                        $17,258,145



The Direct Taxes were as follows:


    1st. Real Estate, 5 per cent, on income      $  140,280
    2nd. Industry and Commerce                    1,400,700
    3rd. Cedalas (Poll Tax)                       5,600,000
    4th. Chinese Poll Tax                           510,190
    5th. Tribute from Sultan of Jolo                 20,000
    6th. Railroads, 10 per cent. of
         Passenger Receipts                          32,000
    7th. Income Tax, 10 per cent. on Public
         Salaries                                   730,000
    8th. Sundry Taxes                                63,000
                                                 ----------
    Total                                        $8,496,170


Indirect Taxes were as follows:


    1st. Imports                                  $3,600,000
    2nd. Exports                                   1,292,550
    3rd. Loading Tax                                 410,000
    4th. Unloading Tax                               570,000
    5th. Fines and Penalties                          27,000
    6th. Special Tax on Liquors, Beer,
         Vegetables, Flour, Salt and Mineral
         Oils                                        301,000
                                                  ----------
    Total                                         $6,200,550


Monopolies:


    1st. Opium Contract                           $  576,000
    2nd. Stamped Paper and Stamps                    646,000
                                                  ----------
    Total                                         $1,222,000


Lottery:


    1st. Sale of Tickets, Less Cost of Prizes     $  964,000
    2nd. Unclaimed Prizes                             30,000
    3rd. Sundry Receipts                               6,000
                                                  ----------
    Total                                         $1,000,000


Income of Government Property:


    1st. Forestry Privileges                       $170,000
    2nd. Sale and Rent of Public Land and
         Buildings                                   85,000
    3rd. Mineral Privileges                           2,000
                                                   --------
    Total                                          $257,000


Sundry Receipts:


    1st. Mint (Seignorage)                        $200,000
    2nd. Sundries                                   98,300
                                                  --------
    Total                                         $298,300


The largest source of income is the Cedala or Poll Tax. Every
man and woman above 18 years of age, residing in the Philippines,
whether Spanish subject or foreigner, is required to have in his or
her possession a paper stating name, age, and occupation, and other
facts of personal identity. Failure to produce and exhibit this when
called upon renders anyone liable to arrest and imprisonment. This
paper is obtained from the internal revenue office annually, on
payment of a certain sum, varying, according to the occupation and
income of the person from $0.75 to $20.00, and averaging about $3.00
for each adult. An extra sum of 2 per cent. is paid for expense of
collection. The tax is collected at the Tribunal in each pueble,
and 20 per cent. is retained for expenses of local administration,
and 80 per cent. paid to the General Treasury. This tax falls heavily
on the poor and lightly on the rich. The tax on industry and commerce
is similarly graded according to the volume of business transacted by
each merchant or merchantile corporation. The tax on real estate is
absurdly low and levied only on municipal property and on the rent,
not the value.

The tax on imports is specific and not ad valorum; it amounts to
about 13 per cent. of estimated values. The free list is very small,
nearly everything of commercial value which is imported being subject
to duty. The revenue from imports has increased from $566,143 in 1865,
to $3,695,446 in 1894. It was about the same in 1897. On the other
hand the export tax, which was nothing in 1892, the loading tax,
which was nothing in 1893, and the unloading tax, which was nothing
in 1894, have all been increased in the last few years in order to
meet the expenses of suppressing the insurrection. These three items
yielded nearly $2,700,000 in 1897.

The monopoly of importing and selling opium is sold, by auction, to
the highest bidder for a term of three years. The present contract
runs until 1899, and yields $48,000 per month.

Every legal document must be drawn up on paper containing a revenue
stamp, engraved and printed in Spain, and every note, check, draft,
bill of exchange, receipt or similar document must bear a revenue
stamp in order to be valid. These stamps and stamped paper yielded
a revenue of $646,000 in 1897.

The lottery is conducted by the Government--the monthly drawings
taking place in the Treasury (Hacienda) Department. The sale of
tickets yielded $1,000,000 over and above prizes in 1897.

In a report to General Merritt, on August 29th, I recommended that
the opium contract be cancelled and the lottery abandoned during our
occupation of Manila; and as the poll tax and the tax on industry
and commerce had been paid for the most part in the early part of
the year, our chief sources of revenue were from the custom house,
the sale of stamps and stamped paper, and the sale of such licenses as
the law allowed (amusements, liquor saloons, etc.), for the benefit
of the city of Manila as distinguished from the general revenue. I
estimated the total at about $500,000 per month.

The expenses of administering the military government of occupation
(apart from the expenses of the army) will consist of the current
expenses of the office at the Provost Marshal General's office and
its various bureaus--at the custom house, internal revenue office,
and other offices--and the salaries of interpreters and minor employes
who are anxious to resume work as soon as they dare do so. An estimate
of these expenses was being prepared at the time I left, but was not
completed. It can hardly exceed $200,000 per month and may be much
less. This should leave $300,000 (silver) excess of income per month,
to go towards the military expenses of occupation.

As soon as it is decided that we are to retain the islands it will
be necessary to make a careful study of the sources of revenue and
items of expenses for all the islands, with a view to thoroughly
understanding the subject, before introducing the extensive changes
which will be necessary.


Currency.

The standard of value has always, until within a few years, been the
Mexican milled dollar. The Spanish dollar contains a little less silver
and, in order to introduce it and profit by the coinage, the Spaniards
prohibited the importation of Mexican dollars a few years since. Large
numbers of Mexican dollars remained in that country, however, and
others were smuggled in. The two dollars circulate at equal value.

All valuations of goods and labor are based on the silver dollar,
and a change to the gold standard would result in great financial
distress and many failures among the banks and mercantile houses in
Manila. Their argument is that while an American ten-dollar gold
piece will bring twenty-one silver dollars at any bank or house
having foreign connections, yet it will not buy any more labor or
any more hemp and sugar from the original producer than ten silver
dollars. The products of the country are almost entirely agricultural,
and the agricultural class, whether it sells its labor or its products,
would refuse to accept any less than the accustomed wages or prices,
on account of being paid in the more valuable coin. The result of
the change would be that the merchant or employe would have to pay
double for what he buys, and would receive no increase for what he
sells. While trade would eventually adjust itself to the change,
yet many merchants would be ruined in the process and would drag some
banks down with them.

The Mexican dollar is the standard also in Hongkong and China, and the
whole trade of the Far East has, for generations, been conducted on a
silver basis. Japan has, within the last year, broken away from this
and established the gold standard, but in doing so the relative value
of silver and gold was fixed at 32 1/2 to 1, or about the market rate.


Public Debt.

I was unable to obtain any precise information in regard to the
colonial debt. The last book on statistics of imports and exports was
for the fiscal year 1894, and the last printed budget was for 1896-7,
which was approved by the Queen Regent in August, 1896. Subsequent to
this date, according to the statements made to me by foreign bankers,
the Cortes authorized two colonial loans of $14,000,000 (silver)
each, known as Series A and Series B. The proceeds were to be used
in suppressing the insurrection. Both were to be secured by a first
lien on the receipts of the Manila custom house.

Series A is said to have been sold in Spain and the proceeds to have
been paid into the Colonial Office; but no part of them has ever
reached the Philippines. Possibly a portion of it was used in sending
out the 25,000 troops which came from Spain to the Philippines in
the autumn of 1896.

Series B was offered for sale in Manila, but was not taken. An effort
was then made to obtain subscribers in the Provinces, but with little
or no success. The Government then notified the depositors in the
Public Savings Bank (a branch of the Treasury Department similar to the
postal savings bureaus in other countries) that their deposits would no
longer be redeemed in cash, but only in Series B bonds. Some depositors
were frightened and took bonds, others declined to do so. Then came
the blockade of Manila and all business was practically suspended.

No printed report has been made concerning the debt, and I was unable
to obtain any satisfactory statement of the matter from the treasury
officials.

The exact in regard to the Series A bonds can be learned in Madrid;
but it will be difficult to learn how many of Series B were issued
and what consideration was received for them.

As already stated, both series of bonds rest for security on the
receipts of the Manila custom house.


Spanish Troops.

The Spanish prisoners of war number about 13,000, including about
400 officers. The infantry arms are about 32,000, the greater part
Mauser model 1895, caliber 28, and the others Remingtons, model
1889, caliber 43. The ammunition is about 22,000,000 rounds. The
field artillery consists of about twelve breech-loading steel guns,
caliber 3 5-10 inches, and ten breech-loading mountain guns, caliber
3 2-10 inches. There are six horses (ponies) for each gun, but the
harness is in bad order. Ammunition, about sixty rounds per gun, with
possibly more in the arsenals. There are about 500 cavalry ponies,
larger than the average of native horses, with saddles and equipments
complete. There is also a battalion of engineers. The fortifications of
the walled city are a fine sample of the Vauban type, on which military
engineers expended so much ingenuity 150 years ago, and of which Spain
possessed so many in her Flemish dominions. The first walls of Manila
were built about 1590, but the present fortifications date from a short
time after the capture and occupation of the place by the English,
in 1762-64. They consist of bastions and curtains, deep, wet ditch,
covered way, lunettes, demilunes, hornworks, and all the scientific
accessories of that day. They are in a good state of preservation, and
mount several hundred bronze guns, but they are chiefly of interest to
the antiquarian. On the glacis facing the bay, and also on the open
space just south of the walls, are mounted 9-inch breech loaders,
four in all, made at Hoatoria, Spain, in 1884. They are well mounted,
between high traverses, in which are bomb-proof magazines. These
guns are practically uninjured, and Admiral Dewey has the breech
blocks. While not as powerful as the guns of the present day of the
same caliber, they are capable of effective service. Their location,
however, is very faulty, as they are on the shore of the bay, with all
the churches, public buildings and most valuable property immediately
behind them. On the day after the naval battle Admiral Dewey sent word
to the Governor-General that if these guns fired a shot at any of his
vessels he would immediately reply with his whole squadron. Owing to
their location, this meant a bombardment of the city. This threat was
effective; these guns were never afterward fired, not even during the
attack of August 13th, and in return the navy did not fire on them,
but directed all their shells at the forts and trenches occupied by
the troops outside of the suburbs of the city.

Within the walled city are the cathedral and numerous churches,
convents and monasteries, the public offices, civil and military,
military workshops and arsenals, barracks for artillery, cavalry and
engineers, storehouses and a few dwellings and shops.

The infantry barracks are outside of the walls, four in number;
viz.: Neysing, Fortin, Calzada and Fruita. They are modern and
well constructed, and will accommodate about 4,000 men. They are
now occupied by the United States troops. Under the terms of the
armistice the arms laid down by the Spanish troops on August 14th
are to be returned to them whenever they evacuate the city, or the
American army evacuates it. All other public property, including
horses, artillery, public funds, munitions, etc., is surrendered to
the United States unconditionally.

The question of sending back the troops to Spain is left absolutely to
the decision of the authorities in Washington. They are all within
the walled city, but as the public buildings are insufficient
to accommodate them, they are quartered in the churches and
convents. These buildings are not adapted for this purpose; they
have no sinks, lavatories, kitchens or sleeping apartments, and
there is great danger of an epidemic of sickness if the troops are
not soon removed.

Pending their removal they are being fed with rations furnished by
the United States Commissary Department, and the officers receive
from the United States sufficient money for their support.


Spanish Navy.

At the outbreak of the war the naval force in the Philippines
consisted of


                10 Cruisers.
                19 Gunboats.
                 4 Armed Launches.
                 3 Transports.
                 1 Survey Boat.
                37


Of these Admiral Dewey destroyed, on May 1st, ten cruisers and one
transport, and he has since captured two gunboats. The Spaniards have
sunk one transport and two or three gunboats in the Pasig River. There
remain thirteen or fourteen gunboats, which are scattered among
the islands. They are of iron, from 140 to 200 tons each, are armed
with one breech-loading rifle, caliber 3 6-10 inches, and two to four
machine guns, each caliber 44-100 to 1 inch. One of the captured boats,
the Callao, under command of Lieutenant Tappan, United States Navy,
and a crew of eighteen men, rendered very efficient service in the
attack of August 13th. These boats would all be useful in the naval
police of the islands. They will, however, probably be scuttled by
the Spaniards before the islands are surrendered.

The Navy Yard at Cavite has barracks for about 1,500 men (now occupied
by United States troops) and has shops and ways for light work and
vessels of less than 1,000 tons. Many of the gunboats above mentioned
were built there. The shallow depth of water in Canacoa or Cavite Bay
would prevent the enlargement of this naval station to accommodate
large vessels, and the plan of the Spaniards was to create a large
naval station in Subig Bay, on which considerable money has already
been spent.


Spanish Civil Administration.

The Government of the Philippine Islands, including the Ladrones,
Carolinas and Palaos, is vested in the Governor-General, who,
in the language of the Spanish Official Guide, or Blue Book,
"is the sole and legitimate representative in these islands of the
supreme power of the Government of the King of Spain, and, as such,
is the supreme head of all branches of the public service, and has
authority to inspect and supervise the same, not excepting the courts
of justice." The office is held by a Lieutenant-General in the Spanish
army, and he is also Vice Royal Patron of the Indies, exercising in
these islands the ecclesiastical functions conferred on the King of
Spain by various Bulls of the Popes of Rome, Captain-General-in-Chief
of the Army of the Philippines, Inspector-General of all branches of
the service, Commander-in-Chief of the Naval Forces, and President of
all corporations and societies which partake of an official character.

What corresponds to his Cabinet, or Ministry, consists of

(a) The Archbishop of Manila and four Bishops, who administer
ecclesiastical affairs in the five dioceses into which the islands
are divided for this purpose; the appointment of parish priests
and curates, however, is vested in the Governor-General. The
various religious orders which exercise so large an influence in the
politics and business of the islands, viz.: Augustinians, Dominicans,
Recollects. Franciscans, Capuchins, Benedictines and Jesuits, are
all under the management of the Bishops, subject to the supervision
of the Pope, and the prerogatives of the King as Royal Patron, which
prerogatives are exercised by the Governor-General as Viceroy.

(b) The High Court of Justice in Manila, which is the Court of
Appeals in civil and governmental cases for all the islands. There
are two principal criminal courts in Cebu and Vigan (northern Luzon)
and appeal in criminal cases lies to these courts or to the High Court
of Manila. In every Province there is a court of primary jurisdiction
in both civil and criminal cases.

(c) The General, second in command, who is a General of Division in
the Spanish army. He is the sub-inspector of all branches of the
military service, is Military Governor of the Province and city
of Manila and commands all the troops stationed therein, and in
the absence or sickness of the Captain General he commands all the
military forces in the islands.

(d) The General Commandant of Dock Yards and Squadron. This post is
filled by a Vice Admiral in the Spanish navy, and he commands the
naval forces, ships and establishments in the islands.

(e) The Minister of Finance, or Intendente General de Hacienda,
who is charged with the collection of customs and internal taxes,
the expenditures of public money, and the audit and control of public
accounts.

(f) The Minister of the Interior, or Director General of Civil
Administration, who is charged with all public business relating
to public instruction, charities, health, public works, forests,
mines, agriculture, industry and commerce, posts and telegraphs
and meteorology.

For the purpose of local administration the islands are divided into
Provinces and Districts, classified as follows:


            19 Civil Governments.
            24 Political-Military Governments.
            23 Political-Military Commands.
            15 Military Commands.


The most important of the Provinces are Manila, with a population of
400,238 (of which 10 per cent. are Chinese), and Cebu, with 501,076;
and the least important districts are Balabas and Corregidor, with
420 and 320 respectively.

The governor or commandant has supreme control within his province
or district of every branch of the public service, including the
Courts of Justice, and each reports to the Governor General. The
Guardia Civil or Gendarmerie, is subject only to his orders, and for
arrests and imprisonment for political offenses, he is responsible,
not to the law, but to the Governor General and the King.

The Civil Governments are governed by Civil Governors, of the rank in
the Spanish Civil Service of Chiefs of Administration of the second
class. The Political Military Governments and Commands are in charges
of military and naval officers of various grades, according to their
size and importance; ranging from General of Division at Mindanao,
Brigadier-Generals at Cebu and Iloilo, Captain in the navy at Paragua,
down to Lieutenant at Balabas and Corregidor.

The Civil or Military Governor is assisted by a secretary, a judge,
an administrator of finances, a postmaster and a captain of police.

The affairs of cities are managed by a council (Ayuntamiento)
consisting of a president, a recorder (Sindico), one or more mayors
(Alcaldo), six to ten aldermen (Regidores) and a secretary.

Outside of the cities each province or district is divided into a
number of villages or parishes (Pueblos); the total number of these
is 1,055; in each there is a parish priest, a municipal captain,
a justice of the peace, a school master and school mistress. The
number of cities is very small, and the social life of the community
depends almost wholly on the form of government of the Pueblos, or
villages. In 1893 this was reorganized with the alleged intention of
giving local self-government. The scheme is complicated and curious
and only an outline of it can be given here. It is contained in full
in the Royal Decree of May 19, 1893, a long document, supplemented
by still longer regulations for carrying the same into effect.

In brief every Pueblo in which there are paid more than 1,000 Cedulas
(poll tax) shall have a municipal tribunal consisting of five members,
by whom its local affairs and funds shall be managed. The members are a


            Municipal Captain.
            Senior Lieutenant.
            Lieutenant of Police.
            Lieutenant of Agriculture.
            Lieutenant of Cattle.


And the Village Priest is required to attend all the important
meetings.

The Captain holds office for four years, and is eligible for
indefinite re-election; the Lieutenants hold office for four years
also, one-half of them going out of office every two years, and they
are ineligible for re-election until two years after the expiration
of their term. Both Captains and Lieutenants are elected, on a day
designated by the Governor, and in presence of the village priest, and
out going Captain, by the Principalia, or body of principal men of the
village. The village is subdivided into Barangayes, or group of about
100 families each, and for each Barangay there is a Chief or Headman
(Cabeza), who is appointed by the Governor, on the recommendation of
the Municipal Tribunal. The Principalia is made up of


        Former Municipal Captains.
        Former Municipal Lieutenants.
        Former Gobernadorcilles.
        Chiefs of Barangayes.
        All inhabitants paying more than $50 annually in taxes.


The Principalia choose the 12 electors as follows:


        6 from the Chiefs of Barangayes.
        3 from Former Municipal Captains.
        3 from the largest taxpayers.


The electors hold office for six years, and one-third go out of office
every two years.

The municipal Captain must be a resident of the village, more than 25
years of age, read and speak Spanish and be a Chief of Barangay. While
the Municipal Tribunal nominally controls the local affairs, yet
the Captain has the right to suspend all its acts which he considers
against the public welfare, and report the matter to the Provincial
Governor, who has power to rescind them; the Captain appoints all
village employes, and removes them at will; he can also fine and punish
them for petty offenses; he issues orders to the police and collects
the taxes. He holds a commission as Delegate or Representative of
the Governor General, and, in fact, he exercises within his little
bailiwick the same supreme power that the governor exercises in the
province, and the Governor General in the whole Archipelago.

In each province there is a Junta or Council, whose membership
consists of


        The Administrator of Finance.
        Two Vicars.
        The Public Physician.


The latter Four Members must be residents of the Capital of the
Province, and they are elected by the Municipal Captains, from a
list of names submitted to them by the Junta with the approval of
the Governor.

The functions of this Junta or Council are solely those of inspection
and advice. It watches over affairs of the Municipal Tribunals, and
reports to the Governor its advice and recommendations concerning
them. The Municipal Captain is obliged to deposit the taxes in the
Provincial Treasury, the keys of which are held by three members of
the Council; he draws out the money in accordance with the municipal
budget, and his accounts must be approved by his lieutenants,
countersigned by the village priest, passed upon by the Provincial
Council, and finally approved by the Governor.

The Governor has power to suspend the Municipal Captain or any of his
colleagues for a period of three months, and the Governor General can
remove one or all of them from office at will; and "in extraordinary
cases or for reasons of public tranquility, the Governor shall have
power to decree, without any legal process, the abolition of the
Municipal Tribunals." (Article 45.)

In December, 1896, General Polavieja issued a decree, suspending
the elections which were to take place that month for one-third of
the municipal electors, and directed the Governors of Provinces to
send in names of persons suitable for appointment, together with the
recommendations of the village priest in each case.

An examination of this unique scheme of village government shows
that one-half of the electors are to be chosen from persons holding
a subordinate office and appointed by the Governor; that the village
priest must be present at all elections and important meetings; that
the Captain has all the responsibility, and he must also be of the
class holding a subordinate office by appointment of the governor;
that the acts of Municipal Tribunal can be suspended by the Captain
and rescinded by the Governor; and, finally, if the Municipal Tribunal
is offensive to the Governor General he can either remove its members
and appoint others in their place or can abolish it altogether.

Such is the Spanish idea of self-government; the Minister of the
Colonies, in submitting the decree to the Queen Regent, expatiated
on its merits in giving the natives such full control of their local
affairs, and expressed the confident belief that it would prove
"most beneficent to these people whom Providence has confided to the
generous sovereignty of the Spanish monarchs."

This scheme of government by Municipal Tribunals was highly approved
by the natives, except that feature of it which placed so much power
in the hands of the Governor and Governor General. This, however,
was the essence of the matter, from the Spanish standpoint, and these
portions of the Decree were the ones most fully carried out. The
natives complained, on the one hand, of the delay in putting the
Decree into operation, and on the other hand that so much of it
as was established was practically nullified by the action of the
Governors. Seeing that the Tribunals had really no power, the members
soon turned their sessions (which the Decree required to be secret)
into political meetings in favor of the insurrection. So the whole
project is thus far a failure: and the local administration is in
considerable disorder, apart from that caused by the insurgents. In
point of fact self-government and representation are unknown in these
islands. The Archbishop and the four Bishops are appointed by the Pope;
the Governor General, military and naval officers and all officials
with a salary exceeding about $2.000 (silver) are appointed by the
King or the Minister of the Colonies. Yet all the expenses are paid
from the Philippine Treasury; the salaries of all officials, military,
naval, civil and ecclesiastical, the expenses and pensions of the army,
navy and church, the cost of the diplomatic and consular service in
Japan, China and Singapore, even a portion of the expenses of the
Colonial office, Madrid, and of pensions paid to the descendants
of Columbus--all come out of the taxes raised in the islands. The
natives have no place in the government, except clerks in the public
offices at Manila and the petty positions in the villages and the
Ayentamientos of cities, where their powers and responsibilities,
as we have seen, are at all times limited and subject to revocation
whenever disapproved by the Governor.

Though the population of the islands is 40 per cent. of that of Spain,
they have no representation in the Cortes.

There is a widespread report, almost universally believed by native
Filipinos and by foreign merchants, and even acknowledged by many
Spaniards, that pecuniary dishonesty and corruption exist throughout
the whole body of Spanish office-holders, from the highest to the
lowest. Forced contributions are said to be levied on the salaries
of minor officials; the Regimental Paymasters and Commissaries are
said to have sold part of the regimental stores for their own profit,
the Collector of Customs and the Minister of Finance to have imposed
or remitted fines at the Custom House and Internal Revenue Office,
according to payment or non-payment of presents by merchants, the
judges and court officials to have "borrowed" from attorneys large
sums which are never paid, and even the Governor General is reported
to have organized a regular system of smuggling in Mexican dollars,
the importation of which was prohibited by law, on a fixed scale of
payment to himself. The current report is that Weyler carried away
over $1,000,000 as his savings during the three years from 1888 to
1891 that he held the office of Governor General, on a salary of
$40,000 a year. Of the proof of these reports I have naturally no
personal knowledge, but they are matters of common talk and belief,
and they have been stated to me by responsible persons, who have long
resided in the islands.

As above stated, the Governor General is supreme head of every branch
of the public service, not excepting the Courts of Justice. How
this power was exercised is shown in the hundreds of executions for
alleged political offenses, which took place during the years 1895,
1896 and 1897, by the thousands deported to Mindanao and Fernando Po,
and by the number of political prisoners in jail at the time of our
entry into Manila. On the first examination which General McArthur,
as Military Governor, made of the jail, about August 22nd, he released
over 60 prisoners confined for alleged political offenses. One of
them was a woman who had been imprisoned for eleven years, by order
of the Governor General, but without any charges ever having been
presented against her; another was a woman who had been in jail for
three years on a vague charge, never formulated, of having carried
a basket of cartridges to an insurgent.

The day of reckoning for three centuries of this sort of government
came when Admiral Dewey destroyed the Spanish squadron on May 1st,
1898. An insurrection had been in progress from August, 1896,
to December, 1897. Unable to suppress it the Government had made a
written treaty with the insurgent leaders, paying them a large sum
of money and promising to introduce various reforms on condition
that they would leave the country. Hardly had the Spanish officials
recovered from this when the appalling disaster of the destruction
of their fleet occurred under their very eyes.

Then followed in rapid succession the naval blockade, the arrival of
the insurgent leaders from Hongkong, the raising of the insurgent army,
which blockaded Manila on the land side, and finally, the American
troops. At the end of 104 days after the destruction of the Spanish
fleet, the city surrendered to a combined land and naval attack of
the American forces. On the day after the capitulation, the American
Commander in Chief issued his proclamation establishing a military
government, appointed a Military Governor, a Minister of Finance,
a Collector of Customs, Collector of Internal Revenue, Postmaster
and Judge of the Provost Court; took possession of all public funds
(about $900,000), and all public offices, and as rapidly as possible
put this government in operation.

The machinery of the Spanish Government was thoroughly disorganized
when we entered Manila. The Courts of Justice, except the inferior
criminal courts, had not been in session since early in May; the
officials had been cut off from communication with the other islands
and with Spain for over three months; there had been no customs to
collect, and, owing to the entire suspension of business, but little
internal revenue; a forced loan of $2,000,000 for military purpose
had been extracted from the Spanish-Philippine Bank, and yet the
troops were several months in arrears of pay; all government offices
outside the walled city had been moved to temporary quarters within
the walls and their records had been lost or thrown into confusion;
the officials seeing the inevitable end in sight, were intent only
on planning for their return to Spain.

This disorganization was completed when the American Military officers
took charge of the Government, and every Spanish official, without
exception, refused absolutely to continue in service. They were
immediately dismissed and dispersed.

The situation thus created is without precedent in American
history. When Scott captured the City of Mexico it was acknowledged
on both sides that his occupation was only to be temporary, and there
were no insurgents to deal with. When the Americans entered California
they found only a scanty population, who were soon outnumbered by
the American immigrants. But in the Philippine Islands there is
a population of more than 7,000,000, governed by an alien race,
whose representatives present in the Islands, including military
and naval forces, clergy and civil employes do not exceed 30,000 in
number. Against this Government an insurrection is in progress, which
claims to have been successful in provinces containing a population of
about 2,000,000. The city and province of Manila, with a population
of 400,000 more, have been captured and occupied by a foreign army,
but whether its occupation is to be temporary or permanent has not
yet been decided.

Finally, the Government officials of all classes refuse to perform
their functions; the desire of most of them is to escape to Spain. It
was stipulated in the capitulation that they should have the right to
do so at their own expense, and numbers of them, as well as friars,
have already taken their departure. The Spanish officials have
intense fear of the Insurgents; and the latter hate them, as well
as the friars, with a virulence that can hardly be described. They
have fought them with success, and almost without interruption for
two years, and they will continue to fight them with increased vigor
and still greated prospects of success, if any attempt is made to
restore the Spanish Government. In its present disorganized condition
the Spanish Government could not successfully cope with them; on the
other hand, it would not surrender to them. The result, therefore, of
an attempted restoration of Spanish power in any of the islands would
simply be civil war and anarchy, leading inevitably and speedily to
intervention by foreign nations whose subjects have property in the
islands which they would not allow to be destroyed.


Insurgent Troops.

It is very difficult to give figures for the exact numbers of insurgent
troops. In his message to foreign governments of August 6th, asking
for recognition of belligerency and independence, Aguinaldo claims
to have a force of 30,000 men, organized into a regular army. This
included the force in the provinces of Luzon outside of Manila. What
was in evidence around Manila varied from 10,000 to 15,000. They were
composed of young men and boys, some as young as fifteen years of age,
recruited in the rural districts, having no property and nothing to
lose in a civil war. They have received no pay and, although Aguinaldo
speaks in his proclamation of his intention and ability to maintain
order wherever his forces penetrate, yet the feeling is practically
universal among the rank and file that they are to be compensated
for their time and services and hardships by looting Manila.

Their equipment consists of a gun, bayonet and cartridge box; their
uniform of a straw hat, gingham shirt and trousers and bare feet;
their transportation of a few ponies and carts, impressed for a day
or week at a time; for quarters they have taken the public building
in each village or pueblo, locally known as the Tribunal, and the
churches and convents; from these details are sent out to man the
trenches. Their food while on duty consists of rice and banana leaves,
cooked at the quarters and sent out to the trenches. After a few days
or a week of active service they return to their homes to feed up or
work on their farms, their places being taken by others to whom they
turn over their guns and cartridges. Their arms have been obtained from
various sources, from purchases in Hongkong, from the supply which
Admiral Dewey found in the arsenal at Cavite, from capture made from
the Spaniards. They are partly Mausers and partly Remingtons. Their
ammunition was obtained in the same way. They have used it freely and
the supply is now rather short. To replenish it they have established
a cartridge factory at the village of Imus, about ten miles south of
Cavite, where they have 400 people engaged in re-loading cartridges
with powder and lead found at Cavite, or purchased abroad. They have
no artillery, except a few antique Columbiads obtained from Cavite,
and no cavalry. Their method of warfare is to dig a trench in front
of the Spanish position, cover it with mats as a protection against
the sun and rain, and during the night put their guns on top of the
trench above their heads and fire in the general direction of the
enemy. When their ammunition is exhausted they go off in a body to
get a fresh supply in baskets and then return to the trenches.

The men are of small stature, from 5 feet to 5 feet 6 inches in
height, and weigh from 110 to 130 pounds. Compared with them our
men from Colorado and California seemed like a race of giants. One
afternoon just after we entered Manila a battalion of the insurgents
fired upon the outposts of the Colorado regiment, mistaking them, as
they claimed, for Spaniards. The outpost retreated to their support,
and the Filipinos followed; they easily fell into an ambush and the
support, numbering about fifty men, surrounded the 250 Filipinos,
wrenched the guns out of their hands and marched them off as unarmed
prisoners--all in the space of a few minutes. Such a force can hardly
be called an army, and yet the service which it has rendered should
not be underestimated. Between 2,000 and 3,000 Spanish native troops
surrendered to it during the months of June and July. It constantly
annoyed and harrassed the Spaniards in the trenches, keeping them up
at night and wearing them out with fatigue; and it invested Manila
early in July so completely that all supplies were cut off and the
inhabitants as well as the Spanish troops were forced to live on horse
and buffalo meat, and the Chinese population on cats and dogs. It
captured the water works of Manila and cut off the water supply, and,
if it had been in the dry season, would have inflicted great suffering
on the inhabitants for lack of water. These results, it is true,
were obtained against a dispirited army, containing a considerable
number of native troops of doubtful loyalty. Yet, from August, 1896,
to April, 1897, they fought 25,000 of the best regular troops sent
out from Spain, inflicting on them a loss of over 150 officers and
2,500 men, killed and wounded, and they suffered still greater losses
themselves. Nevertheless, from daily contact with them for six weeks, I
am very confident that no such results could have been obtained against
an American army, which would have driven them back to the hills and
reduced them to a petty guerilla warfare. If they attack the American
army this will certainly be the result, and, while these guerilla
bands might give some trouble so long as their ammunition lasted, yet,
with our navy guarding the coasts and our army pursuing them on land,
it would not be long before they were reduced to subjection.


Insurgent Civil Administration.

In August, 1896, and insurrection broke out in Cavite, under the
leadership of Emilio Aguinaldo, and soon spread to other provinces
on both sides of Manila. It continued with varying successes on
both sides, and the trial and execution of numerous insurgents,
until December, 1897, when the Governor-General, Primo de Rivera,
entered into written agreement with Aguinaldo, the substance of
the document, which is in possession of Senor Felipe Agoncillo,
who accompanies me to Washington, being attached hereto and marked
"A." In brief, it required that Aguinaldo and the other insurgent
leaders should leave the country, the Government agreeing to pay
them $800,000 in silver, and promising to introduce numerous reforms,
including representation in the Spanish Cortes, freedom of the press,
amnesty for all insurgents, and the expulsion of secularization of
the monastic orders. Aguinaldo and his associates went to Hongkong
and Singapore. A portion of the money, $400,000, was deposited in
banks at Hongkong, and a lawsuit soon arose between Aguinaldo and one
of his subordinate chiefs, named Artacho, which is interesting on
account of the very honorable position taken by Aguinaldo. Artacho
sued for a division of the money among the insurgents, according to
rank. Aguinaldo claimed that the money was a trust fund and was to
remain on deposit until it was seen whether the Spaniards would carry
out their promised reforms, and if they failed to do so it was to
be used to defray the expenses of a new insurrection. The suit was
settled out of court by paying Artacho $5,000.

No steps have been taken to introduce the reforms, more than 2,000
insurgents who had been deported to Fernando Po and other places are
still in confinement, and Aguinaldo is now using the money to carry
on the operations of the present insurrection.

On the 24th day of April Aguinaldo met the United States Consul
and others at Singapore and offered to begin a new insurrection
in conjunction with the operations of the United States navy at
Manila. This was telegraphed to Admiral Dewey and, by his consent, or,
at his request, Aguinaldo left Singapore for Hongkong on April 26th,
and, when the McCullough went to Hongkong early in May to carry the
news of Admiral Dewey's victory, it took Aguinaldo and seventeen other
revolutionary chiefs on board and brought them to Manila Bay. They soon
after landed at Cavite, and the Admiral allowed them to take such guns,
ammunition and stores as he did not require for himself. With these
and some other arms which he had brought from Hongkong Aguinaldo armed
his followers, who rapidly assembled at Cavite and, in a few weeks,
he began moving against the Spaniards. Part of them surrendered,
giving him more arms, and the others retreated to Manila.

Soon afterwards two ships, which were the private property of Senor
Agoncillo and other insurgent sympathizers, were converted into
cruisers and sent with insurgent troops to Subig Bay and other places,
to capture provinces outside of Manila. They were very successful,
the native militia in Spanish service capitulating with their arms
in nearly every case without serious resistance. On the 18th of June
Aguinaldo issued a proclamation from Cavite establishing a Dictatorial
Government, with himself as Dictator. In each village or pueblo a
Chief (Jefe) was to be elected, and in each ward a Nendrum (Cabeza);
also in each pueblo three delegates, one of Police, one of Justice,
and one of Taxes. These were to constitute the Junta, or Assembly, and
after consulting the Junta the Chiefs of pueblos were to elect a Chief
of Province and three Counsellors, one of Police, one of Justice, and
one of Taxes. They were also to elect one or more Representatives from
each Province to form the Bevolutionary Congress. This was followed
on June 20th by a decree giving more detailed instructions in regard
to the elections. On June 23d another decree followed, changing the
title of the Government from Dictatorial to Revolutionary, and of the
chief officer from Dictator to President; announcing a Cabinet with
a Minister of Foreign Affairs, Marine and Commerce, another of War
and Public Works, another of Police and Internal Order, Justice,
Instruction and Hygiene, and another of Taxes, Agriculture and
Manufactures; the powers of the President and Congress were defined,
and a code of military justice was formulated. On the same date a
manifesto was issued to the world explaining the reasons and purposes
of the Revolution. On June 27th another decree was issued containing
instructions in regard to elections. On August 6th an address was
issued to Foreign Governments, stating that the Revolutionary
Government was in operation and control in fifteen Provinces,
and that in response to the petition of the duly elected Chiefs of
these Provinces an appeal is made for recognition of belligerency and
independence. Translations of these various documents are all apended,
marked "B," "C," "D," "E," "F," "G" and "H."

The scheme of Government is set forth in the decree of June 23d,
marked "D." An examination of this document shows that it provides
a Dictatorship of the familiar South American type. All power is
centered in the President, and he is not responsible to any one for
his acts. He is declared to be "the personification of the Philippine
public, and in this view cannot be held responsible while he holds
office. His term will last until the Revolution triumphs." He appoints
not only the heads of the departments, but all their subordinates,
and without reference to Congress. This body is composed of a single
Chamber of Representatives from each Province. The election is to
be conducted by an agent of the President, and the qualifications of
electors are "those inhabitants most distinguished for high character,
social position and honorable conduct."

If any Province is still under Spanish rule its Representative
is to be appointed by the President. Congress is to deliberate on
"all grave and transcendental questions, whose decision admits of
delay and adjournment, but the President may decide questions of
urgent character, giving the reasons for his decision in a message
to Congress." The acts of Congress are not binding until approved by
the President, and he has power of absolute veto.

Congress was to hold its first session at Saloles about September 28th.

While this scheme of Government is a pure despotism, yet it claims
to be only temporary, and intended to "prepare the country so that
a true Republic may be established." It also provides a rude form of
governmental machinery for managing the affairs of the Provinces. To
what extent it has actually gone into operation it is difficult
to say. Aguinaldo claims, in his address of August 6th, that it
is in force in fifteen Provinces, whose aggregate population is
about 2,000,000. They include the island of Mindoro and about half
of Luzon. None of those (except Cavite) have yet been visited by
Americans, and all communication with them by the Spanish Government
at Manila has been cut off since May 1st.

In the province of Cavite and that portion of the Province of
Manila outside of the city and of its suburbs, which was occupied
by the insurgent troops as well as those of the United States,
their military forces, military headquarters, etc., were very much
in evidence, occupying the principal houses and churches in every
village and hamlet, but there were no signs of Civil Government or
administration. It was reported, however, that Aguinaldo's agents
were levying taxes or forced contributions not only in the outside
villages, but (after we entered Manila) by means of secret agents,
in the market places of the city itself. At Aguinaldo's headquarters,
in Bacoor, there were signs of activity and business, and it was
reported that his Cabinet officers were in constant session there.

Aguinaldo never himself failed to claim all the prerogatives due to
his alleged position as the de facto ruler of the country. The only
general officer who saw him or had any direct communication with him
was General Anderson. He did much to thwart this officer in organizing
a native wagon train and otherwise providing for his troops, and he
went so far, in a letter of July 23d (copy herewith marked "J"), as
to warn General Anderson not to land American troops on Philippine
soil without his consent--a notice which, it is hardly necessary
to say, was ignored. The day before the attack on Manila he sent
staff officers to the same General, asking for our plans of attack,
so that their troops could enter Manila with us. The same request had
previously been made to me by one of his Brigade Commanders, to which
I replied that I was not authorized to give the information desired.

Aguinaldo did not call upon General Merritt on his arrival, and this
enabled the latter to avoid any communication with him, either direct
or indirect, until after Manila had been taken. General Merritt then
received one of Aguinaldo's staff officers in his office as Military
Governor. The interview lasted more than an hour. General Merritt
referred to his proclamation as showing the conditions under which
the American troops had come to Manila and the nature of the Military
Government, which would be maintained until further orders from
Washington. He agreed upon the lines outside of the city of Manila,
up to which the insurgent troops could come, but no further with arms
in their hands. He asked for possession of the water works, which
was given, and, while expressing our friendship and sympathy for the
Philippine people, he stated very positively that the United States
Government had placed at his disposal an ample force for carrying
out his instructions, and even if the services of Aguinaldo's forces
had been needed as allies he should not have felt at liberty to
accept them.

The problem of how to deal with Aguinaldo's Government and troops
will necessarily be accompanied with embarrassment and difficulty,
and will require much tact and skill in its solution. The United States
Government, through its Naval Commander, has, to some extent, made use
of them for a distinct military purpose, viz.: to harass and annoy the
Spanish troops, to wear them out in the trenches, to blockade Manila
on the land side, and to do as much damage as possible to the Spanish
Government prior to the arrival of our troops, and for this purpose
the Admiral allowed them to take the arms and munitions which he had
captured at Cavite, and their ships to pass in and out of Manila Bay
in their expeditions against other Provinces. But the Admiral has
been very careful to give Aguinaldo no assurances of recognition
and no pledges or promises of any description. The services which
Aguinaldo and his adherents rendered in preparing the way for attack
on Manila are certainly entitled to consideration, but, after all,
they were small in comparison with what was done by our fleet and army.

There is no reason to believe that Aguinaldo's Government has any
elements of stability. In the first place, Aguinaldo is a young man
of twenty-three years. Prior to the insurrection of 1896 he had been
a schoolmaster, and afterward Gobernadorcillo and Municipal Captain
in one of the pueblos in the Province of Cavite. He is not devoid of
ability, and he is surrounded by clever writers. But the educated and
intelligent Filipinos of Manila say that not only is he lacking in
ability to be at the head of affairs, but if an election for President
was held he would not even be a candidate. He is a successful leader of
insurgents, has the confidence of young men in the country districts,
prides himself on his military ability, and if a Republic could be
established the post he would probably choose for himself would be
General-in-Chief of the Army.

In the next place, Aguinaldo's Government, or any entirely independent
Government, does not command the hearty support of the large body of
Filipinos, both in Manila and outside, who have property, education
and intelligence. Their hatred of the Spanish rule is very keen
and they will co-operate with Aguinaldo or any one else to destroy
it. But after that is done they fully realize that they must have
the support of some strong nation for many years before they will be
in a position to manage their own affairs alone. The nation to which
they all turn is America, and their ideal is a Philippine Republic,
under American protection--such as they have heard is to be granted
to Cuba. But when it comes to defining their ideas of protection and
the respective rights and duties of each under it, what portion of
the Government is to be administered by them and what portion by us;
how the revenues are to be collected, and in what proportion the
expenses are to be divided; they have no clear ideas at all; nor is
it expected that they should have, after generations of Spanish rule
without any experience in self government. The sentiment of this class,
the educated native with property at stake, looks upon the prospect
of Aguinaldo's Government and forces entering Manila with almost as
much dread as the foreign merchants or the Spaniards themselves.

Finally, it must be remembered that this is purely a Tagalo
insurrection. There are upwards of thirty races in the Philippines,
each speaking a different dialect, but five-sixths of the entire
Christian population is composed of the Tagalos and Visayas. The former
live in Mindoro and the southern half of Luzon, and the latter in Cebu,
Iloilo and other islands in the center of the group. The Tagalos are
more numerous than the Visayas, but both races are about equal in
civilization, intelligence and wealth. It is claimed by Aguinaldo's
partisans that the Visayas are in sympathy with his insurrection and
intend to send representatives to the congress. But it is a fact that
the Visayas have taken no active part in the present insurrection
nor in that of 1896, that the Spanish Government is still in full
control at Cebu and Iloilo, and in the Viscayas islands, and that
Aguinaldo has as yet made no effort to attack them. The Visayas
number nearly 2,000,000, or about as many as the population of all
the Tagalo Provinces, which Aguinaldo claims to have captured. There
is no evidence to show that they will support his pretensions, and
many reasons to believe that on account of racial prejudices and
jealousies and other causes they will oppose him.

Upon one point all are agreed, except possibly Aguinaldo and his
immediate adherents, and that is that no native government can maintain
itself without the active support and protection of a strong foreign
government. This being admitted it is difficult to see how any foreign
government can give this protection without taking such an active
part in the management of affairs as is practically equivalent to
governing in its own name and for its own account.


United States Troops and Navy.

I assume that the reports received at the War and Navy Departments
give all the desired information in regard to the military forces of
the United States.

At the time I left (August 30th) the Eighth Corps consisted of two
divisions, numbering in all about 12,000 men, with 16 field guns and
6 mountain guns. No wagons or animals had then arrived.

One regiment was stationed within the walled city guarding its gates,
and the captured guns and ammunition; a small force was at Cavite,
and the bulk of the troops were in Manila, outside of the walled
city. They were quartered in the Spanish barracks, which were all in
good condition, and in convents and private houses. The health of the
troops was excellent, notwithstanding the extraordinary hardships to
which they had been subjected in the trenches before entering Manila.

Admiral Dewey had under his command the Charleston, Monterey and
Monadnock, which arrived in July and August, the Callao and Leyte,
which had been captured from the Spaniards, and the ships which
were in the battle of May 1st, viz: Olympia, Boston, Baltimore,
Raleigh, Concord, Petrel and McCullough. The health of the squadron
was excellent. The Olympia and Concord were being docked and cleaned
at Hongkong. Permission to use the docks at Nagansaki during the
suspension of hostilities had been declined.


United States Civil Administration.

We entered Manila on the afternoon of August 13th. On the 14th the
capitulation was signed, and the same day General Merritt issued his
proclamation establishing a Military Government. On the 15th General
McArthur was appointed Military Commander of the walled city and
Provost Marshal General of the City of Manila and its suburbs, and on
the 17th I was appointed to take charge of the duties performed by the
intendente General de Hacienda, or Minister of Finance, and all fiscal
affairs. Representatives of the Postoffice Department had arrived on
the Steamship China in July and they immediately took charge of the
Manila Post-office, which was opened for business on the 16th. The
Custom House was opened on the 18th, with Lieutenant-Colonel Whittier
as Collector, and the Internal Revenue office, with Major Bement as
Collector on the 22nd. Captain Glass of the Navy was appointed Captain
of the Port, or Naval Officer, and took charge of the office on August
19th. The collections of customs during the first ten days exceeded
$100,000. The collection of internal revenue was small owing to the
difficulty and delay in ascertaining what persons had or had not
paid their taxes for the current year. The administration of Water
Works was put in charge of Lieutenant Connor, of the Engineers, on
August 25th, the Provost Court with Lieutenant-Colonel Jewett, Judge
Advocate United States Volunteers, sitting as Judge, was appointed
and held its first session on August 23rd.

The Provost Marshal General has charge of the Police, Fire, Health
and Street Cleaning Departments, and the issuing of licenses. The
Guardia Civil, or Gendarmerie of the City, proving indifferent and
inefficient, they were disarmed and disbanded; the 13th Minnesota
regiment was detailed for police duty, and one or more companies
stationed in each Police Station, from which patrolmen were sent out
on the streets to take the place of the sentries who had constantly
patrolled them from the hour of entering the city.

The shops were all closed when we entered on Saturday afternoon, the
13th; on Monday some of them opened, and by Wednesday the Banks had
resumed business, the newspapers were published, and the merchants were
ready to declare goods at the Custom House, the tram cars were running
and the retail shops were all open and doing a large business. There
was no disorder or pillage of any kind in the city. The conduct of
the troops was simply admirable, and left no ground for criticism. It
was noted and commented upon by the foreign naval officers in the
most favorable terms, and it so surprised the Spanish soldiers that
a considerable number of them applied for permission to enlist in
our service.

At the time I left General McArthur fully established his office as
Provost Marshal General, and was organizing one by one the various
bureaus connected with it, all with United States military officers in
charge; the Provost Court was in daily session, sentencing gamblers
and persons guilty of petty disturbances, and a military commission
had just been ordered to try a Chinaman accused of burglary.

In various public offices I collected the following Spanish funds:


    At the General Treasury          $795,517.71
    At the Mint                        62,856.08
    At the Internal Revenue Office     24,077.60
                                     -----------
                                     $882,451.39


Of this amount there was in


    Gold Coin            $  4,200.00
    Gold Bars               3,806.08
    Silver Coin           190,634.81
    Copper Coin           297,300.00
    Spanish Bank Notes    216,305.00
    Accepted Checks       170,205.50
                         -----------
                         $882,451.39


The money was counted by a board of officers and turned over to
Major C. H. Whipple, Paymaster U. S. A as custodian of Spanish Public
Funds. A few thousand dollars in other public offices were still to
be collected.

The money received at the Custom House and other offices is turned in
daily, at the close of business, to Major Whipple. Money for current
expenses is furnished to heads of departments on their requisition,
by warrant drawn by the Intendente General on the Custodian of
Spanish Public Funds. The heads of the departments are to submit
their vouchers and accounts monthly to an auditing department, which
was being organized when I left.

All these public offices and funds were surrendered to me only on
threat of using force and on granting permission to file a formal
written protest. None of these had been received at the time I left,
but the ground of verbal protest was that the officials recognized no
authority in these islands but the Governor General appointed by the
King of Spain, and without his order they were unwilling to surrender
them. On the other hand, I recognized no authority of the Spanish
Governor General who was merely a prisoner of war; I acted under the
orders of General Merritt as the United States Military Governor,
and in accordance with the terms of capitulation. The claim will
probably be made by the Spanish officials that as we captured Manila
a few hours after the peace protocol had been signed at Washington,
this property still belongs to the Spaniards. But I believe that the
law in such cases was clearly defined in decisions made by the United
States Supreme Court in 1815. We captured Manila, and the capitulation
(under which these funds became United States property) was signed by
both parties, before either had received any notice of the protocol
of suspension of hostilities.

On the opening of the Custom House several important questions arose
for immediate decision. The first was in regard to Mexican dollars. The
importation of these has for several years been prohibited, with
a view of forcing the Spanish coinage (which contains less silver)
into circulation. The large English banks represented that there was
a scarcity of currency, owing to the amount which had been hoarded and
sent away during the seige, and they agreed in consideration of being
allowed to import Mexican dollars free of duty, to guarantee the notes
and accepted checks of the Spanish bank, which should be received
by us in payment of customs up to $200,000 at any one time. The
Spanish bank was in difficulty, owing to the enormous amount which
the Government had taken from it under the form of a forced loan, and
any discrimination on our part against it would result in its failure,
entailing widespread financial disturbance. As there seemed no reason
against allowing the importation of Mexican dollars and many in favor
of it, I recommended that the Custom House continue to receive the
notes and checks of this bank in payment of customs (for which we
were amply protected by the guarantee of the strong English banks)
and with General Merrill's approval wrote to these banks authorizing
them to import Mexican dollars free of duty until further notice.

The next question was in regard to the rate of duties on imports and
exports. After a careful consideration of the matter, I recommended
that the tariff be not changed until the question had been fully
studied and ample notice given. General Merritt approved this and
the customs are being collected on the Spanish tariff.

About a week after the Custom House was opened certain parties came to
me representing that Consul General Wildman, of Hongkong, had informed
them that United States goods would be admitted free of duty in Manila,
that acting on this they had purchased a cargo of American illuminating
oil in Hongkong, and that the payment of the heavy duty on it ($30 per
ton, or about 8c per gallon) would ruin them. On consulting Lieutenant
Colonel Crowder, Judge Advocate of the Eighth Army Corps, he pointed
out the language of paragraph 5 of General Merritt's proclamation,
which followed literally the instructions of the President, viz:
"The Port of Manila will be open while our military occupation may
continue, to the commerce of all neutral nations as well as our own,
in articles not contraband of war, and upon payment of the prescribed
rates of duty which may be in force at the time of the importation."

Under this there was clearly no authority for discriminating in favor
of American goods, either coming direct from a United States Port or
by transshipment at Hongkong.

The Collector of Customs was directed to act accordingly.

Another question was in regard to the importation of Chinamen into
Manila. The Consul at Hongkong telegraphed to know if they would
be admitted. As there had been no time for examining the treaties
and laws in force on this subject, I replied with General Merritt's
approval that for the present it was not practicable to admit Chinese
laborers into Manila.

Another very important question which arose was in regard to trade with
the other Philippine islands. Nearly all the hemp and the greater part
of the sugar is grown in the Visayas. The hemp is bought by foreign
merchants in Manila, who bring it there from the other islands, and
export it, paying large duties to the Manila Custom House. These
merchants were anxious to bring up their stock, of which a large
amount had accumulated during the war, and ship it abroad. The
ships engaged in this island trade were idle in the Pasig. They
belonged to a Spanish corporation, owned entirely by Scotch capital,
and had a Spanish Register. The owners were ready to transfer them
to the American flag. Could these vessels be allowed to clear for
the ports of Cebu and Iloilo, which were in Spanish possession? The
Judge Advocate advised me that they could not, without the express
authority of the President. I so notified the owners of the ships and
the hemp merchants. The day before I left Manila, however, Admiral
Dewey received a cable from the Navy Department stating that Spanish
ships had been granted the privilege of trading to American ports
during the suspension of hostilities, and that American ships could be
granted a similar privilege for Spanish ports. I understood that on
the strength of this cable General Otis intended to allow the United
States Consul at Manila to grant these vessels an American Register
and then allow them to clear for the other islands. I do not know
what the arrangement, if any was made, in regard to the payment of
export duties at Iloilo. Clearly the hemp cannot pay export duties
at both Iloilo and Manila, and the Spaniards are not likely to allow
it to leave Iloilo free while we collect an export duty on it at
Manila. Incidentally, this illustrates the complications and loss
that will arise if the islands are subdivided. The principal merchants
for all the islands are at Manila, and 90 per cent, of the duties in
imports and exports are collected at its Custom House. A large part
of the imports are redistributed through the islands; and all the
hemp and sugar, which form the principal exports, come to Manila from
other islands. If, then, we retain Luzon and give the other islands
back to Spain or some other nation, that nation will impose import
and export duties on everything coming from or to Manila. The foreign
trade of that city as a distributing and collecting point for all the
islands will be lost, and its prosperity will be destroyed; moreover,
the Government revenue from that trade will be lost.

In view of the fact that Spanish officials declined to co-operate or
assist in any way in the American government of Manila, the ease and
rapidity with which order was maintained, the machinery of government
put in operation and business reestablished, after our entry into
Manila is very remarkable. For every position in the Government
service, legal, administrative, financial, mechanical, clerical, men
could be found in our volunteer ranks who were experienced in just
that class of work at home, and they took charge of their Spanish
positions with promptness and confidence.

Even in the matter of language no serious difficulty was encountered,
for no less than 30 good interpreters were found in the California
and Colorado regiments.

The Military Government as now organized and administered, fulfills all
the requirements of preserving order and collecting the public revenue.

The civil courts, however, have yet to be organized, and their
organization will present many difficulties.



CHAPTER X

Official History of the Conquest of Manila.

The Pith of the Official Reports of the Capture of Manila, by
Major-General Wesley Merritt, Commanding the Philippine Expedition;
General Frank V. Greene, General Arthur McArthur, and General
Thomas Anderson, With the Articles of Capitulation, Showing How
8,000 Americans Carried an Intrenched City With a Garrison of 13,000
Spaniards, and Kept Out 14,000 Insurgents--The Difficulties of American
Generals With Philippine Troops.

One of the most interesting events in the records of the fall of
cities, that carried with them decisive factors affecting nations,
is that of the conquest of Manila, by the army and navy of the United
States in the memorable year of 1898. The victory of Admiral George
Dewey May 1st, in the bay of Manila, nigh Cavite, has been celebrated
in every clime and in all languages, and the great story if related
in this book as one of universal fame, and given in outline and
also in pen pictures meant to show the local coloring, and these are
incidents most illustrative that are not familiar. The names of the
ships and the officers of the victorious fleet, and the force of the
contending squadrons in men and guns are herewith presented as an
indisputable record.

Admiral Dewey held on to his command of the bay and city of Manila,
braving all dangers--and they were many--and as fast as the army could
be organized and equipped, reinforcements were forwarded. General
Wesley Merritt was appointed the Commander in Chief of the expedition
to the Philippines, and arrived at Cavite, July 25th. The official
history of the operations that forced the surrender of the old Spanish
capital in the East Indies has not received the public attention its
unusual and instructive character demands, because the reports were
not received in the States and given to the public until the Paris
peace commission was assembling, and this singularly suggestive
detail has been almost neglected. It is here for the first time
consecutively arranged, annotated and adjusted, so as to tell the
whole story. The part played by the insurgents is one that has not
been stated by authority and with precision combining narrative form
with the internal evidence of authenticity.

The first expeditionary force of the United States to arrive was
that of General Thomas Anderson, on June 30, sixty days after Dewey's
victory. The second expeditionary force, under General Frank V. Greene,
arrived July 17, and the third, under General McArthur, July 30th,
five days later than General Merritt, who found Rear Admiral George
Dewey's war ships "anchored in line off Cavite, and just outside of the
transports and supply vessels engaged in the military service." He was
"in full control of the navigation of the bay, and his vessels passed
and repassed within range of the water batteries of the town of Manila
without drawing the fire of the enemy." This immunity of protected
cruisers from the fire of nine-inch Krupp guns with an abundance of
ammunition that was, and some that was not serviceable, was due to
the terrible prestige of the American Admiral and the consequent power
of his word that if fired upon he would destroy the city. Anderson's
Americans were, General Merritt reports, disposed as follows:

The Second Oregon, detachments of California Heavy Artillery,
Twenty-third Infantry, and Fourteenth Infantry occupied the town of
Cavite; while Brigadier General F.V. Greene, United States Volunteers,
was encamped with his brigade, consisting of the Eighteenth Infantry,
Third United States Artillery, Company A, Engineer Battalion, First
Colorado, First California, First Nebraska, Tenth Pennsylvania, and
Batteries A and B of the Utah Artillery, along the line of the bay
shore near the village of Paranaque, about five miles by water and
twenty-five miles by the roads from Cavite.

The Major General commanding visited General Greene's camp and made
a reconnaissance of the position held by the Spanish, and also the
opposing lines of the insurgent forces, finding General Greene's
command encamped on a strip of sandy land running parallel to the shore
of the bay and not far distant from the beach, but owing to the great
difficulties of landing supplies "the greater portion of the force had
shelter tents only, and were suffering many discomforts, the camp being
in a low, flat place, without shelter from the heat of the tropical
sun or adequate protection during the terrific downpours of rain so
frequent at this season." The General commanding was at once struck
"by the exemplary spirit of patient, even cheerful, endurance shown
by the officers and men under such circumstances, and this feeling of
admiration for the manner in which the American soldier, volunteer
and regular alike, accept the necessary hardships of the work they
have undertaken to do, has grown and increased with every phase of
the difficult and trying campaign which the troops of the Philippine
expedition have brought to such a brilliant and successful conclusion."

The left or north flanks of General Green's camp extended to a point
on the "Calle Real," about 3,200 yards from the outer line of Spanish
defenses of the city of Manila. This Spanish line began at the powder
magazine, or old fort San Antonio, within a hundred yards of the
beach and just south of the Malate suburb of Manila, and stretched
away to the Spanish left in more or less detached works, eastward,
through swamps and rice fields, covering all the avenues of approach
to the town and encircling the city completely."

General Merritt defines with firmness and perspicuity his position
regarding the Filipinos in these terms:

"The Filipinos, or insurgent forces at war with Spain, had, prior
to the arrival of the American land forces, been waging desultory
warfare with the Spaniards for several months, and were at the time
of my arrival in considerable force, variously estimated and never
accurately ascertained, but probably not far from 12,000 men. These
troops, well supplied with small arms, with plenty of ammunition and
several field guns, had obtained positions of investment opposite to
the Spanish line of detached works throughout their entire extent; and
on the particular road called the "Calle Real," passing along the front
of General Greene's brigade camp and running through Malate to Manila,
the insurgents had established an earthwork or trench within 800 yards
of the powder-magazine fort. They also occupied as well the road to
the right, leading from the village of Passay, and the approach by the
beach was also in their possession. This anomalous state of affairs,
namely, having a line of quasi-hostile native troops between our forces
and the Spanish position, was, of course, very objectionable, but it
was difficult to deal with, owing to the peculiar condition of our
relations with the insurgents, which may be briefly stated as follows:

"Shortly after the naval battle of Manila Bay, the principal leader of
the insurgents, General Emilio Aguinaldo, came to Cavite from Hongkong,
and, with the consent of our naval authorities, began active work in
raising troops and pushing the Spaniards in the direction of the city
of Manila. Having met with some success, and the natives flocking to
his assistance, he proclaimed an independent government of republican
form, with himself as president, and at the time of my arrival in the
islands the entire edifice of executive and legislative departments
and subdivision of territory for administration purposes had been
accomplished, at least on paper, and the Filipinos held military
possession of many points in the islands other than those in the
vicinity of Manila.

"As General Aguinaldo did not visit me on my arrival, nor offer his
services as a subordinate military leader, and as my instructions from
the President fully contemplated the occupation of the islands by the
American land forces, and stated that "the powers of the military
occupant are absolute and supreme and immediately operate upon the
political condition of the inhabitants," I did not consider it wise to
hold any direct communication with the insurgent leader until I should
be in possession of the city of Manila, especially as I would not until
then be in a position to issue a proclamation and enforce my authority,
in the event that his pretensions should clash with my designs.

"For these reasons the preparations for the attack on the city were
pressed, and military operations conducted without reference to the
situation of the insurgent forces. The wisdom of this course was
subsequently fully established by the fact that when the troops of
my command carried the Spanish intrenchments, extending from the
sea to the Pasay road on the extreme Spanish right, we were under
no obligations, by prearranged plans of mutual attack, to turn to
the right and clear the front still held against the insurgents,
but were able to move forward at once and occupy the city and suburbs."

General Anderson was the first officer of the American army to arrive,
and says Admiral Dewey gave him "every possible assistance," and
favored him "with a clear statement of the situation." On the second
day after he appeared at Cavite, which was one day after General
Merritt's departure from San Francisco, he had "an interview with
the insurgent chief, Aguinaldo, and learned from him that the Spanish
forces had withdrawn, driven back by his army as he claimed, to a line
of defense immediately around the city and its suburbs. He estimated
the Spanish forces at about 14,000 men, and his own at about the same
number. He did not seem pleased at the incoming of our land forces,
hoping, as I believe, that he could take the city with his own army,
with the co-operation of the American fleet.

"Believing that however successful the insurgents may have been in
guerilla warfare against the Spaniards, that they could not carry their
lines by assault or reduce the city by siege, and suspecting, further,
that a hearty and effective co-operation could not be expected, I
had at once a series of reconnaissances made to exactly locate the
enemy's lines of defense and to ascertain their strength."

The date of the impression made on General Anderson's mind as to
the displeasure of Aguinaldo is important. The insurgent chief would
have preferred the military distinctions to have been reserved for
himself. General Anderson says of the Spanish attacks on General
Greene's lines:

"These conflicts began on the night of July 31, as soon as the
enemy had realized that we had taken the places of the Filipinos,
and began a system of earthworks to the front of their old line. It
may have been merely coincident, but these attacks and sorties began
at the time the Captain General of Manila was relieved by his second
in command. For more than six weeks the insurgents had kept up a
bickering infantry fire on the Spanish trenches, firing occasionally
some old siege pieces captured by Admiral Dewey at Cavite and given
to Aguinaldo. These combats were never serious, and the Spaniards,
so far as I know, made no sorties upon them. But there is no doubt
of the fact that the Spaniards attacked our lines with force and
vindictiveness, until they were informed that the bringing on of a
general engagement would lead to a bombardment of the city. After
this there was for several days a tacit suspension of hostilities."

As to the situation of General Greene, Brigadier General Merritt says:

"The difficulty in gaining an avenue of approach to the Spanish line
lay in the fact of my disinclination to ask General Aguinaldo to
withdraw from the beach and the 'Calle Real,' so that Greene could
move forward. This was overcome by instructions to General Greene
to arrange, if possible, with the insurgent brigade commander in
his immediate vicinity to move to the right and allow the American
forces unobstructed control of the roads in their immediate front. No
objection was made, and accordingly General Greene's brigade threw
forward a heavy outpost line on the "Calle Real" and the beach and
constructed a trench, in which a portion of the guns of the Utah
batteries was placed.

"The Spanish, observing this activity on our part, made a very sharp
attack with infantry and artillery on the night of July 31. The
behavior of our troops during this night attack was all that could
be desired, and I have, in cablegrams to the War Department, taken
occasion to commend by name those, who deserve special mention for
good conduct in the affair. Our position was extended and strengthened
after this and resisted successfully repeated night attacks, our forces
suffering, however, considerable loss in wounded and killed, while the
losses of the enemy, owing to the darkness, could not be ascertained.

"The strain of the night fighting and the heavy details for outpost
duty made it imperative to re-enforce General Greene's troops with
General MacArthur's brigade, which had arrived in transports on
the 31st of July. The difficulties of this operation can hardly be
overestimated. The transports were at anchor off Cavite, five miles
from a point on the beach where it was desired to disembark the
men. Several squalls, accompanied by floods of rain, raged day after
day, and the only way to get the troops and supplies ashore was to
load them from the ship's side into native lighters (called 'cascos')
or small steamboats, move them to a point opposite the camp, and then
disembark them through the surf in small boats, or by running the
lighters head on to the beach. The landing was finally accomplished,
after days of hard work and hardship; and I desire here to express
again my admiration for the fortitude and cheerful willingness of
the men of all commands engaged in this operation.

"Upon the assembly of MacArthur's brigade in support of Greene's,
I had about 8,500 men in position to attack, and I deemed the time
had come for final action. During the time of the night attacks I
had communicated my desire to Admiral Dewey that he would allow his
ships to open fire on the right of the Spanish line of intrenchments,
believing that such action would stop the night firing and loss of
life, but the Admiral had declined to order it unless we were in danger
of losing our position by the assaults of the Spanish, for the reason
that, in his opinion, it would precipitate a general engagement, for
which he was not ready. Now, however, the brigade of General MacArthur
was in position and the Monterey had arrived, and under date of August
6 Admiral Dewey agreed to my suggestion that we should send a joint
letter to the Captain General notifying him that he should remove
from the city all non-combatants within forty-eight hours."

The joint note of General Merritt and Admiral Dewey was as follows:

_Headquarters U.S. Land and Naval Forces_,
Manila Bay,
Philippine Islands,
August 7, 1898.

The General in Chief Commanding Spanish Forces in Manila.

Sir: We have the honor to notify your excellency that operations of
the land and naval forces of the United States against the defenses
of Manila may begin at any time after the expiration of forty-eight
hours from the hour of receipt by you of this communication, or sooner
if made necessary by an attack on your part.

This notice is given in order to afford you an opportunity to remove
all non-combatants from the city.

Very respectfully,

_Wesley Merritt_, Major-General, United States Army, Commanding Land
Forces of the United States.

_George Dewey_, Rear-Admiral, United States Navy, Commanding United
States Naval Forces on Asiatic Station.

The notable words in this are those "against the defenses of Manila,"
instead of against the city itself--the usual way--the city was to
be spared if possible.

Manila, August 7, 1898.

The Governor-General and Captain-General of the Philippines to the
Major-General of the Army and the Rear Admiral of the Navy, commanding,
respectively, the Military and Naval Forces of the United States.

Gentlemen: I have the honor to inform your excellencies that at
half-past 12 to-day I received the notice with which you favor me,
that after forty-eight hours have elapsed you may begin operations
against this fortified city, or at an earlier hour if the forces
under your command are attacked by mine.

As your notice is sent for the purpose of providing for the safety
of non-combatants, I give thanks to your excellencies for the humane
sentiment you have shown, and state that, finding myself surrounded
by insurrectionary forces, I am without places of refuge for the
increased numbers of wounded, sick, women, and children who are now
lodged within the walls.

Very respectfully, and kissing the hands of your excellencies,

_Formire Jaudenes_, Governor-General and Captain-General of the
Philippines.

The second paragraph of the Governor-General and Captain-General's
letter indicates a sense of helplessness, and credits the insurgents
with surrounding the city so that there was no refuge. August 9th
there was a second joint note from Major-General Merritt and Rear
Admiral Dewey, in the terms following:

"The Governor-General and Captain-General of the Philippines.

"Sir: The inevitable suffering in store for the wounded, sick, women,
and children, in the event that it becomes our duty to reduce the
defenses of the walled town in which they are gathered, will, we feel
assured, appeal successfully to the sympathies of a general capable of
making the determined and prolonged resistance which your excellency
has exhibited after the loss of your naval forces and without hope
of succor.

"We therefore, submit, without prejudice to the high sentiments of
honor and duty which your excellency entertains, that surrounded on
every side as you are by a constantly increasing force, with a powerful
fleet in your front and deprived of all prospect of reinforcement and
assistance, a most useless sacrifice of life would result in the event
of an attack, and therefore every consideration of humanity makes it
imperative that you should not subject your city to the horrors of
a bombardment. Accordingly, we demand the surrender of the city of
Manila and the Spanish forces under your command."

The Captain-General wanted time to hear from Madrid, and was refused.

The language of General Greene, in stating the fact that he took
possession of the intrenchments of the insurgents, is in these words:

"On the morning of July 29, in compliance with verbal instructions
received the previous day from the Adjutant-General of the Eighth
Army Corps, I occupied the insurgent trenches, from the beach to the
Calle Real, with one battalion Eighteenth United States Infantry,
one battalion First Colorado Infantry, and four guns--two from each
of the Utah batteries--these trenches being vacated at my request
by the insurgent forces under Brigadier-General Noriel. As these
trenches were badly located and insufficient in size and strength,
I ordered another line constructed about 100 yards in advance of
them, and this work was completed, mainly by the First Colorado,
during the night of July 29-30. The length of this line was only
270 yards, and on its right were a few barricades, not continuous,
occupied by the insurgents, extending over to the large rice swamp,
just east of the road from Pasay to Paco (shown on the accompanying
map). Facing these was a strong Spanish line, consisting of a stone
fort, San Antonio de Abad, near the beach, intrenchments of sandbags
and earth about seven feet high and 10 feet thick, extending in a
curved direction for about 1,200 yards and terminating in a fortified
blockhouse, known as No 14, beyond our right on the Pasay road. It
faced our front and enveloped our right flank."

General Greene, reporting the fighting on his front, says of the
Spanish position and first attack.

Mounted in and near the stone fort were seven guns in all, viz.,
three bronze field guns of 3.6 inches caliber, four bronze mountain
guns of 3.2 inches caliber, and in the vicinity of Blockhouse No. 14
were two steel mountain guns of 3.2 inches caliber. The line was
manned throughout its length by infantry, with strong reserves at
Malate and at the walled city in its rear.

Shortly before midnight of July 31-August 1 the Spaniards opened
a heavy and continuous fire with both artillery and infantry from
their entire line. Our trenches were occupied that day by the two
battalions of the Tenth Pennsylvania Infantry, one foot battery (H),
nearly 200 strong, of the Third Artillery, and four guns, two of
Battery A and two of Battery B, Utah Artillery. For about an hour
and a half the firing on both sides, with artillery and infantry,
was very heavy and continuous, our expenditure of ammunition being
160 rounds of artillery and about 60,000 rounds of infantry. That of
the Spaniards was nearly twice as much.

The American loss was ten killed and forty-three wounded.

General Greene says: "Major Cuthbertson, Tenth Pennsylvania, reports
that the Spaniards left their trenches in force and attempted to
turn our right flank, coming within 200 yards of his position. But as
the night was intensely dark, with incessant and heavy rain, and as
no dead or wounded were found in front of his position at daylight,
it is possible that he was mistaken and that the heavy fire to which
he was subjected came from the trenches near Block House 14, beyond
his right flank, at a distance of about 700 yards. The Spaniards
used smokeless powder, the thickets obscured the flash of their guns,
and the sound of the Mauser bullets penetrating a bamboo pole is very
similar to the crack of the rifle itself.

"This attack demonstrated the immediate necessity of extending our
intrenchments to the right and, although not covered by my instructions
(which were to occupy the trenches from the bay to Calle Real, and to
avoid precipitating an engagement), I ordered the First Colorado and
one battalion of the First California, which occupied the trenches at 9
a. m., August 1, to extend the line of trenches to the Pasay road. The
work was begun by these troops, and continued every day by the troops
occupying the trenches in turn, until a strong line was completed by
August 12, about 1,200 yards in length, extending from the bay to the
east side of the Pasay road. Its left rested on the bay and its right
on an extensive rice swamp, practically impassible. The right flank was
refused, because the only way to cross a smaller rice swamp, crossing
the line about 700 yards from the beach, was along a cross-road in
rear of the general line. As finally completed the works were very
strong in profile, being five to six feet in height and eight to ten
feet in thickness at the base, strengthened by bags filled with earth.

"The only material available was black soil saturated with water,
and without the bags this was washed down and ruined in a day by the
heavy and almost incessant rains. The construction of these trenches
was constantly interrupted by the enemy's fire. They were occupied
by the troops in succession, four battalions being usually sent out
for a service of twenty-four hours, and posted with three battalions
in the trenches, and one battalion in reserve along the crossroad
to Pasay; Cossack posts being sent out from the latter to guard the
camp against any possible surprise from the northeast and east. The
service in the trenches was of the most arduous character, the rain
being almost incessant, and the men having no protection against it;
they were wet during the entire twenty-four hours, and the mud was
so deep that the shoes were ruined and a considerable number of men
rendered barefooted. Until the notice of bombardment was given on
August 7, any exposure above or behind the trenches promptly brought
the enemy's fire, so that the men had to sit in the mud under cover
and keep awake, prepared to resist an attack, during the entire tour
of twenty-four hours.

"After one particularly heavy rain a portion of the trench contained
two feet of water, in which the men had to remain. It could not be
drained, as it was lower than an adjoining rice swamp, in which the
water had risen nearly two feet, the rainfall being more than four
inches in twenty-four hours. These hardships were all endured by
the men of the different regiments in turn, with the finest possible
spirit and without a murmur of complaint."

This is a vivid picture of hard service. General Greene continues:

"August 7 the notice of bombardment after forty-eight hours, or sooner
if the Spanish fire continued, was served, and after that date not
a shot was fired on either side until the assault was made on August
13. It was with great difficulty, and in some cases not without force,
that the insurgents were restrained from opening fire and thus drawing
the fire of the Spaniards during this period.

"Owing to the heavy storm and high surf it was impossible to
communicate promptly with the division commander at Cavite, and I
received my instructions direct from the major-general commanding,
or his staff officers, one of whom visited my camp every day, and I
reported direct to him in the same manner. My instructions were to
occupy the insurgent trenches near the beach, so as to be in a good
position to advance on Manila when ordered, but meanwhile to avoid
precipitating an engagement, not to waste ammunition, and (after August
1) not to return the enemy's fire unless convinced that he had left
his trenches and was making an attack in force. These instructions
were given daily in the most positive terms to the officer commanding
in the trenches, and in the main they were faithfully carried out.

"More ammunition than necessary was expended on the nights of August
2 and 5, but in both cases the trenches were occupied by troops under
fire for the first time, and in the darkness and rain there was ground
to believe that the heavy fire indicated a real attack from outside
the enemy's trenches. The total expenditure of ammunition on our side
in the four engagements was about 150,000 rounds, and by the enemy
very much more.

"After the attack of July 31-August I, I communicated by signal
with the captain of the U. S. S. Raleigh, anchored about 3,000 yards
southwest of my camp, asking if he had received orders in regard to the
action of his ship in case of another attack on my troops. He replied:

"Both Admiral Dewey and General Merritt desire to avoid general action
at present. If attack too strong for you, we will assist you, and
another vessel will come and offer help. "In repeating this message,
Lieutenant Tappan, commanding U. S. S. Callao, anchored nearer the
beach, sent me a box of blue lights, and it was agreed that if I
burned one of these on the beach the Raleigh would at once open fire
on the Spanish fort."

General Merritt speaks of the Colorado skirmishers leaving their
breastworks when the navy ceased firing on the 13th of August, and
advancing swiftly, finding the Spanish trenches deserted, "but as
they passed over the Spanish works they were met by a sharp fire from
a second line, situated in the streets of Malate, by which a number
of men were killed and wounded, among others the soldier who pulled
down the Spanish colors still flying on the fort and raised our own."

General Greene is complimentary to the officers and who conducted
the reconnaissances while he was at Camp Dewey twenty-five days,
and states:

"Captain Grove and Lieutenant Means, of the First Colorado, had been
particularly active in this work and fearless in penetrating beyond
our lines and close to those of the enemy. As the time for attack
approached, these officers made a careful examination of the ground
between our trenches and Fort San Antonio de Abad, and, finally,
on August 11, Major J. F. Bell, United States Volunteer Engineers,
tested the creek in front of this fort and ascertained not only that
it was fordable, but the exact width of the ford at the beach, and
actually swam in the bay to a point from which he could examine the
Spanish line from the rear. With the information thus obtained it was
possible to plan the attack intelligently. The position assigned to
my brigade extended from the beach to the small rice swamp, a front
of about 700 yards.

"After the sharp skirmish on the second line of defense of the
Spaniards, and after Greene's brigade moved through Malate, meeting
a shuffling foe, the open space at the luneta, just south of the
walled city, was reached about 1 p. m. A white flag was flying at the
southwest bastion, and I rode forward to meet it under a heavy fire
from our right and rear on the Paco road. At the bastion I was informed
that officers representing General Merritt and Admiral Dewey were on
their way ashore to receive the surrender, and I therefore turned east
to the Paco road. The firing ceased at this time, and on reaching this
road I found nearly 1,000 Spanish troops who had retreated from Santa
Ana through Paco, and coming up the Paco road had been firing on our
flank. I held the commanding officers, but ordered these troops to
march into the walled city. At this point, the California regiment
a short time before had met some insurgents who had fired at the
Spaniards on the walls, and the latter in returning the fire had
caused a loss in the California regiment of 1 killed and 2 wounded.

"My instructions were to march past the walled city on its surrender,
cross the bridge, occupy the city on the north side of the Pasig,
and protect lives and property there. While the white flag was flying
on the walls yet, very sharp firing had just taken place outside,
and there were from 5,000 to 6,000 men on the walls, with arms in
their hands, only a few yards from us. I did not feel justified
in leaving this force in my rear until the surrender was clearly
established, and I therefore halted and assembled my force, prepared
to force the gates if there was any more firing. The Eighteenth
Infantry and First California were sent forward to hold the bridges
a few yards ahead, but the second battalion, Third Artillery, First
Nebraska, Tenth Pennsylvania, and First Colorado were all assembled
at this point. While this was being done I received a note from
Lieutenant-Colonel Whittier, of General Merritt's staff, written from
the Captain-General's office within the walls, asking me to stop the
firing outside, as negotiations for surrender were in progress."

And General Greene continues: "I then returned to the troops outside
the walls and sent Captain Birkhimer's battalion of the Third Artillery
down the Paco road to prevent any insurgents from entering. Feeling
satisfied that there would be no attack from the Spanish troops
lining the walls, I put the regiments in motion toward the bridges,
brushing aside a considerable force of insurgents who had penetrated
the city from the direction of Paco, and were in the main street
with their flag expecting to march into the walled city and plant
it on the walls. After crossing the bridges the Eighteenth United
States Infantry was posted to patrol the principal streets near the
bridge, the First California was sent up the Pasig to occupy Quiapo,
San Miguel, and Malacanan, and with the First Nebraska I marched down
the river to the Captain of the Port's office, where I ordered the
Spanish flag hauled down and the American flag raised in its place."

The insurgents were disposed to disregard the white flag and the
process of the capitulation, but "a considerable force" of them
was "brushed aside." General Greene's losses before Manila were 16
killed and 66 wounded: his force 5,100. He remarks: "The resistance
encountered on the 13th was much less than anticipated and planned for,
but had the resistance been greater the result would have been the
same, only the loss would have been greater. Fortunately, the great
result of capturing this city, the seat of Spanish power in the East
for more than three hundred years, was accomplished with a loss of
life comparatively insignificant."

Captain T.B. Mott, detached from General Merritt's temporarily,
served on General Greene's staff, and received this mention:

"In posting troops in the trenches, in making reconnaissances,
in transmitting orders under fire, and in making reports, he has
uniformly exhibited courage, military ability, and sound judgment,
the qualities, in short, which are most valuable in a staff officer."

Captain Bates, Lieutenant Schieflie, and Captain D.F. Millet, artist
and author, are praised for activity, intelligence and valuable
service. Millet was with Greene before Plevna, during the Russo-Turkish
campaign. Greene was appointed the senior member of the committee to
arrange the terms of the capitulation.

General Anderson had instructions to extend his line to crowd
the insurgents out of their trenches with their consent, but this
was not attempted, for that would have brought on an engagement
prematurely. Anderson had purchased wire-cutters with insulated handles
in San Francisco, and they were useful! Anderson had his trenches with
the insurgents. McArthur's division was before a "circulated line of
earthworks faced with sand bags," and the problem of the advance was
made difficult because "we could not be sure whether our first attack
was to be tentative or serious, this depending on action of the navy;
second, from our orders not to displace the insurgents without their
consent from their position to the right of their guns on the Pasay
road. This to the very last the insurgent leaders positively refused
to give. Yet, if we could not go far enough to the right to silence
their field guns and carry that part of their line, they would have
a fatal cross fire on troops attacking blockhouse No. 14. I therefore
directed General MacArthur to put the three 2.10 inch guns of Battery
B, Utah Volunteer Artillery, in the emplacement of the insurgent gun
and to place the Astor Battery behind a high garden wall to the right
of the Pasay road, to be held there subject to orders.

"I assumed that when the action became hot at this point, as I knew
it would be, that the insurgents would voluntarily fall back from
their advanced position, and that the Astor Battery and its supports
could take position without opposition."

General Anderson got a message from General MacArthur. "I knew from
this that he wished to push the insurgents aside and put in the
Astor Battery. I then authorized him to attack, which he did, and,
soon after, the Twenty-third Infantry and the Thirteenth Minnesota
carried the advance line of the enemy in the most gallant manner,
the one gun of the Utah Battery and the Astor Battery lending most
effective assistance."

It was General Anderson's opinion that MacArthur should counter march
and go to Malate by the beach, but he had gone too far, for "the guns
of the Astor Battery had been dragged to the front only after the
utmost exertions, and were about being put into battery. At the same
time I received a telegram stating that the insurgents were threatening
to cross the bamboo bridge on our right; and to prevent this and guard
our ammunition at Pasay, I ordered an Idaho battalion to that point."

Again the insurgents were making mischief, and General Anderson,
as well as General Greene had the experience of the continuance of
fire when the white flag was flying. The loss of General Anderson in
the taking of the city was nineteen men killed and one hundred and
three wounded. He concludes by saying:

"The opposition we met in battle was not sufficient to test the
bravery of our soldiers, but all showed bravery and dash. The losses
show that the leading regiments of the First Brigade--Thirteenth
Minnesota, Twenty-third Infantry, and the Astor Battery--met the most
serious opposition and deserve credit for their success. The Colorado,
California, and Oregon regiments, the Regulars, and all the batteries
of the Second Brigade showed such zeal that it seems a pity that they
did not meet foemen worthy of their steel."

General MacArthur says: "Several hours before the operations of the
day were intended to commence, there was considerable desultory firing
from the Spanish line, both of cannon and small arms, provoked no
doubt by Filipino soldiers, who insisted upon maintaining a general
fusilade along their lines."

General MacArthur's personal mention is remarkably spirited, and
makes stirring reading. We quote:

"The combat of Singalong can hardly be classified as a great military
event, but the involved terrain and the prolonged resistance created
a very trying situation, and afforded an unusual scope for the display
of military qualities by a large number of individuals.

"The invincible composure of Colonel Ovenshine, during an exposure
in dangerous space for more than an hour, was conspicuous and very
inspiring to the troops; and the efficient manner in which he took
advantage of opportunities as they arose during the varying aspects
of the fight was of great practical value in determining the result.

"The cool, determined, and sustained efforts of Colonel Reeve, of the
Thirteenth Minnesota, contributed very materially to the maintenance
of the discipline and marked efficiency of his regiment.

"The brilliant manner in which Lieutenant March accepted and discharged
the responsible and dangerous duties of the day, and the pertinacity
with which, assisted by his officers and men, he carried his guns over
all obstacles to the very front of the firing line, was an exceptional
display of warlike skill and good judgment, indicating the existence
of many of the best qualifications for high command in battle.

"The gallant manner in which Captain Sawtelle, brigade quartermaster,
volunteered to join the advance party in the rush; volunteered
to command a firing line, for a time without an officer, and again
volunteered to lead a scout to ascertain the presence or absence of the
enemy in the blockhouse, was a fine display of personal intrepidity.

"The efficient, fearless, and intelligent manner in which Lieutenant
Kernan, Twenty-first United States Infantry, acting assistant
adjutant-general of the brigade, and Second Lieutenant Whitworth,
Eighteenth United States Infantry, aid, executed a series of dangerous
and difficult orders, was a fine exemplification of staff work
under fire.

"The splendid bravery of Captains Bjornstad and Seebach, and Lieutenant
Lackore, of the Thirteenth Minnesota, all wounded, and, finally,
the work of the soldiers of the first firing line, too, all went to
make up a rapid succession of individual actions of unusual merit."

Major General Merritt's account of the capture of the city must be
given in full, for there are no words wasted, and he clears the field
of all confusion.

"The works of the second line soon gave way to the determined advance
of Greene's troops, and that officer pushed his brigade rapidly
through Malate and over the bridges to occupy Binondo and San Miguel,
as contemplated in his instructions. In the meantime the brigade
of General MacArthur, advancing simultaneously on the Pasay road,
encountered a very sharp fire, coming from the blockhouses, trenches,
and woods in his front, positions which it was very difficult to carry,
owing to the swampy condition of the ground on both sides of the roads,
and the heavy undergrowth concealing the enemy. With much gallantry
and excellent judgment on the part of the brigade commander and the
troops engaged these difficulties were overcome with a minimum loss
(see report of brigade commander appended), and MacArthur advanced
and held the bridges and the town of Malate, as was contemplated in
his instructions.

"The city of Manila was now in our possession, excepting the walled
town, but shortly after the entry of our troops into Malate a white
flag was displayed on the walls, whereupon Lieutenant-Colonel C. A
Whittier, United States Volunteers, of my staff, and Lieutenant Brumby,
United States Navy, representing Admiral Dewey, were sent ashore to
communicate with the Captain-General. I soon personally followed
these officers into the town, going at once to the palace of the
Governor-General, and there, after a conversation with the Spanish
authorities, a preliminary agreement of the terms of capitulation
was signed by the Captain-General and myself. This agreement was
subsequently incorporated into the formal terms of capitulation,
as arranged by the officers representing the two forces, a copy of
which is hereto appended and marked.

"Immediately after the surrender the Spanish colors on the sea front
were hauled down and the American flag displayed and saluted by the
guns of the navy. The Second Oregon Regiment, which had proceeded
by sea from Cavite, was disembarked and entered the walled town as
a provost guard, and the colonel was directed to receive the Spanish
arms and deposit them in places of security. The town was filled with
the troops of the enemy driven in from the intrenchments, regiments
formed and standing in line in the streets, but the work of disarming
proceeded quietly and nothing unpleasant occurred.

"In leaving the subject of the operations of the 13th, I desire here
to record my appreciation of the admirable manner in which the orders
for attack and the plan for occupation of the city were carried out
by the troops exactly as contemplated. I submit that for troops to
enter under fire a town covering a wide area, to rapidly deploy and
guard all principal points in the extensive suburbs, to keep out the
insurgent forces pressing for admission, to quietly disarm an army
of Spaniards more than equal in numbers to the American troops,
and finally by all this to prevent entirely all rapine, pillage,
and disorder, and gain entire and complete possession of a city of
300,000 people filled with natives hostile to the European interests,
and stirred up by the knowledge that their own people were fighting
in the outside trenches, was an act which only the law-abiding,
temperate, resolute American soldier, well and skillfully handled by
his regimental and brigade commanders, could accomplish.

The trophies of Manila were nearly $900,000,000, of which $240,000,000
were copper coin, 13,000 prisoners and 22,000 arms.

Three days after the surrender, General Merritt received news of the
protocol, and soon was ordered to Paris. In parting he says of the
insurgent chief that he had written communication with him on various
occasions, and "he recognized my authority as military governor of the
town of Manila and suburbs, and made professions of his willingness
to withdraw his troops to a line which I might indicate, but at
the same time asking certain favors for himself. The matters in this
connection had not been settled at the date of my departure. Doubtless
much dissatisfaction is felt by the rank and file of the insurgents
that they have not been permitted to enjoy the occupancy of Manila,
and there is some ground for trouble with them owing to that fact,
but notwithstanding many rumors to the contrary, I am of the opinion
that the leaders will be able to prevent serious disturbances, as
they are sufficiently intelligent and educated to know that for them
to antagonize the United States would be to destroy their only chance
of future political improvement.

The Commanding General's personal acknowledgments are very handsome,
as follows:

"Brigadier-General E.P. Hughes, my inspector-general at San Francisco,
was especially noticeable in accomplishing the instruction of the green
troops that came to the city, many of them without arms, clothing, or
equipment of any kind. His services will undoubtedly be duly recognized
by Major-General Otis, with whom I left him to continue the good work.

"I desire especially to express my acknowledgments to Brigadier-General
Babcock, my adjutant-general and chief of staff, for his most valuable
services from the inception of the campaign in San Francisco to the
close of the work at the present time. This officer is too well known
to require special mention of his services in any one direction. He
was my right arm, not only in the office but in the field, and
much of the success that has attended the expedition is due to his
individual efforts.

"I desire especially to mention Major McClure and Major Whipple,
of the pay department, who volunteered their services after they
had completed their legitimate duties, and performed excellent work
whenever called upon. Major McClure was especially important in his
services immediately after the surrender, taking long rides under
my orders to the Spanish lines, and bearing instructions to them
which resulted in effecting their withdrawal in such manner as to
prevent the incursion of the insurgents in the northern portions of
the city. Other officers have been named in my special reports and
have been recommended for brevets and promotion.

"I especially call attention to the services of Captain Mott,
as mentioned in the report of Brigadier-General Greene. He was
cheerful, willing, intelligent, and energetic in the discharge of the
multifarious duties imposed upon him in connection with our troops
and trenches during the rainy season, and in the final action showed
these rare characteristics which stamp him as a very superior soldier."


_The Terms of Capitulation_

The undersigned having been appointed a commission to determine the
details of the capitulation of the city and defenses of Manila and
its suburbs and the Spanish forces stationed therein, in accordance
with the agreement entered into the previous day by Major General
Wesley Merritt, United States Army, American commander in chief in the
Philippines, and His Excellency Don Fermin Jaudenes, acting General
in chief of the Spanish Army in the Philippines, have agreed upon
the following:

1. The Spanish troops, European and native, capitulate with the city
and its defenses, with all the honors of war, depositing their arms
in the places designated by the authorities of the United States, and
remaining in the quarters designated and under the orders of their
officers, and subject to the control of the aforesaid United States
authorities, until the conclusion of a treaty of peace between the
two belligerent nations.

All persons included in the capitulation remain at liberty, the
officers remaining in their respective homes, which shall be respected
as long as they observe the regulations prescribed for their government
and the laws in force.

2. Officers shall retain their side arms, horses, and private property.

3. All public horses and public property of all kinds shall be turned
over to staff officers designated by the United States.

4. Complete returns in duplicate of men by organizations, and full
lists of public property and stores shall be rendered to the United
States within ten days from this date.

5. All questions relating to the repatriation of officers and men of
the Spanish forces and of their families, and of the expenses which
said repatriation may occasion, shall be referred to the Government
of the United States at Washington.

Spanish families may leave Manila at any time convenient to them.

The return of the arms surrendered by the Spanish forces shall take
place when they evacuate the city or when the American Army evacuates.

6. Officers and men included in the capitulation shall be supplied by
the United States, according to their rank, with rations and necessary
aid as though they were prisoners of war, until the conclusion of a
treaty of peace between the United States and Spain.

All the funds in the Spanish treasury and all other public funds
shall be turned over to the authorities of the United States.

7. This city, its inhabitants, its churches and religious worship,
its educational establishments, and its private property of all
descriptions are placed under the special safeguard of the faith and
honor of the American Army.

_F.V. Greene_, Brigadier-General of Volunteers, United States Army.

_B.P. Lamberton_, Captain, United States Navy.

_Charles A. Whittier_, Lieutenant-Colonel and Inspector-General.

_E.H. Crowder_, Lieutenant-Colonel and Judge-Advocate.

_Nicholas de la Petra_, Auditor General Excmo.

_Carlos_, Coronel de Ingenieros.

_Jose_, Coronel de Estado Major.


The Spaniards wanted a long array of specifications as to what the
Americans might and should not do, but finally were struck with the
sufficiency of the shining simple words, "under the special safeguard
of the faith and honor of the American Army."



CHAPTER XI

The Administration of General Merritt.

The Official Gazette Issued at Manila--Orders and Proclamations Showing
the Policy and Detail of the Administration of Major-General Wesley
Merritt, Who, as Commander of the Philippine Expedition, Became, Under
the Circumstances of the Capture of Manila, the Governor of That City.

_General Merritt's Proclamation to the Filipinos._

Headquarters Department of the Pacific, August 14, 1898.

To the People of the Philippines:

I. War has existed between the United States and Spain since April 21
of this year. Since that date you have witnessed the destruction by an
American fleet of the Spanish naval power in these islands, the fall
of the principal city, Manila, and its defenses, and the surrender
of the Spanish army of occupation to the forces of the United States.

II. The commander of the United States forces now in possession has
instructions from his Government to assure the people that he has
not come to wage war upon them, nor upon any part or faction among
them, but to protect them in their homes, in their employments, and
in their personal and religious rights. All persons who, by active
aid or honest submission, co-operate with the United States in its
efforts to give effect to this beneficent purpose, will receive the
reward of its support and protection.

III. The government established among you by the United States is a
government of military occupation; and for the present it is ordered
that the municipal laws such as affect private rights of persons and
property, regulate local institutions, and provide for the punishment
of crime, shall be considered as continuing in force, so far as
compatible with the purposes of military government, and that they be
administered through the ordinary tribunals substantially as before
occupation, but by officials appointed by the government of occupation.

IV. A Provost-Marshal-General will be appointed for the city
of Manila and its outlying districts. This territory will be
divided into sub-districts, and there will be assigned to each a
Deputy-Provost-Marshal.

The duties of the Provost-Marshal-General and his deputies will be
set forth in detail in future orders. In a general way they are
charged with the duty of making arrests of military, as well as
civil offenders, sending such of the former class as are triable by
courts-martial to their proper commands, with statements of their
offenses and names of witnesses, and detaining in custody all other
offenders for trial by military commission, provost courts, or native
criminal courts, in accordance with law and the instructions hereafter
to be issued.

V. The port of Manila, and all other ports and places in the
Philippines which may be in the actual possession of our land and naval
forces, will be open, while our military occupation may continue, to
the commerce of all neutral nations as well as our own, in articles
not contraband of war, and upon payment of the prescribed rates of
duty which may be in force at the time of the importation.

VI. All churches and places devoted to religious worship and to the
arts and sciences, all educational institutions, libraries, scientific
collections, and museums are, so far as possible, to be protected; and
all destruction or intentional defacement of such places or properly,
of historical monuments, archives, or works of science and art, is
prohibited, save when required by urgent military necessity. Severe
punishment will be meted out for all violations of this regulation.

The custodians of all property of the character mentioned in this
section will make prompt returns thereof to these headquarters, stating
character and location, and embodying such recommendations as they may
think proper for the full protection of the properties under their care
and custody, that proper orders may issue enjoining the co-operation
of both military and civil authorities in securing such protection.

VII. The Commanding General, in announcing the establishment of
military government, and in entering upon his duty as Military Governor
in pursuance of his appointment as such by the government of the United
States, desires to assure the people that so long as they preserve
the peace and perform their duties toward the representatives of the
United States they will not be disturbed in their persons and property,
except in so far as may be found necessary for the good of the service
of the United States and the benefit of the people of the Philippines.

_Wesley Merritt_,

Major-General, United States Army, Commanding.

The general orders following are full of curious interest, as they
declare the true intent and meaning of the Philippine Expedition,
and define the situation at Manila, with extraordinary precision,
and are in the strictest sense by authority:

_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps_

Manila Bay, August 9th, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 3.

1. In view of the extraordinary conditions under which this Army is
operating, the Commanding General desires to acquaint the officers
and men composing it, with the expectations which he entertains as
to their conduct.

You are assembled upon foreign soil situated within the western
confines of a vast ocean separating you from your native land. You have
come not as despoilers and oppressors, but simply as the instruments
of a strong free government, whose purposes are beneficent and which
has declared itself in this war, the champion of those oppressed by
Spanish misrule.

It is therefore the intention of this order to appeal directly to your
pride in your position as representatives of a high civilization,
in the hope and with the firm conviction that you will so conduct
yourselves in your relations with the inhabitants of these islands,
as to convince them of the lofty nature of the mission which you come
to execute.

It is not believed that any acts of pillage, rapine, or violence will
be committed by soldiers or other in the employ of the United States,
but should there be persons with this command who prove themselves
unworthy of this confidence, their acts will be considered not only
as crimes against the sufferers, but as direct insults to the United
States flag, and they will be punished on the spot with the maximum
penalties known to military law.

By Command of Major-General Merritt: _J.B. Babcock_, Adjutant-General.

Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.





_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps._

Manila, P. I., August 15th, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 4.

1. In addition to his duties as Division Commander, Brigadier-General
T.M. Anderson, U. S. Vols., is hereby assigned to the command of the
District of Cavite and will remove his headquarters to that point. The
garrison of the District of Cavite will be augmented upon the arrival
of the next transports containing troops for this command.

2. In addition to his duties as Brigade Commander, Brigadier-General
Arthur MacArthur, U. S. Vols., is hereby appointed Military Commandant
of the walled city of Manila, and Provost-Marshal-General of the City
of Manila, including all the outlying districts within the municipal
jurisdiction. General MacArthur will remove his headquarters within the
walled city and will bring with him one strong regiment of his command
to take station within the walled town. The Commanding Officer of the
2nd Oregon Vol. Inf., now stationed in the walled city, will report to
General MacArthur, and the Companies of the 2nd Oregon Vol. Inf., now
at Cavite, will, upon being relieved by other troops, be sent to Manila
to join the regiment. General MacArthur will relieve the Civil Governor
of his functions, and take possession of the offices, clerks and all
machinery of administration of that office, retaining and employing
the present subordinate officers of civil administration until,
in his judgment, it is desirable to replace them by other appointments.

3. Colonel James S. Smith, 1st California Vol. Inf., in addition to his
duties as Regimental Commander, is appointed Deputy Provost-Marshal
for the Districts of the city north of the Pasig River, and will
report to General MacArthur. Colonel S. Ovenshine, 23rd U. S. Inf.,
is appointed Deputy Provost-Marshal for the districts of the city,
including Ermita and Malate, outside of the walled town and south of
the Pasig River, and will report to General MacArthur.

4. Under paragraphs "3" and "4" of the terms of capitulation, full
lists of public property and stores, and returns in duplicate of the
men by organizations, are to be rendered to the United States within
ten days, and public horses and public property of all kinds are to be
turned over to the staff officers of the United States designated to
receive them. Under these paragraphs the Chief of Artillery at these
headquarters, and the Chiefs of the Staff Departments, will take
possession of the public property turned over as above, pertaining
to their respective departments.

The returns of the prisoners will be submitted to the Military
Commandant of the City, who will assign the men for quarters in such
public buildings and barracks as are not required for the use of United
States troops. The horses and private property of the officers of the
Spanish forces are not to be disturbed. The Chief Paymaster at these
headquarters will turn over such portion of the Spanish public funds
received by him, by virtue of this order, to the administration of
his office.

5. All removals and appointments of subordinate officers of civil
administration, and transfers of funds authorized by this order, must
receive the approval of the Commanding General, before action is taken.

6. The Chief Quartermaster and Chief Commissary of Subsistence at
these headquarters will establish depots of supply in Manila with as
little delay as possible.

Quartermaster and Subsistence depots will also be retained at Cavite.

By Command of Major-General Merritt:
_J. B. Babcock_,
Adjutant-General.

Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.





_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps._

Manila, P. I., August 17th, 1898.

_General Orders_ No. 5.

1. In addition to the command of his Brigade, Brigadier-General
F. V. Greene, U. S. Vols., will perform the duties hitherto performed
by the Intendente General de Hacienda, and will have charge, subject
to instructions of the Major General Commanding, of all fiscal affairs
of the Government of Manila.

2. Lieutenant-Colonel C. A. Whittier, U. S. Vols., is appointed
Collector of Customs, and the Chief Paymaster, Department of the
Pacific, will designate a bonded officer of the Pay Department as
custodian of all public funds. Both of these officers will report to
Brigadier-General Greene for instructions.

By Command of Major-General Merritt:
_J. B. Babcock_,
Adjutant-General.

Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.





_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps._

Manila, P. I., August 17th, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 6.

The Major-General Commanding desires to congratulate the troops of
this command upon their brilliant success in the capture, by assault,
of the defenses of Manila, on Saturday, August 13, a date hereafter
to be memorable in the history of American victories.

After a journey of seven thousand miles by sea, the soldiers of
the Philippine Expedition encountered most serious difficulties in
landing, due to protracted storms raising high surf, through which it
was necessary to pass the small boats which afforded the only means
of disembarking the army and its supplies. This great task, and the
privations and hardships of a campaign during the rainy season in
tropical lowlands, were accomplished and endured by all the troops, in
a spirit of soldierly fortitude, which has at all times during these
days of trial, given the Commanding General the most heartfelt pride
and confidence in his men. Nothing could be finer than the patient,
uncomplaining devotion to duty which all have shown.

Now it is his pleasure to announce that within three weeks after the
arrival in the Philippines of the greater portion of the forces,
the capital city of the Spanish possessions in the East, held by
Spanish veterans, has fallen into our hands, and he feels assured
that all officers and men of this command have reason to be proud of
the success of the expedition.

The Commanding General will hereafter take occasion to mention to
the Home Government, the names of officers, men and organizations,
to whom special credit is due.

By Command of Major-General Merritt:
_J. B. Babcock_,
Adjutant-General

Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.





_Headquarters of the Provost-Marshal-General and Military Commandant._

City of Manila, P. I., August 18th, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 1.

1. In obedience to the provisions of General Orders, No. 3, dated
Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps, Manila,
P. I., August l5th, 1898, the undersigned hereby assumes the office
and duties of Military Commandant of the walled city of Manila;
Provost-Marshal-General of the city of Manila, including the outlying
districts within the municipal jurisdiction, and also the functions
of Civil Governor.

2. Until further orders the preservation of law and order throughout
the city will be maintained according to the arrangements which
now obtain.

3. The location of these Headquarters will be at the office of the
Civil Governor, corner of San Juan de Letran and Anda Streets, and to
the above address will be referred all papers requiring action by the
undersigned. To insure prompt investigation, all claims, complaints,
and petitions should be presented in the English language.

4. Major Harry C. Hale, Assistant Adjutant-General U. S. Volunteers;
aide de camp to the Commanding General, having been assigned
for temporary duty at these Headquarters, is hereby appointed
Adjutant-General to the undersigned.

5. Colonel S. Overshine having been appointed by proper authority
Deputy Provost-Marshal of the districts of the city (including Ermita
and Malate) outside of the walled town and south of the Pasig river,
will organize and establish his office as soon as possible, and report
the location thereof to these Headquarters.

6. Colonel James S. Smith, 1st California Volunteer Infantry, having
been appointed by proper authority Deputy Provost-Marshal of the
districts of the city north of the Pasig river, will organize and
establish his office as soon as possible and report location thereof
to these Headquarters.

(Sgd.) _Arthur MacArthur_,
Brigadier-General U. S. Volunteers.
Military Commandant and Provost-Marshal-General.





The Official Gazette of Aug. 23 is a record of the organization of
the Military Government of Manila.

_Office Chief of Police._

_Manila_, P. I.

_Order_ No. 1.

By command of Brigadier-General MacArthur and Military Commandant,
the Thirteenth Regiment Minnesota Volunteer Infantry is designated
to perform the police duty of this city and the commanding officer
thereof is appointed Chief of Police, and Major Ed. S. Bean, Inspector
of Police.

Companies D, G, J and S are hereby detailed to at once take charge
of the police stations and perform the necessary duties pertaining
to the position of police and maintenance of order.

C. McC. _Reeve_,
Colonel 13th Regiment Minnesota Volunteer Infantry and Chief of Police.
Aug. 22d. 1898.



_Office Chief of Police._

_Manila_, P. I.

_Order_ No. 2.

1. The following is published for the information of the police of
this city:

2. Bulletin hoards will be kept in all stations and all orders issued
from this office will be posted thereon.

3. Armed native and Spanish soldiers must be disarmed before being
allowed to pass through gates, either way.

4. Arrest drunk and disorderly persons.

5. Spanish officers are allowed to wear their side arms.

6. Commanding officers will have their respective districts patroled
at least once each hour during the day and night.

7. Shoes must be blacked and all brasses bright and shining at
all times.

8. Be courteous in your contact with both natives and Spaniards and
see that all soldiers of other commands observe this rule.

9. Particular attention must be given by men at the gates to the
saluting of officers in passing through, and particularly so to the
general officers.

Ed. S. Bean,
Major 13th Regiment Minnesota Volunteer Infantry, and Inspector
of Police.
Aug. 22d, 1898.

Approved,
_Reeve_,
Colonel 13th Regiment Minnesota Volunteer Infantry and Chief of Police.





_Headquarters of the Provost-Marshal and Military Commandant._

Adjutant-General's Office, City of Manila, P. I., August 22nd, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 3.

Colonel McC. Reeve, 13th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry, is hereby
directed to relieve the Commandante of the Guardia Civil Veterana of
his functions, and will take possession of his office and will employ
such officers and soldiers of his regiment _as may_ be necessary for
the adequate police protection of this city.

By Command of Brigadier-General MacArthur,
Provost-Marshal-General and Military Commandant,
Harry C. Hale,
Assistant Adjutant-General.

_Order_ No. 3.

_Office Chief of Police. Manila_, P.I.

To Commanding Officer.

_Stations_.

Notify all livery stables and other places in your districts,
depositing large quantities of manure and other refuse in the streets,
that they must cart it away daily, themselves.

Failure to do so will result in the arrest of the offending party.

_Ed. S. Bean_, Major 13th Minnesota Volunteers, and Inspector of
Police.

August 22d, 1898.

Approved

_Reeve_, Colonel 13th Minnesota Volunteers, and Chief of Police.





_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps._

Manila, Philippine Islands, August 22nd, 1898.

_General Orders_, No. 8.

I. For the maintenance of law and order in those portions of the
Philippines occupied or controlled by the Army of the United States,
and to provide means to promptly punish infraction of the same,
Military Commissions and Provost Courts, composed and constituted in
accordance with the laws of war, will be appointed from time to time
as occasion may require.

II. The local courts, continued in force for certain purposes in
proclamation from these headquarters, dated August 14th, 1898, shall
not exercise jurisdiction over any crime or offense committed by any
person belonging to the Army of the United States, or any retainer
of the Army, or person serving with it, or any person furnishing
or transporting supplies for the Army; nor over any crime or offense
committed on either of the same by any inhabitant or temporary resident
of said territory. In such cases, except when Courts Martial have
jurisdiction, jurisdiction to try and punish is vested in Military
Commissions and the Provost Court, as hereinafter set forth.

III. The crimes and offenses triable by Military Commission are murder,
manslaughter, assault and battery with intent to kill, robbery, rape,
assault and battery with intent to rape, and such other crimes,
offenses, or violations of the laws of war as may be referred to
it for trial by the Commanding General. The punishment awarded by
Military Commission shall conform, as far as possible, to the laws
of the United States, or the custom of war. Its sentence is subject
to the approval of the Commanding General.

IV. The Provost Court has jurisdiction to try all other crimes and
offenses, referred to in Section II of this order; not exclusively
triable by Courts Martial or Military Commission, including violations
of orders or the laws of war, and such cases as may be referred to
it by the Commanding General. It shall have power to punish with
confinement, with or without hard labor, for not more than six (6)
months, or with fine not exceeding Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars
($250.00) or both. Its sentence does not require the approval of the
Commanding General, but may be mitigated or remitted by him.

V. The Judge of the Provost Court will be appointed by this
Commanding General. When in the opinion of the Provost Court its
power of punishment is inadequate, it shall certify the case to the
Commanding General for his consideration and action.

By Command of Major-General Merritt:
_J.B. Babcock_, Adjutant-General.
Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.





_Headquarters Department of the Pacific and Eighth Army Corps._

Manila, P.I., August 22nd, 1898.

_Special Orders_, No. 32.

1. Upon the recommendation of the Intendente General de Hacienda,
Major R.B.C. Bement, Engineer Officer, U.S. Volunteers, is hereby
appointed Administrator de Hacienda (Collector of Internal Revenue),
and will report without delay to Brigadier-General F.V. Greene,
U.S. Volunteers, Intendente General, Manila.

2. The following orders are confirmed: Special Orders No. 5,
Headquarters Second Division, Eighth Army Corps, August 6th, 1898,
placing First Lieutenant W.G. Haan, 3rd U. S. Artillery, in command
of a separate battery to be organized by details from batteries of
3rd U.S. Artillery, to man the Hotchkiss revolving cannon brought on
the transport Ohio.

3. Private H.J. Green, Company E, 2nd Oregon Volunteer Infantry,
detailed on special duty at these headquarters, will be paid
commutation of rations at the rate of seventy-five cents per diem, it
being entirely impracticable for him to cook or utilize rations. He
will also be paid commutation of quarters at the usual rate. Both
commutations to be paid while this man is employed on his present
duty and stationed in this city, and to date from and inclusive of
the 16th inst.

4. Corporal Jerome Patterson, Company H, 23rd U.S. Infantry, Corporal
James Maddy, Company F, 2nd Oregon Volunteer Infantry, Private Emmett
Manley, Company D, 23rd U.S. Infantry, Private Robert M. Nichols,
Company A, 1st Idaho Volunteer Infantry, Private P.H. Sullivan,
Company F, 23rd U.S. Infantry, are hereby detailed on special duty at
these Headquarters., and will report at once to the Adjutant-General
for duty.

5. Lieutenant-Colonel Charles L. Jewett, Judge Advocate,
U.S. Volunteers, is hereby appointed Judge of the Provost Court,
for the city of Manila. He will hold the sessions of his court at
the headquarters of the Provost-Marshal-General. The Quartermaster
Department will provide the necessary offices and office furniture.

The Provost Court will be attended by one or more Assistant
Provost-Marshal, to be detailed by the Provost-Marshal-General, who
will be charged with the duty of enforcing its orders and executing
its processes. The form of accusation in the Provost Court will be
substantially the same as that used in Courts Martial, and a record
of all cases tried, assimilated to that of the summary court, will
be kept.

6. Upon the recommendation of the Chief Commissary of the Department
of the Pacific, the issue to Spanish Prisoners by Major S.A. Cloman,
C.S., U.S. Vols., Depot Commissary, Cavite, P.I., of one (1) box of
soap (60 lbs. net) is hereby confirmed.

7. Sergeant Charles H. Burritt, Company C, 1st Wyoming Volunteer
Infantry, will report to Lieutenant Morgareidge, 1st Wyoming Volunteer
Infantry, on board Steamer Ohio, for temporary duty in unloading
commissary supplies.

Upon completion of this duty Sergeant Burritt will rejoin his Company.

8. Lieutenant Charles H. Sleeper, 1st Colorado Volunteer Infantry,
is hereby appointed Deputy Collector of Internal Revenue, and will
report to Major R.B.C. Bement, U.S. Vols., Administrator de Haciena
(Collector of Internal Revenue), for instructions.

9. Lieutenant-Colonel Charles L. Potter, U.S. Vols., Chief Engineer
Officer, Eighth Army Corps, will assume charge of the water supply
of this city, and will report to Brigadier-General Arthur MacArthur,
U.S. Vols., Military Commandant of Manila, for instructions.

By Command of Major-General Merritt:

_J.B. Babcock_,
Adjutant-General.
Official: _Bentley Mott_, Aid.

The responsibilities of General Merritt in his Manila, campaign were
graver than the country understands, and his success was regarded as so
much a matter of course that there has been forgetfulness to take into
account the many circumstances that gave anxiety preceding decisions
that seem easy now that they have been vindicated by events. The
departure from San Francisco of the Major-General commanding the
Philippine expedition was as well known to the Spanish as to the
American cabinet, and there is reason to think there were no important
particulars of the sailing of the third division of our Philippine
soldiers unknown to enemies. There were in gold coin, a million and
a half dollars in the strong box of Merritt's ship, the Newport. The
Spanish spies were not as well posted as an average hackman, if they
did not report the shipment of gold. It would have been a triumph
for Spain to have captured the commanding general and the gold, the
Astor Battery and the regular recruits with the headquarters ship,
The Spanish were known to have a gunboat or two lurking in the islands
within striking distance of our transports, unarmed vessels--except
a few deck pieces of field artillery--with more than a thousand men
on each. General Merritt wanted the escort of ships of war to make
all secure, and application to Admiral Dewey to send one of his war
boats, brought the statement that he could not spare a ship. Just at
that time he heard of the run by Camara with the Cadiz fleet Eastward
on the Mediterranean, and soon he had word that the Pelayo and her
companions were in the Suez canal. General Greene had not arrived
at Manila at that time, and the monitors Monterey and Monadnock were
getting along slowly. Dewey knew he would have to evacuate the scene
of his victory in case Camara was fully committed to go to Manila, and
wait for the Monitors, and when he got them he said he would return
and sink another Spanish fleet, but that was something it might be
critical to explain, and General Merritt, after leaving San Francisco,
did not get any news for twenty-six days. All that time he would have
had no justification for surprise if he had been attacked by a Spanish
gunboat, and if the Spaniards had pushed on their Rapide--the converted
German liner the Normania--she could have been handled to cut off the
American reinforcements on the way to the camps of the little American
army already landed. When General Merritt reached Cavite, he found the
situation difficult for the army and pushed things as the only way to
get out of trouble. He had two armies to deal with, one the Spaniards,
fiercely hostile, and the other, the Filipinos, factional and jealous,
each outnumbering by five thousand the American forces with which
the city was assailed and finally captured. There was no time lost,
and if there had been any delay, even two days, the peace protocol
would have found our army in the trenches, and the city belonging to
the Spaniards. It was the energy of General Merritt, heartily shared
by his division commanders, that prevented this embarrassment,
which would have been a moral and military misfortune. We have
given the General's orders to his troops and the Filipinos after
the fall of the city--also his original statement of policy, and
noted how cleverly they supported each other, and how smoothly the
work of organization and administration is carried on the world is
well aware. The orders deputing the officers to discharge certain
duties are plain business. There was no departure from the strict,
straight line of military government, and the threatened entanglements
firmly touched passed away. There was nothing omitted, or superfluous,
and the purpose and programme of policy was made clear by events. The
confusion overcome by the genius of common sense there was order, all
rights respected, the administration was a success from the beginning
and continued, and is to be continued--security is established, there
is public confidence in the air--the "faith and honor of the army"
are inviolable, Manila is ours, and there is peace. If war comes in
that quarter of the globe we shall stand on ground that earthquakes
cannot shake.



CHAPTER XII

The American Army in Manila.

Why the Boys Had a Spell of Home Sickness--Disadvantages of the
Tropics--Admiral Dewey and his Happy Men--How Our Soldiers Passed
the Time on the Ships--General Merritt's Headquarters--What Is Public
Property--The Manila Water Supply--England Our Friend--Major-General
Otis, General Merritt's Successor.

The American soldiers in the Philippines were most devoted and
cheerful, patient under hardship and pleasantly satisfied that they
were as far to the front as anybody and seeing all there was to see
during the siege of Manila. They were out in tropical rains, and the
ditches they waded were deep with mud unless filled with water. They
were harassed by the Spanish with the long-range Mausers at night and
insufficiently provided a part of the time with rations. At best they
had a very rough experience, but kept their health and wanted to go
into the city with a rush. They would rather have taken chances in
storming the place than sleep in the mud, as they did for twenty days.

When the defenders of Manila concluded that the honor of Spain would
be preserved by the shedding of only a little blood in a hopeless
struggle and fell back from very strong positions before the advance
of skirmish lines, and the American columns entered the city, keeping
two armies--the Spaniards and the insurgents--apart, and, taking
possession, restored order and were sheltered in houses, it soon
began to occur to the boys, who came out of the wet campaign looking
like veterans and feeling that they had gained much by experience,
that they were doing garrison duty and that it was objectionable. The
soldiers who arrived on the Peru, City of Pueblo and Pennsylvania
were shocked that they had missed the fight and disgusted with the
news of peace. They had made an immense journey to go actively into
war, and emerged from the ocean solitude to police a city in time of
peace. It was their notion that they lacked occupation; that their
adventure had proved an enterprise that could not become glorious.

The romance of war faded. Unquiet sensations were produced by the
stories that there was nothing to do but go home, and they would
soon be placed aboard the transports and homeward bound. Besides,
the climate was depressing. The days were hot and the nights were not
refreshing. The rations were better and there were dry places to sleep,
but there was no inspiring excitement, and it was not a life worth
living. War--"the front"--instead of offering incomparable varieties,
became tedious--it was a bore, in fact. How could a crowded city and
thronged streets be attractive in a military sense, or the scene of
patriotic sacrifice, when the most arduous duty was that of police? Was
it for this they had left homes in Oregon, Montana, Pennsylvania,
Wisconsin, Tennessee, Nebraska, Utah, California and Colorado?

There came an episode of homesickness. It was about time in a soldier's
life to contrast it with the farms and the villages, the shops,
mines and manufactories. They were kept busy on guard and in caring
for themselves, in activities as the masters of a strange community,
but the novelties of the tropics lost their flavor. What did a man
want with oranges when there were apples? What was a rice swamp
compared with a corn field? Think of the immeasurable superiority,
as a steady thing, of an Irish potato to a banana, or a peach to a
pineapple! What was a Chinese pony alongside a Kentucky horse, or a
water buffalo with the belly of a hippopotamus and horns crooked as
a saber and long as your arm to one who had seen old-fashioned cows,
and bulls whose bellowing was as the roaring of lions? The miserable
but mighty buffaloes were slower than oxen and, horns and all, tame
as sheep--the slaves of serfs!

As for the Chinese, if there were no other objection, they should
be condemned because too numerous--faithful, perhaps, in a way, but
appearing with too much frequency in the swarming streets. And the
women, with hair hanging down their backs, one shoulder only sticking
out of their dresses, the skin shining like a scoured copper kettle; a
skirt tight around the hips and divided to show a petticoat of another
tint, a jacket offering further contrasts in colors, slippers flapping
under naked heels, faces solemn as masks of death heads--oh, for the
rosy and jolly girls we left behind us in tears! How beautiful were
the dear golden-haired and blue-eyed blondes of other days! The boys
wanted at least tobacco and aerated waters to soothe themselves with,
and if there was not to be any more fighting, what was the matter
with going home?

They also serve, however, who only stand and wait--there are no
soldiers or sailors in the world who are in a position of greater
interest and usefulness than those of the American army and navy who
hold fast with arms the capital city of the Philippines. The army,
though much exposed, has not suffered severely from sickness. There
has been an intense and protracted strain upon the men of the ships,
but they have recovered from the amiable weakness for home, and they
are not merely well; they are more than plain healthy--they are hearty
and happy! There is the light of good times in their faces. One thing
in their favor is they have not been allowed to eat unwholesome food,
and the floors of the warboats and every piece of metal or wood that
is in sight is polished and glistening with cleanliness. The soldiers
will feel better when the postoffice is in working order and they
will do better by their organs of digestion when they are not deluged
with fizz--that is, pop, and beer made without malt, and the strange,
sweetish fruits that at first were irresistible temptations.

"Come with me and see the men of the Olympia," said Admiral Dewey,
"and see how happy they are, though they have been shut up here
four months." And the men did look jolly and bright, and proud of
the Admiral as he of them, and they were pleased when he noticed,
kindly, the hostile little monkey, who is the mascot, and the other
day bit the Captain.

The health of the boys was preserved at sea by systematic exercise. Not
a transport crossed the Pacific that was not converted into a military
school, and each floating schoolhouse had about 1,000 pupils. They
were put through gymnastics and calisthenics when, as a rule,
they were barefooted and wore no clothes but their undershirts and
trousers. There was even a scarcity of suspenders. The drill-masters
were in dead earnest, and their voices rang out until the manifestation
of vocal capacity excited admiration. The boys had to reach suddenly
for heaven with both hands and then bring their arms to their sides
with swinging energy. Then they had to strike out right and left to
the order "Right!" "Left!" until the sergeant was satisfied. Next each
foot had to be lifted and put down quickly at the word of command;
then it was needful that the legs should he widely separated in a jump
and closed up with vigor; then the spinal columns swayed forward and
back and all the joints and muscles had something to do. This was
no laughing matter to any one, though it was funny enough from the
ordinary standpoint of civil life. This medicine was taken day after
day, and seemed to vindicate itself.

It was esteemed a good thing for the boys to perspire from
exercise. There was no trouble, though, when south and west of
Honolulu, in having substantially Turkish baths in the bunks at
night, and there were queer scenes on deck--men by hundreds scantily
clothed and sleeping in attitudes that artists might have chosen to
advantage for life studies. It was necessary for those who walked
about, during the hours thus given to repose, where the enlisted
men took their rest with their undershirts and drawers around them,
to be careful not to tramp on the extended limbs. Once I feared I had
hit a soldier's nose with my heavy foot when stepping over him in a
low light, and was gratified that my heel had merely collided with
a big boy's thumb. He had gone to sleep with his head protected by
his hand. I paused long enough to note that the sheltering hand if
clinched would have been a mighty and smiting fist; and I was doubly
pleased that I had not tramped on his big nose.

Not infrequently, when we were steaming along the 20th parallel of
north latitude--that is to say, well in the torrid zone--and were
wafted by the trade winds that were after us at about our own speed,
heavy showers came up in the night and spoiled the luxurious content of
those who were spread on the decks. The boys got in good form through
the longest journey an army ever made--for the distance is greater from
the United States to the Philippines than from Spain--and every week
the skill of a soldier in acquiring the lessons of the climate and the
best methods of taking care of himself will become more useful, and the
tendency will be to settle down to the business of soldiering, make the
best of it and accept it as educational--an experience having in it the
elements of enduring enjoyments. "The days when I was in Manila, away
down in the south seas, but a little way from the island from which
came the wild man of Borneo," will be pleasant in remembrance, and
there will be perpetually an honorable distinction in identification
with an ambitious yet generous enterprise, one of the most remarkable
a nation can undertake--not excepting the Roman conquests all around
the Mediterranean, and that touched the northern sea, invading England.

In the later days of August there were in the prisons of Manila,
which answer to the penitentiary and jail in the American States,
2,200 prisoners, one of whom was a Spaniard! The prisons are divided
only by a high wall and contain many compartments to assist in
classification. There are considerable spaces devoted to airing the
prisoners, and one in which the privileged are permitted to amuse
themselves with games. The guard consisted, when I visited the place,
of sixty-three soldiers from Pennsylvania. There were many women
imprisoned. One who had been shut up for more than a year was taken
into custody because she had attempted rather informally to retake
possession of a house of which she had been proprietor and out of
which she had been fraudulently thrown. Her crime was a hysterical
assertion of her rights and her uninvited tenants were Spaniards.

One of the buildings contained the criminals alleged to be desperate,
and as they stood at the windows the chains on their right legs were
in sight. It was plainly seen in several cases that the links of the
chains used were about three inches long and that three or four turns
were taken around the right ankle. In a group of prisoners waiting
for supper to be handed them in pans in the open air a large number
wore chains. Many of the prisoners were incarcerated as insurgents,
having offended by refusing to espouse the Spanish cause or by some
other capital criminality in that line of misconduct! A commission was
investigating their cases and the Filipinos who had not satisfied the
Spanish requirements were represented by an able lawyer who was well
informed and disposed to do justice. Sixty-two of the inmates of the
penitentiary held for discontent with the Spanish system of government
were to be discharged as soon as the papers could be made out.

Many most interesting questions arise in connection with the
capitulation of the Spanish army. It was agreed that the Spaniards,
upon surrendering and giving up the public property, should be entitled
to the honors of war. It was expressly understood that the arms the
troops gave up were to be retained. In case the Americans abandoned
the islands or the Spaniards departed the rifles should be given them,
and usage would seem to determine that this return of weapons must
include the Mausers in the hands of the troops now prisoners of war
and the cartridges they would carry if they took the field.

Then arises a difficulty as to the precise meaning of the words
"public property." There were laid down by the Spaniards about 12,000
Mausers and Remingtons, and there were 10,000 in the arsenals--22,000
in all. It is admitted that 12,000 personally surrendered rifles go
back to the Spaniards, whether they or we go away from the islands--as
one or the other is sure to do--but the 10,000 stand of arms in the
arsenals come under the head of "public property," and so should be
retained permanently by the Americans. The number of ball cartridges
a soldier starting out to make a march carries is 100. There were
surrendered more than 500 rounds to the man. The public money was
public property, of course, and General Greene demanded the keys to
the vault containing it. The Spanish authorities objected, but yielded
after presenting a written protest. The money consisted of Spanish
and Mexican dollars, a lot of silver bars and change fused into one
mass, and some gold in the same state, also $247,000 in copper coin,
which was regarded, under the old dispensation, good stuff to pay
poor wages to poor men and women.

There are some fine points about customs. The American flag floats
over the city, and the importers and exporters want to know what the
charges are and how much the private concessions must be. Some of
these people ran around for several days with the object of placing
a few hundred Mexican dollars in the hands of officials, where they
would do the most good, and could not find anybody ready to confer
special favors for hard cash. These pushing business men had been
accustomed to meet calls for perquisites, and did not feel safe for a
moment without complying with that kind of formality. They turned away
embarrassed and disappointed, and were surprised to learn that they
were on a ground floor that was wide enough to accommodate everybody.

It should be mentioned in this connection, also, a Mexican dollar
passes in Manila for 50 cents American. The price of Mexican dollars
in the banks of San Francisco and Honolulu is 46 and 47 cents. The way
it works is illustrated in paying in a restaurant for a lunch--say
for two. If the account is $2 you put down a $5 United States gold
piece and receive in change eight Mexican dollars. If you buy cigars
at $40 per 1,000 a $20 American gold piece pays the $40 bill. There is
now pretty free coinage of Mexican dollars and they answer admirably
as 50-cent coins. That is one of the ways in which free coinage of
silver removes prejudices against the white metal; no one thinks of
objecting to a Mexican dollar as a half-dollar, and our boys, paid
in American gold, have a feeling that their wages are raised because
all over the city one of their dollars counts two in the settlement
of debts. These useful American dollars are admitted free of duty.

The headquarters of the American administration in Manila are in the
city hall, situated in the walled city, with a park in front that
plainly has been neglected for some time. It also fronts upon the same
open square as the cathedral, while beyond are the Jesuit College and
the Archbishop's palace. Just around the corner is a colossal church,
and a triangular open space that has a few neglected trees and ought
to be beautiful but is not. A street railroad passes between the
church and the triangle, and the mule power is sufficient to carry at
a reasonable rate a dozen Spanish officers and as many Chinamen. The
fare is 1 cent American--that is, 2 cents Philippine--and the other
side of the river you are entitled to a transfer, but the road is short
and drivers cheap. There is a system of return coupons that I do not
perfectly understand. The truth about the street railway system is
that there is very little of it in proportion to the size of the city,
but the average ride costs about 1 cent. If the Americans stay there
is an opening for a trolley on a long line.

There is no matter of business that does not depend upon the question:
Will the Americans stay? If they do all is well; if they do not all
is ill, and enterprise not to be talked of.

The most important bridge across the Pasig is the bridge of Spain. The
street railway crosses it. The carriages and the coolies, too, must
keep to the left. It is the thoroughfare between the new and old
cities, and at all hours of the day is thronged. It is a place favored
by the native gig drivers to whip heavily laden coolies out of the
way. A big Chinaman with powerful limbs, carrying a great burden,
hastens to give the road to a puny creature driving a puny pony,
lashing it with a big whip, and scrambles furiously away from a
two-wheeler whirling along a man able to pay a 10-cent fare.

In other days when one passed this bridge he faced the botanical
gardens, which had a world-wide reputation, an attraction being
a wonderful display of orchids. There were also beautiful trees;
now there are only stumps, disfigurements and desolation--some of
the horrors of war. The gardens were laid waste by the Spaniards as
a military precaution. As they seem to have known that they could
not or would not put up a big fight for the city, what was the use
of the destructiveness displayed in the gardens, parks and along the
boulevards? The fashion of taking a garden and making a desert of it
and calling it one of the military necessities of war is, however,
not peculiar to the chieftains of Spain.

Crossing the bridge of Spain to the walled city and turning to the
right there are well-paved streets bordered with strips of park
beside the river, that is rushing the same way if you are going to
headquarters; and the object that tells where to turn off to find
the old gateway through the wall, with a drawbridge over the grassy
moat, is a Monument to Alphonse, whose memory it is the habit of
these people to celebrate. Approaching the city hall (headquarters)
there is a white-walled hospital to note; then comes a heavy mass of
buildings on a narrow street, and the small square already styled
in this article a park, and we arrive at the grand entrance of the
official edifice. The room devoted to ceremony is so spacious that one
must consent that magnitude is akin to grandeur. There is the usual
double stairway and a few stone steps to overcome. On the right and
left under the second lift of stairs were corded the Spanish Mausers
and Remingtons and many boxes of cartridges. I have several times
noticed soldiers tramping on loose cartridges as though they had no
objection at all to an explosion. You can tell the Mauser ammunition,
because the cartridges are in clips of five, and the little bullets
famous for their long flight are covered with nickel. The Remington
bullets are bigger and coated with brass. Something has been said to
the effect that the Remington balls used by the Spaniards are poisonous
and that it is uncivilized to manufacture them. The object of the
Mauser and Remington system in covering the bullets, the one with
nickel and the other with brass, is not to poison, but to prevent the
lead from fouling the rifles. The point is almost reached in modern
guns of 2,000 and 3,000 yards range where the friction of the gun
barrel and the speed of the missile at the muzzle are sufficient to
fuse unprotected lead, and at any rate so much of the soft material
would soon he left in the grooves as to impair accuracy and endanger
the structure of the arm.

Right ahead when the first stairs are cleared is a splendid hall,
with a pair of gilded lions on a dais, and some of the boys had
adorned these beasts with crowns of theatrical splendor. The arms
of Spain are conspicuous, and in superb medallions illustrious
warriors, statesmen, authors, artists and navigators, look down
from the walls upon desks now occupied by American officers. Above
this floor the stairs are blocks of hardwood, the full width of the
stairway and the height of the step, and this earthquake precaution
does not detract from the dignity of the building, for the woodwork is
massive and handsome. A marvelous effect might be produced in some of
the marble palaces of private citizens in our American cities by the
construction of stairways with the iron-hard and marble-brilliant wood
that is abundant in Puerto Rico, Cuba and Luzon. The hall in which
the city council met, now the place of the provost-marshal's court,
is furnished in a style that puts to shame the frugality displayed
in the council chambers of our expensively governed American cities,
where men of power pose as municipal economists.

In the elevated chair of the President, faced by the array of chairs
of the Spanish councilmen, or aldermen, sits the provost-marshal
judge, and before him come the soldiers who have forgotten themselves
and the culprits arrested by the patrol. On the wall above him is a
full-length likeness of the Queen Regent--a beautiful, womanly figure,
with a tender and anxious mother's solicitous face. She looks down with
sad benignity upon the American military government. There is also
a portrait of the boy king, who becomes slender as he gains height,
and rather sickly than strong. It may be that too much care is taken
of him.

In the corner room at the end of the corridor Major-General Otis
received at his desk the news that Generals Merritt and Greene
were ordered home, and that he was the major-general commanding and
the chief of the civil, as well as the military department of the
government. He had already found much to do and tackled the greater
task with imperturbable spirit and a habit of hard work with, his
friends say, no fault but a habit that is almost impracticable of
seeing for himself almost everything he is himself held responsible
for. If he has a weakness of that sort he has a rare opportunity to
indulge it to the full extent of his personal resources. He certainly
dispatches business rapidly, decides the controverted points quickly
and has a clear eye for the field before him. His record is a good
one. When the war of the States came on he was a New York lawyer--his
home is at Rochester. Near the close of the war he was wounded on the
Weldon road, along which Grant was extending his left wing to envelop
Petersburg. He was struck by a musket ball almost an inch from the
end of the nose, and the course of it was through the bones of the
face under the right eye, passing out under the right ear. He was
"shot through the head," and suffered intensely for a long time,
but maintained his physical vitality and mental energy. His face
is but slightly marked by this dreadful wound. He has been a hard
student all his life, and is an accomplished soldier, as well as
an experienced lawyer. His judicial services in court-martials have
been highly estimated. Altogether he is well equipped for executing
the various duties of his position. He will "hold the fort in good
shape." In an adjacent room, Assistant Adjutant-General Strong, son
of the ex-mayor of New York, a young man of much experience in the
national guard and a sharp shooter, sticks to business with zeal and
knowledge, and in a very few days established a reputation as a helper.

So much has been said in disparagement of the "sons of somebodies"
that it is a pleasure to put in evidence the cleverness and intelligent
industry of Captain Strong, late of the 69th New York, and of Captain
Coudert, of New York.

General Merritt took possession of the palace of the governor-general,
overlooking the river, a commodious establishment, with a pretentious
gate on the street, a front yard full of shrubbery and rustling with
trees, a drive for carriages and doors for their occupants at the side
and a porte cochere, as the general said with a twinkle of his eye, for
the steam launch which was a perquisite of the Governor. The commanding
general of the Philippine expedition enjoyed the life on the river,
along which boats were constantly passing, carrying country supplies
to the city and returning. The capacity of canoes to convey fruit
and vegetables and all that the market called for was an unexpected
disclosure. There were unfailing resources up the river or a multitude
of indications were inaccurate. The General's palace is more spacious
than convenient; the dining room designed for stately banquets, but
the furniture of the table was not after the manner of feasts, though
the best the country afforded, and the supply of meat improved daily,
while the fruit told of the kindly opulence of the tropics.

There was a work of art in the palatial headquarters that the
commanding general highly appreciated--a splendid but somber painting
of the queen regent in her widow's weeds, holding the boy king as a
baby on her right shoulder, her back turned to the spectator, gloomy
drapery flowing upon the carpet, her profile and pale brow and dark
and lustrous hair shown, her gaze upon the child and his young eyes
fixed upon the spectator. This picture has attracted more attention
than any other in Manila, and the city is rich in likenesses of the
queen mother and the royal boy, who, without fault have upon them
the heavy sorrows of Spain in an era of misfortune and humiliation;
and it will take some time for the Spanish people, highly or lowly
placed, to realize that the loss of colonies, as they have held them,
is a blessing to the nation and offers the only chance of recuperation
and betterment in Spain's reputation and relations with the world.

The governor-general's palace, with General Merritt for General, was
a workshop, and the highly decorated apartments, lofty and elaborate,
were put to uses that had an appearance of being incongruous. The
cot of the soldier, shrouded in a mosquito bar, stood in the midst of
sumptuous furniture, before towering mirrors in showy frames, and from
niches looked down marble statues that would have been more at home
in the festal scenes of pompous life in the sleepy cities of dreamy
lands. There was no more striking combination than a typewriting
machine mounted on a magnificent table, so thick and resplendent
with gold that it seemed one mass of the precious metal--not gilt,
but solid bullion--and the marble top had the iridescent glow of a sea
shell. This was in the residence of the General, his dining and smoking
rooms and bedrooms for himself and staff, the actual headquarters
being next door in the residence of the secretary-general. Here was
a brilliant exhibition of mirrors, upon some of which were paintings
of dainty design and delicate execution, queerly effective. The
tall glasses stood as if upon mantles. There were other glasses that
duplicated their splendors; through the open doors down the street,
which was the one for the contemplation of the gorgeous--and down the
street means into the modern end of the city--was the residence of the
Spanish Admiral of the annihilated fleet, Montijo. It had been the
property of and was the creation of a German, who got rich and got
away in good time with $1,000,000 or more, selling his house to one
of the rich Chinese, who had the fortune, good, bad or indifferent,
to become the landlord of the Admiral whose ships disappeared in a
vast volume of white vapor on the May morning when the Americans came
and introduced themselves.

General Greene's headquarters were in the house the German merchant
built, the Chinese millionaire bought, and the Admiral, without a
fleet since the 1st of May, rented. The furnishing was rich; there were
frescoes that were aglow with the tropic birds and window curtains that
were dreams. The vast mansions of the ex-officials were not, however,
such as would have been sought as accommodations for the management of
the military and other affairs, and there was much lacking to comfort;
but as the hotels after the siege were not tolerable, the officers
had to discover houses in which they could develop resources, and
the public property was that of those who conquered to the extent to
which it had belonged to those displaced.

The Americans got out of the chaotic hotels soon as possible, for there
were some things in them simply not endurable. They rent houses and
employ servants and set up housekeeping. The newspaper correspondents
have been driven to this, and they are comparatively happy. They have
found ponies almost a necessary of life, and food that is fair is
attainable, while the flowing hydrants remove a good deal of privation
and apprehension. The water is from an uncontaminated stream, and
though slightly soiled after heavy rainfalls, it is not poisonous,
and that is what many American and European cities cannot truthfully
say of their water supplies. The demand for houses by the Americans
has raised the views of the proprietors. The street on which the
official Spaniards meant to flourish, as Weyler, Blanco and others
had done before them, and had not time to reap a harvest of plunder
before the days of doom came, would be called by the citizens of
Cleveland, O., the Euclid avenue of the town. It runs out to the old
fort where the Spaniards made their stand "for the honor of the arms
of Spain." The English and German and Chinese successful men reside
in this quarter. The majority of those who have provided themselves
with houses by the river and fronting on the street most approved,
looking out through groves and gardens, are Chinese half-castes,
claiming Chinese fathers and Philippine mothers. These are the most
rapacious and successful accumulators, and they would all be glad
to see the Americans stay, now that they are there, and have shown
themselves so competent to appreciate desirable opportunities and
understand the ways and means, the acquirements and the dispensations
of prosperity as our troops entered the city by the principal residence
street, it was noticed that guards were left at all the houses that
displayed the British flag--a reward for English courtesy, and the
feeling of the troops that the British are our friends.



CHAPTER XIII

The White Uniforms of Our Heroes in the Tropics.

The Mother Hubbard Street Fashion in Honolulu, and That of Riding
Astride--Spoiling Summer Clothes in Manila Mud--The White Raiment
of High Officers--Drawing the Line on Nightshirts--Ashamed of Big
Toes--Dewey and Merritt as Figures of Show--The Boys in White.

Recent experiences of the United States excite attention to the
fashions of the tropics. In Florida our soldiers who invaded Cuba were
in a degree and sense acclimated for the temperature of the island
that has been for so long "so near, and yet so far," so wet and yet so
hot. But the troops of the Philippine expedition were not prepared by
the chilly blasts from the mountains of California for the exceedingly
soft airs of Hawaii, though Honolulu was a pleasant introductory school
to Manila. Our new possession two thousand miles from the continent,
has been preparing for the destiny realized for two generations, and
the American ladies who dwell in the islands of perpetual summer in
the Pacific, have not submitted wholly to the dominion of the climate
and composed themselves to languish in loose and gauzy garments when
on the streets. But the Honolulu women, in general, who largely are
in the possession of luxuriant proportions, are enveloped in the
blandishments of Mother Hubbards, and do not even tie strings about
themselves to show where they would have spectators to infer their
waists ought to be. They go about flowing and fluttering in freedom,
and have all the advantages due the total abandonment of corsets,
and suffer none of the horrors of tight lacing recorded in medical
publications. The Mother Hubbard gown is not without its attractions,
but we can hardly say they are too obvious, and slender figures are
lost in voluminous folds that are billowy in the various ways and
means of embracing the evolutions of beauty. And the native singers
seem fully justified in throwing the full force of their lungs and
the rapture of their souls into the favorite chorus, "The Honolulu
Girls Are Good Enough for Me." The refrains of the Hawaiian songs
are full of a flavor of pathos, and there is the cry of sorrows,
that seem to be in the very air, but belong to other ages. The
Honolulu females of all races have flung away side saddles with
their corsets, and bestride horses and mules with the confidence
in the rectitude of their intentions that so besets and befits the
riders of bicycles. People would stare with disapproval in Honolulu
to see a woman riding with both legs on the same side of a horse,
and those wandering abroad in the voluminous folds of two spacious
garments disapprove the unusual and unseemly spectacle.

It is as hot in some parts of Texas, Arizona and California as in
any of the islands of the seas of the South, but we had not been
educated in the art of clothing armies for service in the torrid
zone, until the Philippine expedition was undertaken, and we were
making ready for challenging the Spaniards in their Cuban fastnesses,
when it speedily was in evidence that we wanted something more than
blue cloth and blankets. The Spanish white and blue stuff and straw
hats were to our eyes unsightly and distasteful, and we began with a
variety of goods. Our army hats were found good, but we tried nearly
all things before holding onto anything as sufficient for trousers
and coats. The officers on long journeys speedily resolved, if we
may judge from the results, that the suit most natty and nice for
wear within twenty degrees of the Equator was the perfect white, and
so the snowy figures below shoulder straps became familiar. This did
not, of course, indicate acute stages of active service. Never were
campaigns more destructive of good looks in clothing, than those in
assailing Santiago and Manila, in which the thin stuffs were tested in
torrential rain and ditches full of mud. The compensation was that the
volunteers fresh from the camps of instruction, put on in a few days
the appearance of veteran campaigners. In Manila there was an edifying
contrast between the Spaniards who had surrendered and the Americans
who did not pause when the Mausers were fired into their ranks, not
with the faintest hope of successful resistance, but for the "honor
of Spain." The Spanish soldiers had been well sheltered and came out
in fairly clean clothes, while the soldiers of our nation closed up
dingy ranks, suited for hunting in swamps and thickets, their coats,
hats and trousers the color of blasted grass and decayed leaves. The
passage of the line from the new to the old clothes was sudden, and
the gallant boys in blue were not in the least disconsolate over the
discoloration of their uniforms, having reached the stage where it
was a luxury to sleep on a floor or pavement, without wasting time
to find a soft or quiet spot.

The sombre taste of the Spanish ladies in dress, so famous and
effective that the black mantillas and skirts, and the fans that do
such execution in the hands of the dark-eyed coquettes, as to have
sway where empires have been lost and won--control Cuba, but does
not dominate the Philippines. The Pope of the period, it will be
remembered, divided the new worlds discovered by the navigators of
Spain and Portugal, awarding to the best of his knowledge, by a line
drawn south from the southern shore of the Caribbean Sea. Portugal
holding that to the eastward and Spain that to the westward. Hence
the separation of South America between Brazil and the rest of the
central and south American states, to await the inevitable end of the
evolutions that were the revolutions of independence. Magellines,
a Portuguese, who, being slighted in his own country, went over to
the Spaniards, and pointed out that by sailing west the east would
be attained, and so found the straits that bear his name, and the
Ladrones and Philippines, annihilating the Papal boundary line by
taking and breaking it from the rear.

The conquest of the Philippines by the Spaniards has not been complete
as a military achievement or the enforcement of the adoption of customs
and costumes according to the habits and taste of the conquerors,
who have nibbled at the edges of the vast archipelago, greater in its
length and breadth and its natural riches than the West Indies. The
Spanish ladies in the Philippines are dressed as in the ancient cities
of their own renowned peninsula. The Filipinos are of the varied
styles that adorn Africans and the Asiatics. They are gay in colors
and curious in the adjustment of stuffs, from the flimsy jackets to
the fantastic skirts. The first essential in the dress of a Filipino
is a jacket cut low, the decolette feature being obscured to some
extent by pulling out one shoulder and covering the other, taking
the chances of the lines that mark the concealment and disclosure
of breast and back. There is no expression of immodesty. The woman
of the Philippines is sad as she is swarthy, and her melancholy eyes
are almost always introspective, or glancing far away, and revising
the disappointed dreams of long ago. Profounder grief than is read
in the faces of bronze and copper no mourning artist has wrought nor
gloomy poet written. Below the jacket, the everlasting blazer, is a
liberal width of cloth tightly drawn about the loins, stomach and hips,
making no mistake in revelations of the original outline drawings, or
the flexibilities which the activities display. There are two skirts,
an outer one that opens in front, showing the tunic, which is of a
color likely to be gaudy and showing strangely with the outer one. The
feet are exposed, and if not bare, clothed only in clumsy slippers
with toe pieces, and neither heels nor uppers. Women carry burdens on
their heads, and walk erect and posed as if for snap photographs. The
young girls are fond of long hair, black as cannel coal, and streaming
in a startling cataract to the hips. It seems that the crop of hair
is unusually large, and it shines with vitality, as the breeze lifts
it in the sunshine. The Philippine boys are still more lightly clad
than the girls, who have an eye to queer combinations of colors, and
the revelation of the lines that distinguish the female form without
flagrant disclosure. There is much Philippine dressing that may under
all the surroundings be called modest, and the prevalent expression
of the Filipino is that of fixed but bewildered grief. The males are
rather careless, and display unstinted the drawings of legs, that are
copper-colored and more uniform in tint than symmetry. Two or three
rags do a surprisingly extensive service, and all the breezes cause
the fluttering of fantastic but scanty raiment. It is a comfort to
return to a country where people wear clothing not as a flimsy and
inadequate disguise. What will be the influence of our armies bent to
the tropics, upon the dress of Americans? It is a question that may
be important. The "wheel" has introduced knickerbockers and promises
to result in knee breeches. On the transports that have traversed the
Pacific the soldiers were fond of taking exercise in undershirts and
drawers only and they swarmed from their bunks at night, to sleep on
deck, sometimes condescending to spread blankets to take the edge
off the cruelty of the hard wood, but reluctant to be encumbered
with undershirts. Their favorite night dress was drawers only,
and they acted upon the false theory that one cannot take cold at
sea. The authority of officers was often necessary to impress the
average soldier that he ought to have an undershirt between his skin
and the sky. The boys were during their long voyage very sparing
in the use of shoes and stockings, and it has perhaps never before
occurred in American experiences that there was such an opportunity
to study the infinite variety of the big toe, and, indeed, of all the
toes. In active army service the care of the feet is essential. The
revelations on shipboard disclose the evils of ill-fitting shoes
to be most distrusting. One of the claims of West Point for high
consideration is in teaching the beauty of white trousers, and our
tropical army experiences will extend the fashion. When General Merritt
and Admiral Dewey parted on the deck of the China in Manila harbor,
both were clad in spotless white, their caps, coats and trousers making
a showy combination. There was also a group of sea captains who had
gathered to give the Captain of the China a good send-off, and they
with the staff officers, were all in radiant white. There was not a
boy in blue among them. The illustrious General and Admiral reminded
me of Gabriel Ravel, when in his glory as The White Knight. It would
be hard to say which wore the nattier cap, but that of the Admiral
was of the more jaunty cut, while the General--gold cord for a band
and gold buttons, especially became his blue eyes. If the officers of
the army, navy and transports could be photographed as they stood in
dazzling array, as if hewn from marble, the fashion plate resulting
would be incomparably attractive, and in the summers to come we shall
find among the influences of our tropical adventure and possessions
a heightening of the colors worn by American ladies, and a whitening
of the suits of gentlemen, involving the necessity of "calling in"
white coats, as well as straw hats on stated days in early September.



CHAPTER XIV

A Martyr to the Liberty of Speech.

Dr. Jose Rizal, the Most Distinguished Literary Man of the Philippines,
Writer of History, Poetry, Political Pamphlets, and Novels, Shot on the
Luneta of Manila--A Likeness of the Martyr--The Scene of His Execution,
from a Photograph--His Wife Married the Day Before His Death--Poem
Giving His Farewell Thoughts, Written in His Last Hours--The Works
That Cost Him His Life--The Vision of Friar Rodriguez.

There is history, romance and tragedy in the martyrdom of Dr. Rizal,
whose execution by shooting on the Luneta two years ago is a notable
incident of the cruelties of Spanish rule. This was on account of the
scholarship, the influence, the literary accomplishments, and the
personal distinction of the man. Dr. Rizal was easily the foremost
writer his race and country has produced. He was a poet, novelist,
political essayist, and historian, and his execution was for the
crime of loving his country, opposing the Spaniards, criticising and
lampooning the priests. He is called the Tagalo Martyr, for he was of
the tribe of Malay origin, the most numerous and rebellious in the
Philippine Islands. His fate was shocking. He was an intelligent,
learned man, an enthusiastic patriot, who had been educated in
Spain and France. For writing a book against Spanish oppression he
was exiled to the Island of Dapitan. There he met a young woman of
Irish parentage, with whom he fell in love. They were engaged to be
married, when, on some pretext, the Doctor was brought back to Manila,
sent to Madrid to be tried, and then sent back to Manila. The unhappy
girl to whom he was betrothed tells the rest of the story:

"Everyone knew that Dr. Rizal was innocent. All that could be brought
against him was the publication of his book, and the Spanish officials
who tried him had never even read it. Nevertheless, he was condemned to
death. I then asked permission to be married to him, and they granted
my request, thinking to add to the horror of his martyrdom. The
marriage was celebrated by a friar the same day on which he was
sentenced. I passed the whole night on my knees in prayer before
the prison door, which shut my husband from me. When morning dawned,
the Doctor came out, surrounded by soldiers, his hands bound behind
his back. They took him to the Luneta, the fashionable promenade of
the city, where all military executions take place. The lieutenant in
command of the firing party asked my husband where he would prefer
to be shot. He replied 'Through the heart.' 'Impossible,' said the
lieutenant. 'Such a favor is granted only to men of rank. You will be
shot in the back.' A moment after my husband was dead. The soldiers
shouted, 'Hurrah for Spain,' and I, 'Hurrah for the Philippines and
death to Spain.' I asked for the body. It was refused me. Then I swore
to avenge his death. I secured a revolver and dagger and joined the
rebels. They gave me a Mauser rifle, and the Philippines will be free."

In his poem, filled with his last thoughts--his exalted dreams that
had faded, his patriotic sentiments that were bloody dust and ashes,
his love for the woman he was allowed to marry a few hours before
he was shot, his woeful love for his troop of devoted friends, who
would have died for him and with him if the sacrifice then and there
had not been hopeless--it will be discovered that he was a true poet,
and we give one of his stories that was hostile to the orders of the
Church, and a satire on Spanish rule, showing why he was a martyr.

The following is a prose translation from the Spanish of the poem
Dr. Rizal wrote the night before he was executed:





_My Last Thoughts._

Farewell! my adored country; region beloved of the sun; pearl of the
Orient sea; our lost Eden! I cheerfully give for thee my saddened life,
and had it been brighter, happier and more rosy, I would as willingly
give it for thy sake.

Unhesitatingly and without regret others give thee their lives in
frenzied fight on the battlefield. But what matter the surroundings! Be
they cypress, laurel or lilies, scaffold or open country, combat
or cruel martyrdom, it is all the same, when for country and home's
redress.

I die while watching the flushing skies announce through dark mantle
the advent of a day. Should it need purple to tint its dawn, here
is my blood; I gladly will shed it if only it be gilded by a ray of
new-born light.

My dreams while only a boy, and when of vigor full, a youth, were
always to see thee, jewel of the Orient sea! thy black eyes dry,
thy frownless face uplifted, and spotless thine honor.

Dream of my life! My fervent anxiety! Shouts the soul that soon is
to depart, Hail! It is glorious to fall to give thee flight; to die
to give thee life; to die under thy Skies, and in thy maternal bosom
eternally to sleep.

Shouldst thou find some day over my grave, a lonesome, humble flower,
blossoming through the dense foliage, take it to your lips and kiss
my soul. Let me feel upon my forehead under the cold tomb your warm
and tender breath.

Let the moon with her soft and silent light watch over me; let dawn
spread its fulgent splendor; let the wind moan with solemn murmur. And
should a bird descend and repose upon my cross, let it there proclaim
a canticle of peace.

Let the burning sun evaporate the dew, spreading through space the
notes of my songs. Let a friendly being mourn my early end, praying
on calm evenings, when thou also, oh, dear country! should pray to
God for me.

Pray for all those who died unhonored; for those who suffered unequaled
torments; for our poor mothers who silently grieve; for orphans and
for widows; for prisoners in torture; and pray for thyself that thou
mayest attain thy final redemption.

And when the dark shades of night enwrap the cemetery, and the dead
are left alone to watch, do not disturb their rest, do not disturb
their mystery. Shouldst thou hear chords of a zither, it is I,
beloved country! who sings to thee.

And when my grave, by all forgotten, is marked by neither cross
nor stone, let the ploughman scatter its mould; and my ashes before
returning to nothing will become the dust of your soil.

Then, I will not mind if thou castest me into oblivion. Thy atmosphere,
thy space, thy valleys I will cross. A vibrating, limpid note I
will be in your ear; aroma, color, rumor, song, a sigh, constantly
repeating the essence of my faith.

My idolized country! grief of my griefs! My adored Philippines! Hear my
last farewell. I leave them all with thee; my fathers and my loves. I
go where there are no slaves, no oppressors, no executioners; where
faith is not death; where He who reigns is God.

Farewell! fathers and brothers, parts of my soul! Friends of my
infancy in the lost home. Give thanks that I should rest from the
fatiguing day. Farewell, sweet stranger, my friend, my joy. Farewell,
beloved beings. To die is to rest.

_Jose Rizal._





_The Vision of Friar Rodriguez._

Comfortably seated in an arm chair one night, satisfied with himself
as well as with his supper, Friar Jose Rodriguez dreamed of the
many pennies that the sale of his little books was drawing from the
pockets of the Filipinos, when suddenly, and as if by enchantment,
the yellow light of the lamp gave a brilliant, white flash, the air
was filled with soft perfume, and without his being able to explain
how or wherefrom, a man appeared.

This was an old man of medium height, dark complected and thin,
whose white beard was a contrast to his glittering vivacious eyes,
which gave his face extreme animation. Over his shoulder he wore a
long cape; a mitre on his head and a crosier in his hand gave him
the aspect of a Bishop.

At sight of him, Friar Rodriguez yawning, murmured:

"Dreams of my fertile imagin--!"

The vision did not permit him to finish the exclamation, but gave
him a whack between the shoulders.

"Eh! This is no joke!" exclaimed Friar Rodriguez, stroking with one
hand the afflicted part while with the other he rubbed his eyes.

"I see! It is no dream! But partner!"

Incensed at such familiarity, the strange personage began poking
Friar Rodriguez severely with his crosier on the stomach. The latter,
satisfied by this time that the thrashing was in earnest, exclaimed:

"Here! Here! Friar Pedro (Peter)--Is that the way you cancel
indulgencies? That was not the agreement."

The strange Bishop, aroused to a high pitch of anger, stopped his
poking and started to knock Friar Rodriguez on the head, believing
it to be a more sensitive part. Unfortunately, Friar Rodriguez's
head was too hard for anything, and the crosier fell, broken in two
pieces. At last! said the poor friar, who, pale and deadly frightened,
had fallen on his knees and was trying to creep away on all fours.

At sight of his pitiful condition, the stranger seeded satisfied,
and, placing on a table the broken crosier, said with contempt:

"Homo sine homine, membra sine spiritu! Et iste appellatur filius
meus!"

At the sound of that potent voice and language, unknown to him, Friar
Rodriguez appeared confounded. The stranger could not be Friar Pedro
(Peter) nor any brother in disguise! Impossible!

"Et tamen (the stranger continued), tanta est vanita vestra, ut ante
me Patrem vestrum--sed video, loguor et non audis!"

And shaking in disgust his head, the vision continued speaking in
Castillian, but with a foreign accent.

"And are you they who call themselves my sons? Has your haughtiness
reached such a degree that you not only pretend to be feared and
worshiped by governors and governed, but neither recognize nor respect
me, whose name you dishonor, and whose condignity you abuse? How do
I find you? Insolent with the unfortunate and cowardly towards those
who do not fear you! Surge et audi!"

His voice was so imperative and his command so expressive, that Friar
Rodriguez, although shaking with tremor, made every effort to stand
against a corner of the room.

Moved by this proof of obedience, so rarely found amongst those who
make a vow of humility, the stranger, full of contempt, repressed
a sigh and proceeded in a more familiar manner, but without losing
dignity.

"For you and for your nonsense I have been obliged to leave that
region, and come here! And what trouble I had to distinguish and
find you amongst the others! With but little difference, you are
all alike. 'Empty heads and replete stomachs!' _Up There_, they
did not cease to tease me about you all and most especially on your
account. It was useless to appear unconcerned. It was not only Lopez
de Recalde (Ignatius of Loyole) who with his eternal smile and humble
looks made fun of me; nor Domingo (Dominic) with his aristocratic
pretensions and little stars of false jewelry on his forehead, who
laughed at me; but even the great simpleton of Francisco (Francis),
do you understand? tried to poke fun at me; at me, who has thought,
argued and written more than all of them together!

"Your order is great and powerful," said Ignatius, bending his
head. "It resembles one of the Egyptian pyramids; great at the base
(you are the base), but the higher it goes the smaller it becomes--what
a difference between the base and the apex!" he murmured, while walking
away. "Doctor," said Dominic, "why did you not do with your science
as I did with the nobility I left as inheritance to my sons? We would
all be better off!"

"Mon ami, came and said Francis. If God should order me again to
earth, to preach as before amongst brutes and animals, I would preach
in your convents." And after saying this he roared in such a manner
that although small and thin, it seemed as though he would burst.

"In vain I answered them that their sons were no better than you are,
and that were we to look for skeletons in the closets, we had better
wall every crevice. But of no use. How could I argue against three,
moreover, having you to defend! Three, did I say? Why! Even Peter,
the old fisherman, attracted by the laughter, left his porter's lodge
and came to upbraid me for the trick you have played on his priests,
taking away from them all their parishes, regardless of the fact that
they had been in these islands long before you, and that they were
the first to baptise in Cebu and in Luzon.

"Of course," he said, "as my sons are lazy and in dissension among
themselves, and yours lie and shout louder, they make themselves
believed by the ignorant. But I shall be glad when my descendants
are extinct."

"And so shall I! And I! I wish it was all over with mine!" shouted
at once several voices.

"But old Peter's revenge did not stop at that. Yesterday he played
a hard joke on me. He not only confiscated a package that a Tagalo
[5] brought with him, but instead of directing him to the imbecile's
department, he took him where we all were. The poor Tagalo carried with
him a large collection of little books written by you, which were given
him by his Priest, who told him they represented so much indulgency
for his next life. As soon as the Indian had arrived everyone _Up
There_ knew he had brought books written by an Augustinian monk,
and they were snatched away. I tried to hide myself, but I could
not. What laughter and what jokes! The little angels came in a body;
the Celestial Father's Orchestra lost its time; the Virgins, instead of
watching their music sheets read the books and sang most discordantly,
and even old Anthony's little pig began grunting and twisting his tail.

"I felt ashamed; I could see every one point their finger at me and
laugh. But, in spite of all this Zarathustra, the grave and serious
Zarathustra, did not laugh. With a humiliating pride he asked me:

"'Is that your son, he who pretends that my religion is paganish,
and that I am a pagan? Have your sons degenerated to such a degree
as to confound my pure religion, root of the most perfect creeds,
with Polytheism and Idolatry? Do they know that paganism is derived
from pagani, which means inhabitant of the fields, who always were
faithful to the Greek and Roman Polytheism? You may answer that they do
not know Latin! If so, make then speak more modestly. Tell them that
paganus comes from pagus, from which the words pages, payes, paien,
paese, pais (country), are derived. Tell those unfortunate that the
Zend-Avesta religion was never professed by the rural inhabitants
of the Roman country. Tell them that my religion is monotheist, even
more so than the Roman Catholic religion, which not only accepted the
dualism of my creed, but has deified several creatures. Tell them
that Paganism in its widest and most corrupted sense, duly meant
Polytheism; that neither my religion nor that of Moses nor Mohammed
were ever Pagan religions. Tell them to read your own works, where
in every page you refer to the Pagans. Repeat to them that which you
said in speaking of the religion of the Manechees (a corruption of my
doctrine by you professed) which influenced your works and prevails
yet in your religion, and which at one time caused the Roman Catholic
Church to vacillate. Yes: I linked the principle of Good and Evil
together--Ahura-Mazda; God! But this is not to admit of two Gods, as
you, yourself said. To speak of health and sickness is not to admit two
healths. And what? Have they not copied my principle of evil in Satan,
prince of darkness? Tell them that if they do not know Latin to at
least study the religions, since they fail to recognize the true one!'

"Thus spoke Zarathustra, or Zoroaster. Then, Voltaire--Voltaire,
who had heard what you were saying about his death, accosted me,
and grasping me by the hand, effusively thanked me.

"'Why so?' I asked him.

"'Your sons, mon cher Docteur de l'Eglise,' he answered, 'have proved
and continue proving by facts, that which I maintained. And what was
it that you maintained? That besides being ignorant, they were liars.'

"To this I could not reply, for he was right. You should know that
he died when 84 years of age, possessed of all his faculties, and
with so lucid a mind that when nearing his end and being importuned
to make confession, he said: 'Let me die in peace'--and died. But the
worst of it all is, that Voltaire has been pleading with God to take
you to Heaven alive and clothed, and when asked why so, he answered
'So that we may have some fun.'

"On learning of all the indulgences that the Archbishop had allowed
on your books, to allure buyers, old Peter, thumping his bald head,
exclaimed:

"'Why did I not think of granting indulgencies with the fish I
sold, when a fisherman? We would have been rich, and Judas, instead
of selling the Master, would have sold sardines and tinapa! [6]
I would not have been obliged to cowardly apostatize, and would not
have suffered martyrdom. Verily, I say, that my friend down _Below_
leaves me behind in the matter of knowing how to make money; and yet
I am a Jew.'

"'Of course, don't you know that your friend _Below_ is a Gallego?' [7]
Said a little old man who had been _Up There_ but a few years. His
name was Tasio, and, addressing himself to me, he continued:

"'You are a great Doctor, and although you have contradicted yourself
many times, I hold you as a privileged character of vast erudition,
for, having written your books, Retractationum, and Confesiones;
and since you are so different from your sons who try, when defending
themselves, to make black appear white, and white green, I will state
my complaints, so that you, as their Father, may put a stop to it all.

"'There exists on earth an unfortunate, who, amongst many foolish acts,
has committed the following:

"'1st. He holds solidary of all that I have said during my earthly
life, an Indian called Rizal, only because said Indian has quoted
my words in a book that he wrote. As you can see, should we follow
such a system of reasoning, Rizal would also agree with the views
expressed by friars, policemen, etc., and you, yourself, Holy Doctor,
would also be solidary of all that you ascribe to heretics, Pagans,
and above all, to Manichees.

"'2nd. He wants me to think as he himself does, since he quotes me
as saying 'The Bible and the Holy Gospel.' It may be well that he,
as all fanatics, should believe that these are one and the same
thing. But I, having studied the original Hebraic Bible, know,
that it does not contain the Gospel. That the Jewish Bible, being
a history of creation, treasure and patrimony of Jewish people,
the Jews, who do not accept the Gospel, should be authority. That as
the Latin translation is incorrect, the Catholics could not lay down
the Law, notwithstanding their habit of appropriating everything to
themselves, and of misconstruing to their advantage the translation of
the original text. Besides, the Gospels, with the exception of that
written by Saint Mathew, were written in Greek later than the Bible,
and conflict in every respect with the Law of Moses, as proved by the
enemity between Jews and Christians. How, then, could I, knowing all
this, express myself as a fanatic, or as an ignorant monk? I do not
exact from any monk the speech of a free-thinker and therefore, they
should not exact that I express myself as a monk would. Why do they
want me to consolidate under one name two distinct things, which, to
a certain extent contradict each other? Let the Christians do so, but
I must not, and cannot. If I call them separately, it is in accordance
with the thought inspiring two works, two legislations, two religions,
on which they want to found the Catholic Religion. Your son, moreover,
reasons finely, when he says: 'I did not know that the Gospels were
different from the Bible, and not a principal part of it.' Tell him,
Holy Father, that in every country a part, no matter how principal may
it be, is always different from the whole, for instance: The principal
thing in Friar Rodriguez is his habit: but his habit is different from
Friar Rodriguez, as otherwise there would be one dirty Friar Rodriguez,
another shining, another creased, another wide, short, long, greasy,
etc. On the other hand, the habit is different from the monk, because
a piece of cloth, no matter how dirty, could never be presumptuous,
despotic, ignorant or obscurantistic.

"'3d. To prove the existence of a Purgatory, he quotes: 'Saint
Mathew says in Chapter twelfth, thirty-sixth verse----.' But he
quotes wrongly, as from that verse cannot be derived the existence
of a Purgatory, nor anything of its kind. The Hebrew text says:
'Wa 'ebif 'omar lakam kij 'al kal abar reg ashar idabbru 'abaschim
yittbu heschboun biom hammischphat'; the Greek text, 'Lego de hynun
hote pan rema argon, ho ean lalesosin hoi anthropoi, apodosousi peri
auton logon en hemera kriseos.' All these translated into Latin say:
'Dicto autem vobis, quoniam omne verbum otiosum quod locuti fucrint
homines, reddent rationem de co in die judicii,' which, translated
into English means, '_And I say to you, that on the Day of Judgment,
men shall have to account for every idle word_.' From all these texts,
you can see, Holy Doctor, that the only thing to be derived is that
on the Day of Judgment, Friar Rodriguez will have to give such an
account of himself, that very likely it will take him two days to
account for all the nonsense he has said.

"'I imagine that your son, instead of the thirty-sixth verse, meant
to quote the thirty-second, which says: "And all who shall say word
against the son of man will be forgiven; but he who says word against
the Holy Ghost, shall not be pardoned; neither in this life nor in
the next." From this they have tried to derive the existence of a
Purgatory. What a fertile imagination!

"'4th. Because Saint Ireneus, St. Clement of Alexandria, and Origenes,
three in all, although not being the first Christian, had some
remote idea of Purgatory, it does not follow that the Christians of
the first century did believe in it, unless it could be previously
established that three persons represent a totality, even if amongst
such a totality existed, contradictory ideas. But, as a proof that
was it not so, you, yourself, Holy Doctor, being their father, having
flourished in the fourth and fifth century, and supposed to be the
greatest amongst the Fathers of the Church, denied most emphatically,
in various instances, the existence of a Purgatory. In your CCXCV
cermon, beginning by: 'Frecuenter charitatem vestra,' etc., you said
very decidedly: 'Nemo se slecipiat fratres; _Duo_ cuim _loca_ sunt
et _terius_ non est ullus. Qui cum Christo reguare non meruerit, cum
diabolo _absque dubitatione ulla_ perebit.' This translated means,
'Do not deceive yourselves, brethren; there are but two places for
the soul and there is no third place. He who should not deserve to
live with Christ, _undoubtedly_ will perish.'

"'Further on, in de Consolatione mortuorum, you say: 'Sed recedus
anima quoe carnalibus oculis non videtur, ab angelis susciptur et
collocatur, aut in sinu, Abrahae, si fidelis est, aut in carcerio
inferni custodia si peccatrix est.' This means, 'But at the departure
of that soul which the eyes of the flesh cannot see, the angels will
receive and carry it to the Bosom of Abraham, if it has been faithful;
or to Hell, if sinful.' On the other hand, I could quote a large
number of your own texts showing that for you, Purgatory was not an
impossibility. Add to all this what Saint Fulgentius, who flourished
after you during the fifth and sixth century, says in Chapter XIV.,
of his 'de incarnatione et gratia,' etc.: 'Quicumque regnum Dei non
ingreditur, poenis oeternis cruciatur.' That is to say, 'He who could
not enter the Kingdom of God, will suffer eternal punishment.'

"'5th. Your son either cannot read, or else acts in bad faith;
otherwise, how could he, from my estatement, 'The Protestants _do
not believe_ in it; neither do the Greek Fathers, because they miss,'
etc., try to make 'The Greek Fathers DID NOT believe in a Purgatory?'

"'How could he deduct from a present, a past tense and twist the
sentences to make from it 'The Holy Greek Fathers?'

"'I used '_believe_,' the present tense, although in my time the _Holy
Greek Fathers_ did not exist, but simply the fathers belonging to
the Greek Church. Moreover, as I was following an historical order,
how could I refer to the Protestants, first, and to the _Holy Greek
Fathers_ afterwards, who believed what they wished, and who at the
time of my earthly life were a past to me?

"'And enwrapped in such bad faith, he dares to qualify as a slanderer,
imposter and ignoramus, the man who only quoted me!

"'But such proceeding is worthy of Friar Rodriguez, who, following his
system of confusing a part with the whole, tries to condemn another's
book, and mistakes the rays of the sun for the sun itself, all with
the purpose of slandering the author and calling him Freemason.

"'Tell me, Holy Doctor, after what I have told you, who is the real
ignoramus, impostor and slanderer?

"'6th. Instead of accusing others of ignorance, and presuming to know
everything, he should be careful, because he has not even read your
books, notwithstanding you are his father, and that it is his duty to
know what you have said. Should he have done so, he would neither have
written so much nonsense nor would he have shown the shallowness of his
knowledge, which, by the way, he derives from some little books, which,
to propagate and maintain obscurantism, were published in Cataluna,
[8] by Sarda y Salvany.'

"Thus was old Tasio expressing himself, when the voice of the Almighty
was heard summoning me to His presence.

"Trembling, I approached, and prostrated myself at His feet.'

"'Go to Earth,' said the voice, 'and tell those who call themselves
your sons that I, having created millions of suns, around which,
thousands of worlds, inhabited by millions of millions of beings,
created by my infinite Mercy, gyrate, cannot be an instrument to the
fulfilment of a few ungrateful creatures' passions, simply handfuls
of dust carried away by a gust of wind; insignificant particles of
the inhabitants of one of my smallest worlds!'

"'Tell them that my Name must not be used to extend the misery or
ignorance of their brothers, nor shall they restrain in my Name,
intelligence and thought, which I created free. That they must not
commit abuses in my Name, cause a tear, nor a single drop of blood to
be shed. That they must not represent me as being cruel, revengeful,
subject to their whims and executor of their will. Not to represent me,
The Fountain of Goodness, as a tyrant, or an unkind Father, pretending
that they are the only possessors of Light and Eternal Life. How? I,
who have given to each being air, light, life and love, that he may be
happy, could I deny to one of the most transcendental, true happiness,
for the sake of others? Impious! Absurd! Tell them that I, who am All,
and apart from whom nothing exists, nor could exist, I have not and
cannot have enemies. Nothing equals me, and no one can oppose my will!

"'Tell them that their enemies are not my enemies; that I have
never identified myself with them, and that their maxims are vain,
insensible, blasphemous! Tell them that I pardon error, but punish
iniquity; that I will forgive a sin against me, but will prosecute
those who should torture an unfortunate. That being infinitely
Powerful, all the sins of all the inhabitants of all the worlds,
thousands of times centuplicated, can never dim an atom of my
glory. But the least injury to the poor and oppressed I will punish,
for I have not created man to make him unhappy nor the victim of his
brothers. I am the Father of all existent; I know the destiny of every
atom; let me love all men, whose miseries and needs I know. Let each
one perform his duty, that I, The God of Mercy, know my own will.'

"Thus spoke the Almighty; and I came here to fulfill his command. Now,
I say to you:

"That the miseries of the unhappy Indian whom you have impoverished
and stupefied, have reached the Throne of the Highest. _There_ have
arrived so many intelligences obscured and impaired by you! The cry
of so many exiles, tortured, and killed at your instigation! The tears
of so many mothers and the miseries of so many orphans, combined with
the noise of your orgies! Know that there is a God, (perhaps you doubt
His existence, and only use His name to advance your ends) who will
some day call you to account for all your iniquities. Know that He
needs not the money of the poor, nor is it necessary to worship Him
by burning candles and incense, saying masses or believing blindly
what others say, contrary to common sense.

"No! His luminary is greater than your own sun; His flowers more
fragrant than those on earth. He suffices to Himself. He created
intelligence for no subservient purpose; but that with its use, man
could be happy in raising himself to Him. He needs no one. He created
man, not for His sake, but for man's own. He is happy for all eternity!

"You obstinately uphold the existence of a Purgatory, using even the
most ignoble weapons and means to defend your belief. Why, instead
of wasting your time in affirming the existence of that which you
never saw, do you not preach and practice love and charity amongst
yourselves? Why not preach words of comfort and hope, to somewhat
soothe the miseries of life, instead of frightening your brothers by
tales of future punishment? Why? Because Christ's True Doctrine would
bring you no earthly wealth, and all that you look for is gold, and
gold! And to satisfy your end and bleed the timid souls, of money,
you have invented a Purgatory! Why afflict orphans and widows with
dreadful tales of the next life, only to extort from them a few
cents? Have you forgotten what the Apostle said? 'Nolo vos ignorare,
fratres, de dormientibus, ut non contristenuni, sicut qui spem non
habent,' which means, 'I do not wish you to ignore, brethren, that
which concerns those who sleep, that you may not be saddened, like
those who have lost all hope.' Also, that I, myself, have said? 'Hoec
enim est Christianoe fidei summa: vitam veram expectare post mortem,'
that is 'Here is then the summary of the Christian faith: to hope for
a true life after death.' But you, lacking in charity, and for a vile,
greedy interest, live in opposition to Christ, and pretend to be able
to mould Divine Judgment. All the strength of your philosophy seems
to be derived from your own theory, which denies the existence of
souls sufficiently sinners to be condemned, or pure enough to enter
the Kingdom of God! By whose authority do you pretend to oppose the
judgment of Him who weighs and considers the smallest thought? Who
knows it is impossible to expect perfection from beings made of clay,
subject to the miseries and oppressions of earthly life? Who told you
that He will judge as you, with your narrow, limited intelligence,
do? That the miseries of this life are not expiations of sins?

"Cease in your avaricious hoarding of wealth! You have now enough. Do
not wrench from the poor his last mouthful of bread.

"Remember what Saint Fulgentius said: 'Et si mithetur in stagnum
ignis et sulphuris qui nudum vestimento non tegit, quid passures
est qui vestimento crudelis expoliat? Et si rerum suarem avarus
possessor requiem non habebit, quomodo aliaenarum rerum insatiabilis
raptor?' Meaning, 'And if he who never clothed the naked is sent to
the pond of fire and sulphur, where will he, who cruelly stripped
them, go? And if the greedy possessor of his own wealth may never
rest, how shall it be with the thief, insatiable in his greed for
the wealth of others?'

"Preach then, the religion of Hope and Promises, as you, above
all, are in need of pardon and forgiveness. Do not speak of rigor,
nor condemn others, lest God should hear and judge you according to
the laws by you formulated. Bear always in mind Christ's words, 'Vae
vobis scribae et Pharisae hypocrite qui clauditis regnum coelorum ante
homines; vos non intratis, nec introeunts sinitis intrare!' This means,
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, who close to men the Kingdom of
God, and neither enter nor allow others to enter!'

"Now, to you personally, I will say: You are an unfortunate fool,
who speak numberless absurdities, although I could not expect aught
else from you, and would not punish you for them. But you have had the
audacity of not only insulting others, by which you forgot truth and
charity, but praised yourself and called attention to your own praise.

"Referring to yourself, you said. This Father, whom I well know (liar,
you do not even know yourself), although he may appear a little hard
headed (a little hard-headed? Ask my crosier if your head is not harder
than stone), never speaks in vain (this is true; every word you say
causes as much laughter on earth as in Heaven), nor uses words without
first thinking (if such is true, your intelligence is very limited).

"For such foolish vanity I ought to punish you severely, so that you
would stop forever your senseless writings, saving me the trouble of
coming to reprimand you at every instance.

"Were I to judge you according to your own theory, you should at
least go to your Purgatory. But, after all, you are not so bad,
as many learned persons are made to laugh at your writings.

"It would be well for your pride if you allowed the Indians to pass
by you without taking off their hats or kissing your hand. But then,
they would be imprisoned or exiled, and it would not do to increase
the wrong you do them.

"Shall I make you lame and dumb? No! Your brothers would claim it
was a trial of your forbearance, to which God had submitted you. No;
you won't catch me on that!

"What shall I do with you?"

The old Bishop meditated for a few moments, and then, he exclaimed:

"Ah! Now I know! Your own sin shall be your punishment!

"I condemn you to continue saying and writing nonsense for the rest
of your life, so that the world may laugh at you, and also, that on
the Day of Judgment you may be judged according to your deserts!"

"Amen!" replied Friar Rodriguez.

The vision then disappeared; the light of the lamp regained its
yellowish flame, and the soft perfume dispersed.

On the following day Friar Rodriguez started writing greater nonsense,
with renewed energy.

Amen!

_Jose Rizal._

Note.--The foregoing admirable translations from the writings of
Dr. Rizal were made by Mr. F.M. de Rivas, of Chicago.



CHAPTER XV

Events of the Spanish-American War.

No Mystery About the Cause of the War--The Expected and the Inevitable
Has Happened--The Tragedy of the Maine--Vigilant Wisdom of President
McKinley--Dewey's Prompt Triumph--The Battles at Manila and Santiago
Compared--General Shafter Tells of the Battle of Santiago--Report of
Wainwright Board on Movements of Sampson's Fleet in the Destruction of
Cervera's Squadron--Stars and Stripes Raised Over Porto Rico--American
and Spanish Fleets at Manila Compared.--Text of Peace Protocol.

The war between Spain and the United States was a long time coming,
and there is no more mystery about its cause than doubt as to its
decisions. It was foretold in every chapter of the terrible stories
of the conflicts between the Spaniards and their colonists, largely of
their blood, in Central and South America. The causes of war in Cuba,
and the conduct of warfare by Spain in that island were the same that
resulted in revolutionary strife in Mexico and Peru, and, indeed, all
the nations in the Americas that once were swayed by the sovereignty
of Spain. The last of the islands of the Spanish possessions in the
hemisphere introduced to the civilized world by Columbus were lost by
the western peninsula of Europe, symbolized and personified in the
Crown, as the first crumbling fragments of the colonial empires of
Spain fell away from her. Only in the case of Cuba there was the direct
intervention of the United States to establish "a stable government"
in the distracted island, desolated by war, pestilence and famine,
that had evolved conditions, of terrible misery incurable from within,
and of inhumane oppression that should be resented by all enlightened
people. It had long been realized by the thoughtful men of Spain
capable of estimating the currents of events, that the time must come,
and was close at hand, when the arms of the United States would be
directed to the conquest of Cuba. It was not only in the air that
this was to be, it was written in the history of Spanish America,
and more than that, there was not an Atlas that did not proclaim in
the maps of the continents of the Western world, that Cuba would and
in the largest sense of right should, become a part of the United
States, and must do so in order to be redeemed from the disabilities
deeply implanted, and released from having the intolerable burdens
imposed by the rule of Spain. The consciousness of the Spaniards,
that the shadow of the United States lowered over the misgovernment
of Cuba, and that there was a thunder-cloud in the north that must
burst--with more than the force of the hurricanes that spin on their
dizzy way of destruction from the Caribbean Sea--aroused the fury of
passion, of jealous hatred and thirst for revenge, in anticipation of
the inevitable, that caused the catastrophe of the blowing up of the
Maine, and kindled with the flame of the explosion, the conflagration
of warfare in the Indies West and East, that has reddened the seas and
the skies with the blood of Spain and the glow of America's victory
both in the Antilles and the Philippines, wiping from the face of the
earth the last vestiges of the colonial imperialism of Spain that gave
her mediaeval riches and celebrity, for which--as the system always
evil became hideous with malignant growth, so that each colony was
a cancer on the mother country--there has been exacted punishment of
modern poverty, and finally the humiliation of the haughty, with no
consolation for defeat, but the fact that in desperate and forlorn
circumstances there were seen glimpses of the ancient valor in Spanish
soldiers, that was once their high distinction among the legions of
embattled Europe.

The United States was not ready for war. Our regular army was a 16
to 120 Spanish troops in Cuba, our field guns 1 to 6 of Blanco's
batteries, our siege train nowhere, and fortified cities to assail;
and the ability and industry of the Spaniards as well as their
skill and strength in surveying and fortifying military lines,
and their food resources were dangerously undervalued. The war was
rushed upon the country, contrary to the calm executive judgement of
the President. The army and navy were admirable but faulty in hasty
equipment, the navy a perfect machine in itself, but without docks
and arsenals in the right place for the supply of a fleet in the old
battle field of European navies, the West Indies. The energies of the
Government were put forth as soon as the war was seriously threatened,
and the mighty people arose and swiftly as the aptitudes of Americans
in emergencies could be applied, deficiencies were supplied. The first
stroke of arms came as a dazzling flash from the far southwest, in
the story of the smashing victory of Dewey at Manila. That splendid
officer, gentleman and hero did not signal his fleet as Nelson
at Trafalgar, that every man was expected to do his duty, but he
reported that every man did his duty; and the East Indian fleet of
Spain vanished, smashed, burned and sunken by a thunderbolt! The theory
of war countenanced by the impetuous and demanded by the presumptuous,
was that our aggressive forces must attack Havana. In and around that
city were an enormous garrison, abundant military stores, forty miles
of trenches defended by sixty thousand men; and far more to be dreaded
the deadly climate, the overwhelming rains, the deep rank soil soaked
under the tropical sun and the dense vegetation, and still more the
pestilence--the ghastly Yellow Fever, and scarcely less poisonous and
fatal pernicious malarial fevers, and dysenteries that exhausted as
fast as fever consumed. Fortunately, it was decided that the place
to attack Havana was Santiago, and there the regular army, with the
exception of the regiments sent to the Philippines, was ordered and in
due time reinforced by volunteers, safely embarked and disembarked, to
become the winners on bloody fields and receive the surrender of the
Spanish garrisons of the city and province of Santiago. The vaunted
fleet of Cervera, having attempted flight, perished--the wrecks of
his fine ships strewing the southern coast of Cuba, where they remain
as memorials, like and unlike the distorted iron that was the Maine,
in the harbor of Havana, and as the shattered and charred remnants of
the fleet of Montejo, at Manila, still cumber the waters of the bay off
Cavite, telling the story of the glory of our victorious heroes there.

The responsibility of the Chief Magistrate of the United States in
the late war was remarkable. Everything of moment was referred to
him from the Cabinet officers of the Government, and he gave all the
closest attention, making, after conscientious consideration, the
decisions that determined the course of action taken. This was true
in unusual measure of the Treasury, State, War and Navy Departments.

It is well the President resisted while he could the "rush line"
in Congress, that strove headlong for war, and strenuously urged
in the time gained essential preparations, and that he pressed the
war the day it was declared with a hurry message to Admiral Dewey,
who won his immortal victory on the other side of the world within
a week of his orders by cable to "destroy" the squadron of the enemy
that might be found somewhere on the west coast of Luzon.

Nearer home there was a harder task. The Spanish army in Cuba was
much more formidable on the defensive than in the offensive. There
were greater numbers of soldiers of a better class in the service of
Spain on the island, than had been supposed, and they did not lack,
in the degree believed, discipline, ammunition or provisions. The
Spaniards had an effective field artillery, more than one hundred
guns, and their Mauser rifles were excellent, far-reaching; and,
in field ammunition, they were ahead of us in smokeless powder. Our
regiments would have given way before the Spanish rifles, that told
no tales except with bolts, that flew invisible, fatal arrows, from
the jungles, if the American soldier had not been of stuff that was
like pure steel, and marched unflinchingly through the deadly hail,
regarding the bitter pelting as a summons to "come on" and carry the
trenches and ambuscades by storm. The incapacity of the Spaniards
to put down the Cuban Rebellion caused grave misapprehensions, both
as to the Spanish and Cuban soldiery, for few Americans understand
the conditions of the interminable guerilla warfare, the particular
military accomplishment of the Spanish race, impotent in all save
the destructive effect upon those not engaged in it. In Congress no
impression could be made of the real feebleness of the Cubans, except
in bushwhacking, and it is still a puzzle that the immense masses of
Spanish troops should be so helpless against the insurgents, and yet
so troublesome in harassing invaders. The Cuban army was not a myth,
certainly, but it has been a disappointment to those who were swift
in shouting its praises, upon information given by the Cuban Key
West Bureau of News novelettes. It was well that the attack on Spain
in the West Indies was directed upon Santiago and Porto Rico. The
former manifestly was a point that commanded the central waters of
the West Indies; recently there have been expressions of surprise
that the expedition to Porto Rico, finally and handsomely led by
Major General Miles, commanding the army of the United States, was
so delayed. Investigation from the inside will duly determine that no
harm was done in that case by loss of time. Santiago was pointed out
by many circumstances as the vital spot of Spanish power in America,
where a mortal blow might be delivered. It was in the province where
the insurgents had greater strength than in any other part of the
island. It was so situated that our fleet in that locality was close
to the Windward Passage, east of Cuba, where Columbus was at once
perplexed and triumphant, and to Hayti, Jamaica and Porto Rico; and
there were several landings where it would be possible to disembark
troops, protected by the fire of our ships. More than that, Santiago
is the old capital of Cuba, the place where the head of the Cuban
church abides, and the scene of the Virginius Massacre--altogether
having a place in history almost equal to that of Havana. It was not
doubted the sanitary situation of the east end of Cuba was better than
that of the west end. Experience shows that this easy assumption was
questionable. If we omit the great plague spot, the city of Havana,
it will appear that Santiago is in a region as pestilential as can
be found in the provinces of Havana and Pinar del Rio. More than
all other associations and conspicuities, the attention of the world
was directed to Santiago because Cervera's elusive fleet, short of
coal and provisions, and overmatched by the United States navy, took
refuge in the deep harbor, hoping to clean his ships, get supplies and
escape with coal enough to open a new career. The Spaniards were too
slow, and the only ships of Spain that showed a sign of the spirit
of enterprise and the capacity of adventure, were bottled up by a
relentless blockade. Lieutenant Hobson became famous in a night in his
most hazardous effort to use the Merrimac as a cork for the bottle,
but fortunately left a gap through which the Spaniards made haste to
their doom. When the second fleet of Spain was destroyed, all chance
of disputing our supremacy at sea, or of doing anything to guard
Spanish interests either in the East or West Indies, was extinguished.

There has been no marked features of contention as to the battles of
Manila, except in the case of the gratuitous observations of critical
persons, whose feelings have been disturbed, that the storming of the
town was not bloody enough. The victory, however, was all the greater,
for the casualty lists were not long, owing to the management of the
Commanding General and the heroic Admiral, who won a battle famous as
that at New Orleans, with less bloodshed, but as Jackson's victory
was not belittled because he lost but half a dozen men killed, the
victories at Manila should not be slighted. The Santiago battles,
however, have stirred controversies, and there is a great mass of
literature, official and other, subject to endless examination, and
perhaps so voluminous as to confuse readers for some generations. The
leading and indisputable facts are, that the Spaniards fought well
on land, but were ineffectual afloat, in their attempts to inflict
injuries, though they put to sea in dashing style, and did not flinch
in efforts to evade a superior force, until the fire of the Americans
crushed them. In the incidents of warfare on the hills around and
the waves before Santiago, it is fair to say that the Spaniards
redeemed themselves from imputation of timidity, and fought in a
manner not unworthy of the countrymen of the Garrison of Morro Castle,
Havana, whose gallantry in resisting the army and fleet of England,
in 1762, commanded the respectful regard of their conquerors, and is
a glorious chapter in the story of Spain. The Santiago events were
most honorable to American arms, and it would lessen the splendor of
the reputation of the American soldiers if one failed to do justice
to the sturdy fighters they overcame. It is too early or too late
for participation in the debates whether civil or acrimonious, as
to the merits or faults of those engaged at Santiago, further than
to quote that golden sentence from the report of Commodore Schley,
that there was "glory enough to go around." We, whatever is said,
remember what was done on those hills that have an everlasting place
in history. There forever is to be application of marvelous propriety,
of the mournful and noble lines of Kentucky's poet, Theodore O'Hara:


"On Fame's eternal camping ground
Their silent tents are spread,
And Glory guards with solemn round
The bivouac of the dead."


There was a speedy realization by the country, and all the intelligent
peoples of the earth, when our troops were embarked for the Santiago
campaign, that the crisis of the war was at hand. No American thought
of failure. The only questions were as to the power of the defense
of Cuba by Spain, and the cost to us in men and money to overcome the
defenders. Those who knew the most about the conditions in Cuba had the
least confidence in the efficiency of the Cuban Army. The only body
of organized Cubans of importance was that under command of Garcia,
and it was the province of which he was in partial occupation that
we invaded in force. The public had been considerably interested and
entertained by the rousing accounts of the various naval bombardments
of Spanish shore fortresses. But the firing from our ships had not
materially shaken the Spanish defenses. The sea power had not shattered
the shore lines, but found abundant occupation in guarding transports
and protecting the troops when landing. It would have been an act of
the most gross imprudence and incompetency to have put an army ashore
unless the supremacy of the navy on the sea was absolute. More than
that, our own cities had to be assured that they were secure from
attack. On the 31st of May orders were issued for the embarkation of
the army of invasion as follows:

1. The Fifth Army Corps.

2. The Battalion of Engineers.

3. The detachment of the Signal Corps.

4. Five squadrons of cavalry, to be selected by the commanding
general of the cavalry division, in accordance with instruction
previously given.

5. Four batteries of light artillery, to be commanded by a major, to
be selected by the commanding officer of the light artillery brigade.

6. Two batteries of heavy artillery, to be selected by the commanding
officer of the siege artillery battalion, with eight (8) siege guns
and eight (8) field mortars.

7. The Battalion of Engineers, the infantry, and cavalry, will be
supplied, with 500 rounds of ammunition per man.

8. All troops will carry, in addition to the fourteen (14) days'
field rations now on hand, ten (10) days' travel rations.

9. The minimum allowance of tentage and baggage as prescribed in
General Orders 54, A.G.O., current series, will be taken.

10. In addition to the rations specified in paragraph 8 of this order,
the chief commissary will provide sixty (60) days' field rations for
the entire command.

11. All recruits and extra baggage, the latter to be stored, carefully
piled and covered, will be left in camp, in charge of a commissioned
officer, to be selected by the regimental commander. Where there are
no recruits available the necessary guard only will be left.

12. Travel rations will be drawn, at once, by the several commands,
as indicated in paragraph 8.

This was by command of Major-General Shafter. There were delays on
account of inadequate facilities for embarkation at Tampa and Port
Tampa. Orders for General Shafter to move with not less than 10,000 men
were issued on the 7th, and there was delay on account of reports of
Spanish ships of war ready to strike a blow at the transports. Twelve
squadrons of cavalry not mounted were added to the troops designated
in the general order, and June 14th the expedition sailed with 815
officers and 16,072 enlisted men, and had a smooth and uneventful
passage. There were several demonstrations for the deception of the
enemy, in one of which 500 Cubans were employed. General Shafter
was committed by the movements and the ground, as he says in his
official report:

"To approach Santiago from the east over a narrow road, at first in
some places not better than a trail, running from Daiquiri through
Siboney and Sevilla, and making attack from that quarter, was, in
my judgment, the only feasible plan, and subsequent information and
results confirmed my judgment."

The disembarkation commenced June 22nd, and all men were ordered
to carry "on the person the blanket roll (with shelter tent and
poncho), three days' field rations (with coffee, ground), canteens
filled, and 100 rounds of ammunition per man. Additional ammunition,
already issued to the troops, tentage, baggage, and company cooking
utensils left under charge of the regimental quartermaster, with one
non-commissioned officer and two privates from each company,"

Two days were occupied in getting the troops ashore, and the first
engagement was on the morning of the 24th, General Young's brigade
taking the advance, and finding a Spanish force strongly intrenched
on the Santiago road three miles from Siboney. Young's force was 964
officers and men. The enemy were driven from the field. Our loss, 1
officer and 15 men killed, and 6 officers and 46 men wounded. Spanish
loss reported 9 killed and 27 wounded. General Shafter says the
engagement had "an inspiring effect" upon the men, and "gave us a
well-watered country further to the front, on which to encamp our
troops," and the rest of the month was occupied in attempting to
land rations enough to have a reserve, and "it was not until nearly
two weeks after the army landed that it was possible to place on
shore three days' supplies in excess of those required for the daily
consumption."

General Shafter reconnoitered, and formed his plan of battle June
30th, and reports that in the opening of the engagement on July 1st
"the artillery fire from El Pozo was soon returned by the enemy's
artillery. They evidently had the range of this hill, and their first
shells killed and wounded several men. As the Spaniards used smokeless
powder it was very difficult to locate the position of their pieces,
while, on the contrary, the smoke caused by our black powder plainly
indicated the position of our battery."

The advantages the Spaniards had in the use of smokeless powder were
conspicuous throughout the scenes of fighting both at Santiago and
Manila. We had, however, at Santiago a war balloon of the actual
service, of which General Shafter says: "General Kent forced the
head of his column alongside of the cavalry column as far as the
narrow trail permitted, and thus hurried his arrival at the San Juan
and the formation beyond that stream. A few hundred yards before
reaching the San Juan the road forks, a fact that was discovered by
Lieutenant-Colonel Derby of my staff, who had approached well to the
front in a war balloon. This information he furnished to the troops,
resulting in Sumner moving on the right-hand road, while Kent was
enabled to utilize the road to the left."

General Shafter officially makes the following reference to his
illness at the time: "My own health was impaired by overexertion in
the sun and intense heat of the day before, which prevented me from
participating as actively in the battle as I desired; but from a high
hill near my headquarters I had a general view of the battlefield,
extending from El Caney on the right to the left of our lines on San
Juan Hill. My staff officers were stationed at various points on the
field, rendering frequent reports, and through them by the means of
orderlies and the telephone, I was enabled to transmit my orders.

"After the brilliant and important victory gained at El Caney, Lawton
started his tried troops, who had been fighting all day and marching
much of the night before, to connect with the right of the cavalry
division. Night came on before this movement could be accomplished. In
the darkness the enemy's pickets were encountered, and the Division
Commander being uncertain of the ground and as to what might be in
his front halted his command and reported the situation to me. This
information was received about 12:30 a. m., and I directed General
Lawton to return by my headquarters and the El Pozo House as the only
certain way of gaining his new position.

"This was done, and the division took position on the right of the
cavalry early next morning, Chaffee's brigade arriving first, about
half-past 7, and the other brigades before noon."

Of the hottest of the fight on the 1st of July, General Shafter
reports: "Great credit is due to Brigadier-General H. S. Hawkins,
who, placing himself between his regiments, urged them on by voice
and bugle calls to the attack so brilliantly executed.

"In this fierce encounter words fail to do justice to the gallant
regimental commanders and their heroic men, for, while the generals
indicated the formations and the points of attack, it was, after all,
the intrepid bravery of the subordinate officers and men that planted
our colors on the crest of San Juan Hill and drove the enemy from
his trenches and blockhouses, thus gaining a position which sealed
the fate of Santiago.

"In this action on this part of the field most efficient service was
rendered by Lieutenant John H. Parker, Thirteenth Infantry, and the
Gatling gun detachment under his command. The fighting continued
at intervals until nightfall, but our men held resolutely to the
positions gained at the cost of so much blood and toil.

"I am greatly indebted to General Wheeler, who, as previously
stated, returned from the sick list to duty during the afternoon. His
cheerfulness and aggressiveness made itself felt on this part of the
battlefield, and the information he furnished to me at various stages
of the battle proved to be most useful."

The report of the General Commanding of the further fighting is a
model of forcible brevity, in these paragraphs:

"Soon after daylight on July 2 the enemy opened battle, but because
of the intrenchments made during the night, the approach of Lawton's
division, and the presence of Bates' brigade, which had taken position
during the night on Kent's left, little apprehension was felt as to
our ability to repel the Spaniards.

"It is proper here to state that General Bates and his brigade had
performed most arduous and efficient service, having marched much
of the night of June 30-July 1, and a good part of the latter day,
during which he also participated in the battle of El Caney, after
which he proceeded, by way of El Pozo, to the left of the line at
San Juan, reaching his new position about midnight.

"All day on the 2d the battle raged with more or less fury, but such
of our troops as were in position at daylight held their ground,
and Lawton gained a strong and commanding position on the right.

"About 10 p..m., the enemy made a vigorous assault to break through
my lines, but he was repulsed at all points.

"On the morning of the 3d the battle was renewed, but the enemy seemed
to have expended his energy in the assault of the previous night, and
the firing along the lines was desultory;" and this was stopped by a
letter sent by General Shafter, saying he would be obliged to "shell
Santiago," if not surrendered, and non-combatants would be given until
10 o'clock July 4th to leave the city. The reply of the Spanish General
was that he would not surrender. Then foreign consuls came within our
lines asking more time to remove the women and children. The language
of General Shafter reporting the situation at the time and the events
following, is here reproduced as of permanent interest:

"My first message went in under a flag of truce at 12:30 p.m. I was
of the opinion that the Spaniards would surrender if given a little
time, and I thought this result would be hastened if the men of
their army could be made to understand they would be well treated as
prisoners of war. Acting upon this presumption, I determined to offer
to return all the wounded Spanish officers at El Caney who were able
to bear transportation, and who were willing to give their paroles
not to serve against the forces of the United States until regularly
exchanged. This offer was made and accepted. These officers, as well as
several of the wounded Spanish privates, 27 in all, were sent to their
lines under the escort of some of our mounted cavalry. Our troops were
received with honors, and I have every reason to believe the return
of the Spanish prisoners produced a good impression on their comrades.

"The cessation of firing about noon on the 3d practically terminated
the battle of Santiago.

"A few Cubans assisted in the attack at El Caney, and fought valiantly,
but their numbers were too small to materially change the strength,
as indicated above. The enemy confronted us with numbers about equal
to our own; they fought obstinately in strong and intrenched positions,
and the results obtained clearly indicate the intrepid gallantry of the
company, officers and men, and the benefits derived from the careful
training and instruction given in the company in recent years in rifle
practice and other battle exercises. Our losses in these battles were
22 officers and 208 men killed, and 81 officers and 1,203 men wounded;
missing, 79. The missing, with few exceptions, reported later.

"The arrival of General Escario on the night of July 2, and his
entrance into the city was not anticipated, for although it was known,
as previously stated, that General Pando had left Manzanillo with
reinforcements for the garrison of Santiago, it was not believed
his troops could arrive so soon. General Garcia, with between four
and five thousand Cubans, was intrusted with the duty of watching
for and intercepting the reinforcements expected. This, however, he
failed to do, and Escario passed into the city along on my extreme
right and near the bay."

On the 11th, when the firing ceased and was not resumed "the sickness
in the army was increasing very rapidly, as a result of exposure in the
trenches to the intense heat of the sun and the heavy rains. Moreover,
the dews in Cuba are almost equal to rains. The weakness of the troops
was becoming so apparent I was anxious to bring the siege to an end,
but in common with most of the officers of the army I did not think
an assault would be justifiable, especially as the enemy seemed to
be acting in good faith in their preliminary propositions to surrender.

"July 12 I informed the Spanish Commander that Major-General Miles,
Commander-in-Chief of the American army, had just arrived in my camp,
and requested him to grant us a personal interview on the following
day. He replied he would be pleased to meet us. The interview took
place on the 13th."

The Spanish raised many points, as is their habit, and were tenacious
about retaining their arms, but yielded, and "the terms of surrender
finally agreed upon included about 12,000 Spanish troops in the city
and as many more in the surrendered district."

July 17th "we met midway between the representatives of our two armies,
and the Spanish Commander formally consummated the surrender of the
city and the 24,000 troops in Santiago and the surrendered district.

"After this ceremony I entered the city with my staff and escort, and
at 12 o'clock noon the American flag was raised over the Governor's
palace."

The men and material surrendered by the Spaniards at Santiago largely
exceeded the two English armies and their equipments at Saratoga
and Yorktown.

The yellow fever appeared in the American camp at Siboney July 4th,
and the fact was soon known to the army. General Shafter says of
the wounded and sick: "They received every attention that it was
possible to give them. The medical officers without exception worked
night and day to alleviate the suffering, which was no greater than
invariably accompanies a campaign. It would have been better if we
had more ambulances, but as many were taken as was thought necessary,
judging from previous campaigns."

General Joe Wheeler's report of the action of July 1st is a paper
full of striking points. The movement into battle began in wading
the San Juan river under heavy fire, and the General says:

"We were as much under fire in forming the line as we would be by an
advance, and I therefore pressed the command forward from the covering
which it was formed. It merged into open space, in full view of the
enemy, who occupied breastworks and batteries on the crest of the
hill which overlooked Santiago, officers and men falling at every
step. The troops advanced gallanty, soon reached the foot of the hill
and ascended, driving the enemy from their works and occupying them
on the crest of the hill.

"Colonel Carroll and Major Wessels were both wounded during
the charge, but Major Wessels was enabled to return and resume
command. General Wyckoff, commanding Kent's Third Brigade, was killed
at 12:10. Lieutenant-Colonel Worth took command and was wounded at
12:15. Lieutenant-Colonel Liscum then took command and was wounded at
12:20, and the command then devolved upon Lieutenant-Colonel Ewers,
Ninth Infantry.

"Upon reaching the crest I ordered breastworks to be constructed,
and sent to the rear for shovels, picks, spades, and axes. The
enemy's retreat from the ridge was precipitate, but our men were so
thoroughly exhausted that it was impossible for them to follow. Their
shoes were soaked with water by wading the San Juan River; they had
become drenched with rain, and when they reached the crest they were
absolutely unable to proceed further. Notwithstanding this condition
these exhausted men labored during the night to erect breastworks,
furnished details to bury the dead and carry the wounded back in
improvised litters."

Wheeler's loss was 6 officers and 40 men killed, 29 officers and 288
men wounded, and 10 men missing--total 372, out of a force of 127
officers and 2,536 men.

General Bates says that after his brigade remained for some time in
the first cross road after wading the San Juan river: "We moved to the
right to assault a small hill, occupied upon the top by a stone fort
and well protected by rifle pits. General Chaffee's brigade charged
them from the right, and the two brigades, joining upon the crest,
opened fire from this point of vantage, lately occupied by the Spanish,
upon the village of El Caney.

"From this advantageous position the Spanish were easily driven from
place to place in the village proper, and as fast as they sought
shelter in one building were driven out to seek shelter elsewhere. The
sharpshooters of my command were enabled to do effective work at
this point. The town proper was soon pretty thoroughly cleaned out of
Spanish, though a couple of blockhouses upon the hill to the right of
the town offered shelter to a few, and some could be seen retreating
along a mountain road leading to the northwest. A part of these made
a stand in a field among some bowlders.

General Lawton observes: "The light battery first opened on a column of
Spanish troops, which appeared to be cavalry moving westward from El
Caney, and about 2 miles range, resulting, as was afterwards learned,
in killing 16 in the column."

The General has much to say of a pleasing personal nature.

The report of General Kent is of extraordinary merit for the exact
detail and local color. Colonel McClernand, he says, "pointed out
to me a green hill in the distance which was to be my objective
on my left," and as he moved into action, "I proceeded to join the
head of my division, just coming under heavy fire. Approaching the
First Brigade I directed them to move alongside the cavalry (which
was halted). We were already suffering losses caused by the balloon
near by attracting fire and disclosing our position.

"The enemy's infantry fire, steadily increasing in intensity, now
came from all directions, not only from the front and the dense
tropical thickets on our flanks, but from sharpshooters thickly
posted in trees in our rear, and from shrapnel apparently aimed at
the balloon. Lieutenant-Colonel Derby, of General Shafter's staff,
met me about this time and informed me that a trail or narrow way had
been discovered from the balloon a short distance back leading to the
left to a ford lower down the stream. I hastened to the forks made
by this road, and soon after the Seventy-first New York Regiment of
Hawkins' brigade came up. I turned them into the by path indicated by
Lieutenant-Colonel Derby, leading to the lower ford, sending word to
General Hawkins of this movement. This would have speedily delivered
them in their proper place on the left of their brigade, but under
the galling fire of the enemy the leading battalion of this regiment
was thrown into confusion and recoiled in disorder on the troops in
the rear."

The Second and Third Battalions "came up in better order," but there
was some delay, and General Kent says:

"I had received orders some time before to keep in rear of the cavalry
division. Their advance was much delayed, resulting in frequent halts,
presumably to drop their blanket rolls and due to the natural delay in
fording a stream. These delays under such a hot fire grew exceedingly
irksome, and I therefore pushed the head of my division as quickly
as I could toward the river in column files of twos parallel in
the narrow way by the cavalry. This quickened the forward movement
and enabled me to get into position as speedily as possible for the
attack. Owing to the congested condition of the road, the progress
of the narrow columns was, however, painfully slow. I again sent a
staff officer at a gallop to urge forward the troops in rear."

The Second Brigade and Third "moved toward Fort San Juan, sweeping
through a zone of most destructive fire, scaling a steep and difficult
hill, and assisting in capturing the enemy's strong position (Fort
San Juan) at 1:30 p.m. This crest was about 125 feet above the general
level, and was defended by deep trenches and a loop-holed brick fort
surrounded by barbed-wire entanglements."

General Hawkins, after General Kent reached the crest, "reported that
the Sixth and Sixteenth Infantry had captured the hill, which I now
consider incorrect. Credit is almost equally due the Sixth, Ninth,
Thirteenth, Sixteenth, and Twenty-fourth regiments of infantry. Owing
to General Hawkins' representations, I forwarded the report sent to
corps headquarters about 3 p.m. that the Sixth and Sixteenth infantry
regiments captured the hill. The Thirteenth Infantry captured the
enemy's colors waving over the fort, but, unfortunately, destroyed
them, distributing the fragments among the men, because, as was
asserted, 'It was a bad omen,' two or three men having been shot
while assisting private Arthur Agnew, Company H, Thirteenth Infantry,
the captor. All fragments which could be recovered are submitted with
this report.

"I have already mentioned the circumstances of my Third Brigade's
advance across the ford, where in the brief space of ten minutes it
lost its brave commander (killed) and the next two ranking officers
by disabling wounds. Yet, in spite of these confusing conditions the
formations were effected without hesitation, although under a stinging
fire, companies acting singly in some instances, and by battalion and
regiments in others, rushing through the jungle, across the stream
waist deep, and over the wide bottom thickly set with barbed wire."

General Kent says:

"The bloody fighting of my brave command can not be adequately
described in words. The following list of killed, wounded, and missing
tells the story of their valor:

"July 1st the loss was 12 officers and 77 men killed, 32 officers
and 463 men wounded, 58 men missing. Total loss, 642."

The following day the Spaniards resumed the battle, and the losses
of Kent's command on the 2nd and 3d of July made up a total loss
in three days of 99 killed and 597 wounded, and 62 missing. General
Shafter said that before closing his report he desired to dwell upon
"the natural obstacles I had to encounter, and which no foresight could
have overcome or obviated. The rocky and precipitous coast afforded no
sheltered landing places, the roads were mere bridle paths, the effect
of the tropical sun and rains upon unacclimated troops was deadly,
and a dread of strange and unknown diseases had its effect on the army.

"The San Juan and Aguadores rivers would often suddenly rise so as to
prevent the passage of wagons, and then the eight pack trains with
the command had to be depended upon for the victualing of my army,
as well as the 20,000 refugees, who could not in the interests of
humanity be left to starve while we had rations."

During the Chicago Peace Jubilee, General Shafter made an address at
the Armory of the First Illinois Volunteers, and, released from the
continual forms of official reports, added much of interest to the
story of Santiago. He says of the send-off:

"We were twice embarked and twice taken back to Tampa and
disembarked. On the first occasion the cause was the appearance
of Admiral Cervera's fleet; it requiring the entire navy that was
disposable to go after that fleet, and the second time by a report
that afterwards turned out to be incorrect, that in the St. Nicholas
channel, through which we would have to go, some Spanish cruisers
had been seen."

When ordered to Tampa to command the first Cuban expedition,
he continued:

"I took the troops that I thought best fitted and prepared for that
service. There were some magnificent regiments of volunteers, but to
part of them I had issued arms only two or three days before. They
were not properly equipped, and lacked experience. As I had the
choice, I took all of the regulars that were there, and with them
three regiments of volunteers. They were magnificent men, as perfect
as men could be, but, as you know who served in '61, poorly prepared
to take care of themselves at first. You recollect it was months
before we were prepared, and we made numerous mistakes that led to
sickness and death. The same things have occurred again, and they
always will continue with troops that are not used to the field, and
in this campaign men were taken directly from their camps immediately
after being mustered in, and put into the most difficult campaign of
modern military history.

"I practically had the entire regular army of the United States, twenty
of the twenty-five regiments of infantry, five of the ten regiments
of cavalry, and five batteries of artillery, with three regiments of
volunteers, the Seventy-first New York, the Second Massachusetts,
and the regiment known as Roosevelt's rough riders. The last were
practically seasoned soldiers. They were men from the frontier, men
who had been accustomed for years to taking a little sack of corn
meal on their saddles, and a blanket, and going out to sleep out of
doors for a week or a month at a time. Of course, they knew how to
care for themselves in camp.

"Early in June I was called to the telephone in Tampa, and told from
the President's mansion in Washington to proceed immediately with
not less than 10,000 men to Santiago; that news had been received
that day that the fleet of Cervera was surely within that harbor,
and that if 10,000 men could be placed there at once the fleet and
the city could be captured in forty-eight hours. The horses and
mules had been taken off from the ships as well as the men, and the
time consumed in reloading the horses and mules allowed me to embark
17,000 men nearly. That was very fortunate for me and our cause."

On arrival off Santiago, he, "with Admiral Sampson, went down the coast
about twenty miles, and saw General Garcia, and asked him his opinion
of the country, what his force was, and whether he was disposed to
assist. I found him very willing and very glad to offer his services
at once, with 3,000 men that he had with him and another thousand
that he had up the country a little further, which were to join us
immediately. In sailing along the coast, looking for a landing place,
I selected two places--Siboney, a little indentation in the coast
about twelve or thirteen miles east of Santiago, and another little
bay about eight miles further east, where small streams entered
into the sea, making a valley and a sandbar about 150 to 200 yards
in extent. All the rest of the coast is abrupt, perpendicular walls
of rock from ten to thirty feet high, against which the waves were
dashing all the time, and where it is utterly impossible to land.

"We had the earnest and able support of the navy and their assistance
in disembarking, and the next morning were bombarding the two little
places and driving the few hundred Spanish soldiers, that were there
away. We began disembarking, and before the end of the day the men
were on shore, with 2,000 horses and mules that we had to throw
overboard to get ashore, and the artillery."

The General noted the loss of 17,000 troops out of 24,000 in the
English army that besieged Havana in 1762, at the same time of year
that he landed at Santiago, and remarked:

"I knew that my entire army would be sick if it stayed long enough;
that it was simply a question of getting that town just as soon as
possible. I knew the strength, the courage, and the will of my men,
or I thought I did, and the result shows that I was not mistaken. It
was a question of starting the moment we landed and not stopping
until we reached the Spanish outposts, and, therefore, as soon as a
division was put on shore it was started on the march.

"On the 24th the first engagement took place, in which we had between
800 and 900 men on the American side and probably 1,000 or 1,200 on
the Spanish. The enemy was strongly intrenched, showing only their
heads, while the American forces had to march exposing their whole
bodies to the fire of the enemy.

"It is announced by military experts as an axiom that trained troops
armed with the present breech-loading and rapid-firing arm cannot
be successfully assailed by any troops who simply assault. Of course
you can make the regular approaches and dig up to them. The fallacy
of that proposition was made very manifest that day when the men
composing the advance marched as deliberately over those breastworks
as they ever did when they fought with arms that you could only load
about twice in a minute and of the range of only 200 or 300 yards.

"This army was an army of marksmen. For fifteen years the greatest
attention has been paid to marksmanship, and I suppose four-fifths
of all the men in that army wore on their breasts the marksman's
badge. I had given orders, knowing that the noise of firing is
harmless and that shots put in the air are harmless--I had given the
strictest orders to all officers that their men should be told not to
fire a shot unless they could see something moving, and the firing
was to be by individuals, what is called file firing, individual
firing. The Spanish troops, not so well drilled in firing as ours,
used volley firing, which is very effective against large bodies
of troops massed and moving over a plain, but utterly inefficient
when used against skirmishers moving over a rough country. In that
battle, which lasted two hours, less than ten rounds of ammunition
per man was fired by my men, and the losses, notwithstanding my men
were exposed, their whole bodies, while the enemy were in trenches,
where only their heads could be seen, were about equal.

"I saw the commander of that force a few days later in Santiago, and
in talking about it he said to me: 'Your men behaved very strange. We
were much surprised. They were whipped, but they didn't seem to know
it; they continued to advance (laughter and applause), and we had to
go away.' He was quite right about it. They did have to go away.

"On the 29th we had reached the immediate vicinity of the peaks in
front of Santiago, about a mile and a half from the city. On the 30th
I carefully reconnoitered the ground as much as one could in the dense
undergrowth, and determined where I would make my attack, which was
simply directed in front, and to make a direct assault. There was
no attempt at strategy, and no attempt at turning their flanks. It
was simply going straight for them. In that I did not misjudge my
men, and that is where I succeeded so well. (Applause.) If we had
attempted to flank them out or dig them out by regular parallels and
get close to them my men would have been sick before it could have
been accomplished, and the losses would have been many times greater
than they were.

"The only misfortune, as I judged it, of the first day's fight,but
which I have since learned was for the best, was that immediately on
our right, and what would be in our rear when we attacked the town,
was a little village called El Caney, four miles and a half from
Santiago, and whence the best road in the country connected with
Santiago. I did not know the exact force there, but it was estimated
to be 1,000, and perhaps a little more, and it would, of course,
have been very hazardous to have left that force so near in our rear.

"Instead of finishing the affair by 9 o'clock, as we expected, it took
until 4:30 o'clock in the afternoon before the last shot was fired,
and then after a loss of nearly a hundred killed and 250 wounded on
our side and the almost total annihilation of the force opposed to
us. They had an idea that they would be killed, and when men believe
that it is hard to capture them. Just at the close of the battle
three or four hundred did attempt to escape, but ran out in front of
a brigade that they did not see, and in the course of about three
or four hundred yards most of them were dead or mortally wounded,
so that probably not more than twenty men on the other side escaped
from that battle. It was a most desperate struggle.

"Men were killed in the trenches by being knocked on the head with
muskets, and one man I was shown two days later with what would be
called a tremendous head on him, and the interpreter asked him how
that had occurred, and he doubled up his fist and spoke of the soldier
that had hit him as a black man, that he had dropped his gun and hit
him in the head with his fist. That was pretty close work.

"Meanwhile the battle in front of Santiago progressed, with
three divisions on our side, one of dismounted cavalry and two of
infantry. It was beautifully fought. Every man knew what he had to do,
and so did every officer. The orders were that Immediately upon being
deployed they were to attack. They did it. Every man kept going, and
when one's comrade dropped the rest kept going. The result was that
in about two hours the line was taken, and practically that afternoon
the battle of Santiago was ended, for those men never advanced beyond
that point.

"During the night I brought up the division of General Lawton that had
been on the right at Caney and put them on the extreme right, where I
had intended to have them the day before, and where, had they been,
we should probably have taken the town and have gotten only the men
that were there, and not the 12,000 that were far beyond our reach
who were surrendered a few days later.

"On the morning of the 2d a weak attempt was made upon our lines. In
that the Spaniards had to expose themselves, while my men were
covered. The fight lasted but a little while, and they retreated.

"On the morning of July 3 I thought we had so much of an advantage
that I could notify the enemy, first, that I wanted a surrender, and,
second, if they declined to surrender that they could have twenty-four
hours to get the women and children out of town. Of course, civilized
people do not fire on towns filled with women and children if they
will come out if it can be avoided. The Spanish commander declined
very promptly to surrender, but said he would notify the women and
children and those that desired to go, but he wanted twenty-four
hours more, and said there were a great many people to go out. They
began to stream out at once, and for forty-eight hours old men, women,
and children poured out until it was estimated that at least 20,000
people passed through our lines and out into the woods in the rear. Of
course, there was an immense amount of suffering, and numbers died,
especially of the old. Fortunately we were enabled to give them some
food, enough so that they existed, but at that time, with the Cuban
forces that I had, I was issuing daily 45,000 rations. Forty-five
thousand people are a good many to feed when you have such fearful
roads and food could only be carried on the backs of mules.

"On that morning of the 3d, about an hour after the time for
surrendering, Cervera's fleet left the harbor, and went out, as you
know, to total annihilation. It was not more than twenty or thirty
minutes after they left the mouth of the harbor before, so far as
we could hear, the firing had ceased, and 1,700 men were prisoners,
600 were killed, and three or four battleships and some torpedo boats
were either on the rocks or in the bottom of the sea--a most wonderful
victory, never equaled before in naval history, and due mainly to
the magnificent marksmanship of our men, which covered the Spanish
decks with such a hail of iron that no sailors on earth could stand
against it.

"Two days after this I saw General Toral, and I was convinced from
conversation with him that he was going to surrender. I had no one
but myself to take the responsibility, in fact, I did not want anyone
else to do it, but while I was convinced myself it was hard to convince
others. I knew that we could capture the town at any time, that we had
it surrounded so that they could not possibly get away, although on
the night of July 2 2,800 men marched in. I had understood there were
8,000, but when we counted them a few days afterward there were only
2,800. I knew that if we carried that town by force a thousand men at
least would be lost to the American army, and a thousand good American
men are a good many to expend in capturing a Spanish town (applause),
and I did not propose to do it if I could possibly talk them out of it.

"General Toral knew just as well as I did that I knew just what he
had--that he was on his last rations, and that nothing but plain rice,
that we had his retreat cut off, that we had the town surrounded,
that he could not hurt us, while we could bombard him and do some
little damage, perhaps, and that it was only a question of a few days.

"I found out a few days later what the hitch was which caused the
delay, for General Toral had told me that he had been authorized by
Blanco, the Governor-General, to enter into negotiations and make
terms for surrender, and in Cuba you know General Blanco was in
supreme command. His authority was such that he could even set aside
a law of Spain. Knowing that, I felt sure that after very little
delay they would surrender. They desired to get permission from
the Madrid government to return to Spain. It was that that delayed
them. Immediately upon receiving the permission to return to Spain
they surrendered.

"I had in line when the fighting was going on, about 13,000 men--not
more than that at any time. Inside the Spanish trenches there were
about 10,000. There were 11,500 surrendered, and I think about 1,500
of them were sick. The disproportion, considering the difference of
situation, is not very great. In fact, I think that 10,000 American
soldiers could have kept 100,000 Spaniards out had they been in the
same position (applause), although I do not wish to disparage the
bravery of the Spanish troops. They are gallant fellows, but they
have not the intelligence and do not take the initiative as do the
American soldiers; and they have not the bull-dog pluck that hangs
on day after day.

"Toral made the first proposition to surrender. He said if I would let
him take his men and such things as they could carry on their persons
and on a few pack mules that they had and guarantee him safe conduct
to Holguin, which was fifty-two miles away to the north and in the
interior, they would march out. I told him, of course, that was out
of the question; that I could not accept any such terms as that, but
I would submit it to the President. I did so, and was very promptly
informed that only unconditional surrender would be received, but I
was at liberty to say to General Toral that if they would surrender
they would be carried, at the expense of the United States government,
back to Spain. When that proposition was made to him I could see his
face lighten up and the faces of his staff, who were there. They were
simply delighted. Those men love their country intensely, they had been
brought to Cuba against their will, and had stayed there three years,
poorly clad, not paid at all, and not well fed, and the prospect of
going back to their homes had as much to do with conforming their
views to our wishes as anything that was done during the campaign.

"Meanwhile ten or twelve days had elapsed and I had received quite a
number of volunteer regiments--two from Michigan, the First District
of Columbia, a Massachusetts regiment, and an Ohio regiment, the
Eighth Ohio--all splendid troops and well equipped, and while they
were not there at the hardest of the fighting they were there during
the suffering, and everything that soldiers were called upon to do
they did like men.

"It is a great deal harder to stand up day after day and see companions
go from sickness and disease than it is to face the perils of battle.

"When I told General Toral that we would carry his men back he said:
'Does that include my entire command?' I said: 'What is your command
and where are they?' He replied the Fourth Army Corps; 11,500 men in
the city, 3,000 twenty miles in the rear of us; 7,500 he said were
up the coast less than sixty miles, and about 1,500 125 to 150 miles
off on the northeastern coast.

"There were 3,440 odd, and at a place less than sixty miles east
there were 7,500 and a few over, because we counted them and took
their arms. The result of that surrender was as unexpected to us as
probably it was to every person in the United States. There was simply
a little army there, which had gone down to assist the navy in getting
the Spanish fleet out and capturing that town, and we expected no other
result from it than victory at the spot at the utmost, but in attacking
the limb we got the whole body. It was expected that, beginning about
the first of October, the objective point of the campaign was to be
Havana, where we knew there were from 125,000 to 150,000 men, and
it was expected that about the first of October a large army would
be sent over there, and the battle that would decide the war would
be fought in the vicinity of Havana. I think that was the universal
feeling. The loss of that city and of those 24,000 men--23,376, to
be accurate--so dispirited them that within a week the proposition
of Spain to close the war was made, and, happily, the war was ended.

"The difficulties of that campaign were not in the fighting. That
was the easiest part of it. The difficulties were in getting food
and medicine to the front. There was but a single road, a muddy and
terrible road, and with five or six wagons going over it the sixth
wagon would be on the axle tree, and in taking up some artillery I
had fourteen horses on one battery that was usually drawn by four,
and even with that number it went out of sight, and we had to leave
it and dig it out after the water had subsided."

Admiral Sampson's report, dated August 3d, was published October
23d, and covers the conduct of the fleet under his command, in
its operations in the West Indies, for about two months prior to
the destruction of Admiral Cervera's ships on July 3. It was made
up largely of official dispatches and the movements of the fleet,
with explanations and comment by the Admiral, and begins with a
statement of the determination reached by the Navy department to send
a squadron to the Windward Passage for the purpose of observation,
because of the information received of the sailing, on April 29,
of Admiral Cervera's squadron from the Cape Verde Islands.

On the voyage eastward from the naval base at Key West, which began
on May 4, Admiral Sampson reports there was experienced endless
trouble and delay because of the inefficiency of the two monitors
accompanying the other ships, and which had to be taken in tow. Their
coal supply was so small that it was at once evident that they must
either frequently coal or be towed. The Admiral says:

"Had the sea been rough, or had the enemy appeared at this juncture,
the squadron would have been in a much better position for an
engagement had the monitors been elsewhere. Subsequently, when engaging
the batteries of San Juan, it was evident that their shooting was bad.

"Owing to the quick rolling of these vessels, even in a moderate sea,
they were unable to fire with any degree of accuracy."

Among the telegrams received by the Admiral from the department at
Washington when off Cape Haytien was the following:

Washington, D.C., May 6.--Do not risk or cripple your vessels against
fortifications as to prevent from soon afterwards successfully
fighting Spanish fleet, composed of Pelayo, Carlos V., Oquendo,
Vizcaya, Maria Teresa, Cristobal Colon, four deep sea torpedo boats,
if they should appear on this side. _Long_.

It was determined to go to Porto Rico, and the squadron arrived off
San Juan on the morning of the 12th and the bombardment of that place
ensued. Regarding his action at this place the Admiral says:

"It was clear to my own mind that the squadron would not have any great
difficulty in forcing the surrender of the place, but the fact that we
should be held several days in completing arrangements for holding it;
that part of our force would have to be left to await the arrival of
troops to garrison it; that the movements of the Spanish squadron,
our main objective, were still unknown; that the flying squadron was
still north and not in a position to render any aid; that Havana,
Cervera's natural objective, was thus open to entry by such force
as his, while we were a thousand miles distant, made our immediate
movement toward Havana imperative.

"I thus reluctantly gave up the project against San Juan and stood
westward for Havana."

Several telegrams are here presented, based on reports that Cervera's
squadron had returned to Cadiz and they had in view "to return and
capture San Juan, the desire to do so and occupy the place being
assured in the event of Admiral Cervera's failure to cross the
Atlantic."

Shortly after news was received that the Spanish fleet had appeared
off Curacao, West Indies, and the squadron under orders from the
department proceeded to Key West, to which place the flying squadron
under Commodore (now Admiral) Schley had already been ordered.

Arrangements were then hurriedly made and the flying squadron,
augmented by the other vessels under Commodore Schley, was sent off
Cienfuegos, where it was believed the enemy would go, in which case an
effort was to be made to engage and capture him. Sampson was given the
choice either of the command of the blockading squadron off Havana or
at Cienfuegos, Schley in either case to remain with his own squadron.

From messages received by the Admiral from the department about May
20 it appears that reports had reached the United States that the
Spanish fleet was at Santiago, so the department advised Sampson to
send immediately word to Schley to proceed to that place, leaving
one small vessel off Cienfuegos.

On May 21 instructions were written by Samnson for Commodore Schley
and sent to him via the Marblehead regarding the possibility of the
Spanish fleet being at Santiago. They are in part as follows:

United States Flagship New York, First Rate, Key West, Fla., May
21.--Sir: Spanish squadron is probably at Santiago de Cuba--four ships
and three torpedo boat destroyers. If you are satisfied they are not
at Cienfuegos proceed with all dispatch, but cautiously, to Santiago
de Cuba, and if the enemy is there blockade him in port. You will
probably find it necessary to establish communication with some of
the inhabitants--fishermen or others--to learn definitely that the
ships are in port, it being impossible to see into it from the outside.

The Admiral said he felt much concerned as to the delivery of
these orders and sent a duplicate by the Hawk with an additional
memorandum. The Admiral suggested that if the information did not
reach Commodore Schley before daylight of May 23 to mask the real
direction he should take as much as possible. He adds: "Follow the
Spanish squadron whichever direction they take."

The Admiral off Havana gives copies of orders of battle which were to
be followed in the event that Cervera left Santiago on the approach
of Schley's fleet from Cienfuegos and attempted to cruise around the
coast to Havana, in which case the Havana squadron would attempt to
intercept him by going east about 200 miles beyond the junction of
Santiren and Nicholas Channels. Strict orders were given for screening
lights and to see that none were accidentally shown.

The squadron was to cruise generally to the eastward in the day and
westward during the night.

On May 23, as shown by the report, Commodore Schley expressed the
belief that the Spaniards were at Cienfuegos. On the 27th the Admiral
sent word to Schley, directing him to proceed with all possible speed
to Santiago because of information received that the Spaniards were
there. The same time orders were sent to have the collier Sterling
dispatched to Santiago with an expression of opinion that the Commodore
should use it to obstruct the channel at its narrowest part leading
into the harbor.

The details of the plan were left to the Commodore's judgment, as he
(Sampson) had "the utmost confidence in his ability to carry this
plan to a successful conclusion, and earnestly wished him good luck."

Sampson apparently felt certain of the presence of the Spaniards
at Santiago and urged that the harbor must be blockaded at all
hazards. Schley in the meantime had proceeded to Santiago, although
it appears not the same day Admiral Sampson expected.

At one time Commodore Schley contemplated going to Key West with the
squadron for coal, but this was abandoned, his collier having been
temporarily repaired, and the necessity for a trip to Key West being
avoided Santiago was then blockaded.

Admiral Sampson arrived at Santiago June 1st. June 8 the Admiral
urged upon the department, as he had previously done, to expedite the
arrival of the troops for Santiago, the difficulty of blockading the
Spanish ships daily increasing.

In a memorandum dated June 15, the Admiral says:

"The Commander-in-Chief desires again to call the attention of the
commanding officers to the positions occupied by the blockading fleet,
especially during the daytime, and it is now directed that all ships
keep within a distance of the entrance to Santiago of four miles,
and this distance must not be exceeded.

"If the vessel is coaling or is otherwise restricted in its movements
it must nevertheless keep within this distance. If at any time the
flagship makes signal which is not visible to any vessel, such vessel
must at once approach the flagship or retreating vessel to a point
where it can read the signal.

"Disregard of the directions which have already been given on this
head has led to endless confusion. Many times during the day the fleet
is so scattered that it would be perfectly possible for the enemy to
come out of the harbor and meet with little opposition.

"The Commander-in-Chief hopes that strict attention will be given
this order."

In the order of battle incidental to the landing of Shafter's army
corps June 22, when ships were sent to shell the beach and cover the
landing of the men" the following occurs:

"The attention of commanding officers of all vessels engaged in
blockading Santiago de Cuba is earnestly called to the necessity of
the utmost vigilance from this time forward, both as to maintaining
stations and readiness for action and as to keeping a close watch upon
the harbor mouth. If the Spanish Admiral ever intends to attempt to
escape that attempt will be made soon."

The Admiral says trouble was experienced in the landing of Shafter's
army on account of the wandering proclivities of some of the
transports. The progress of the disembarkation was rendered somewhat
difficult by a heavy sea, the heaviest during the three weeks the
fleet had been stationed there, owing to a stiff blow off the coast
of Jamaica.

According to a dispatch to Secretary Long, dated June 26, the
channel at Santiago not having been obstructed by the sinking of the
Merrimac, Admiral Sampson was preparing a torpedo attack to hasten the
destruction of the Spanish vessels, although he regretted resorting to
this method because of its difficulties and small chance of success. He
would not do this, he says, were the present force to be kept there; as
it then insured a capture, which he believed would terminate the war.

There was contemplated at this time sending a fleet to the Spanish
coast; and this expedition was to consist of the Iowa, Oregon, Newark,
Yosemite, Yankee, and Dixie, and they were to go to the Azores for
orders, en route to Tangier, Morocco. The colliers were to join the
fleet at the Azores.

On June 30 the Admiral received a communication from Major-General
Shafter announcing that he expected to attack Santiago the following
morning, and asking that he (Sampson) bombard the forts at Aguadores
in support of a regiment of infantry, and make such demonstrations
as he thought proper at the harbor's mouth, so as to keep as many of
the enemy there as possible.

This request was complied with, and on July 1 General Shafter asked
that the Admiral keep up his fight on the Santiago water front. On
July 2 the following was received from General Shafter.

"Terrible fight yesterday, but my line is now strongly intrenched
about three-fourths of a mile from town. I urge that you make effort
immediately to force the entrance to avoid future losses among my men,
which are already heavy. You can now operate with less loss of life
than I can. Please telephone answer."

A reply was telephoned General Shafter from Admiral Sampson, through
Lieutenant Stanton, which said the Admiral had bombarded the forts
at the entrance of Santiago and also Punta Gorda battery inside,
silencing their fire, and asked whether he (Shafter) wanted further
firing on the Admiral's part. The explanation was made that it was
impossible to force an entrance until the channel was cleared of
mines--a work of some time after the forts were taken possession of
by the troops. To this General Shafter replied:

"It is impossible for me to say when I can take batteries at entrance
of harbor. If they are as difficult to take as those which we have been
pitted against it will be some time and at great loss of life. I am at
a loss to see why the navy cannot work under a destructive fire as well
as the army. My loss yesterday was over 500 men. By all means keep up
fire on everything in sight of you until demolished. I expect, however,
in time and with sufficient men to capture the forts along the bay."

On the 2nd of July, Sampson wrote to Shafter.

"An officer of my staff has already reported to you the firing which we
did this morning, but I must say in addition to what he told you that
the forts which we silenced were not the forts which would give you
any inconvenience in capturing the city, as they cannot fire except
to seaward. They cannot even prevent our entrance into the harbor
of Santiago. Our trouble from the first has been the channel to the
harbor is well strewn with observation mines, which would certainly
result in the sinking of one or more of our ships if we attempted
to enter the harbor, and by the sinking of a ship the object of
attempting to enter the harbor would be defeated by the preventing
of further progress on our part.

"It was my hope that an attack on your part of these shore batteries
from the rear would leave us at liberty to drag the channel for
torpedoes.

"If it is your earnest desire that we should force our entrance I
will at once prepare to undertake it. I think, however, that our
position and yours would be made more difficult if, as is possible,
we fail in our attempt.

"We have in our outfit at Guantanamo forty countermining mines, which I
will bring here with as little delay as possible, and if we can succeed
in freeing the entrance of mines by their use I will enter the harbor.

"This work, which is unfamiliar to us, will require considerable time.

"It is not so much the loss of men as it is the loss of ships which
has until now deterred me from making a direct attack upon the ships
within the port."

The Admiral says he began making preparations to countermine, and,
with the object of arranging an attack upon the batteries at the
entrance a visit was arranged to General Shafter, so that the matter
might be thoroughly discussed, and combined action take place.

He adds: "I had in view the employment of the marines for an assault an
either the Morro or Socapa battery, while at the same time assaulting
the defenses at the entrance with the fleet."

The Admiral says of the sortie and destruction of Cervera's fleet:

"This event closes the purely naval campaign, crowning with complete
success the anxious work of almost exactly two months."

The error of Commodore Schley as to the location of Cervera's fleet,
his hesitation in accepting the report of the Spaniards' presence at
Santiago, appears to have caused the advancement of Admiral Sampson
and subordinated Schley. Out of this came differences of opinion about
facts among the close friends of the two distinguished officers. Schley
was close at hand when Cervera's run from Santiago took place,
while Sampson was out of the way on other duty, and Schley has been
charged with an evasive movement of the New York just then that lost
valuable time. It is related by the Washington staff correspondent
of the Chicago Times-Herald that just after the battle of Santiago,
Commodore Schley went aboard the Iowa and hailed Captain Evans with
the remark that it had been a great day for the American navy.

"But why didn't you obey orders and close in on the mouth of the
harbor instead of heading out to sea?" inquired Evans.

Commodore Schley's reply was that he was afraid the Vizcaya would
ram the Brooklyn. This colloquy referred to a striking maneuver of
the flagship Brooklyn early in the engagement at Santiago, which has
been commented on before. In justice to Commodore Schley the navy
department officers admit the Spanish officers after the battle
said that it had been their purpose, on emerging from the harbor,
to have the Vizcaya ram the Brooklyn, believing that the Spanish
cruisers could outrun the remaining vessels in the American fleet,
most of which were battleships, supposed to be of a lower rate of
speed than the Spanish cruisers.

The action of the Vizcaya as she headed toward the Brooklyn indicated
her determination to carry out this programme. But the remark of
Captain Evans to the nominal commander of the squadron would under
ordinary circumstances have been an act of insubordination and only
illustrates the feeling of some of the captains of the fleet toward
the Commodore.

It has been said that Schley, being ordered to Key West when Cervera
appeared in Cuban waters, "proceeded to Cienfuegos, which was thought
to be the destination of the Spanish warships. That port commanded the
only direct railroad connection with Havana, and had the Spanish fleet
gone there Admiral Cervera could have relieved General Blanco with
money and munitions of war and received in return supplies necessary
for his squadron. It is believed even now that had the Spanish ships
been properly supplied and equipped they would have gone to Cienfuegos
instead of to Santiago. But subsequent developments have shown that
Admiral Cervera was permitted to take only enough coal to carry him
to the nearest port, Santiago."

Schley credited Cervera with knowing enough to know that Cienfuegos
was the better port for his purposes, and therefore adhered to his
opinion, and Sampson was made his superior officer. So important
have the differences seemed that the Wainwright Board was convened to
investigate the parts taken in the Santiago naval battle respectively
by Admiral Sampson and Admiral Schley. But in official phrase this
board was convened for the purpose of determining the position and
courses of the ships engaged in the action at Santiago July 3, and
reporting to the Secretary of the Navy.

The report is:

"U.S.F.S. New York, First Rate, Navy Yard, New York, Oct. 8,
1898.--Sir: In obedience to your order of Sept. 2, 1898, appointing
us a board to plot the positions of the ships of Admiral Cervera's
squadron and those of the United States fleet in the battle of July 3,
off Santiago de Cuba, we have the honor to submit the following report,
accompanied by a chart, showing the positions of the ships at seven
different times.

"These times, as taken by the United States ships engaged, with the
incidents noted, are as follows:

"No. 1, 9:35 a.m.--Maria Teresa came out of the harbor.

"No. 2, 9:50 a.m.--Pluton came out.

"No. 3, 10:15 a.m.--Maria Teresa turned to run ashore.

"No. 4, 10:20 a.m.--Oquendo turned to run ashore.

"No. 5, 10:30 a.m.--Furor blew up and Pluton turned to run ashore.

"No. 6, 11:05 a.m.--Vizcaya turned to run ashore.

"No. 7, 1:15 p.m.--Colon surrendered.

"The chart selected by the board for plotting is H.O. chart No. 716,
1885, West Indies, eastern part of Bahama Islands, with part of
Cuba and north coast of San Domingo. This selection was made after
a careful comparison with all other charts at hand, as the positions
of the principal headlands and inlets and the distances between them
on it agree more nearly with the observation of members of the board
than those given by any other.

"The positions of the United States ships were established by known
bearings and distances from the Morro at No. 1, with the exception
of the New York, whose position is plotted by the revolutions of its
engines during a run of forty-five minutes cast from its position,
southeast half south of the Morro, 6,000 yards. Position at No. 2 is
plotted by all ships according to their relative bearings from each
other, the operations of their engines from 9:35 to 9:50, the evidence
of the officers on board them, and the ranges used in firing at the
Spanish ships. Position No. 3 is plotted from observations of the
officers of the United States ships, with regard to their nearness
to each other, and relative bearings of themselves from Teresa,
with ranges in use at the time, the performance of the engines,
and general heading of the ships. Position No. 4 same as No. 3,
substituting Oquendo for Teresa. Position Nos. 5, 6, and 7 are plotted
on the same general plan.

"Before plotting these positions the board took each ship separately
and discussed the data for the position under consideration--this data
being obtained from the report of the commanding officers, notes taken
during the action, and the evidence of the members of the board. In
reconciling differences of opinion in regard to distances, bearings,
ranges, etc., full liberty was given to the representative of the
ships under discussion to bring in any argument or data he considered
necessary, and the board submits this report with a feeling that,
under the circumstances, it is as nearly correct as is possible so
long after the engagement. Very respectfully,

"_Richard Wainwright_,
"Lieutenant Commander, U.S.N., Senior Member.
"_S.P. Comly_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.
"_L.C. Heilner_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.
"_W.H. Schuetze_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.
"_A.C. Hodgson_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.
"_W.H. Allen_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.
"_Edward E. Capehart_,
"Lieutenant, U.S.N.

"To the Commander-in-Chief."

Measurements upon the chart showing the positions of the vessels at
the specified times named in the report will give as fair an idea of
the work of the board as can be made without the chart itself.

"Position No. 1, 9:35 a.m. When the Maria Teresa came out of the
harbor the New York was nine miles east of Morro, accompanied by the
Hist and Ericsson. The Brooklyn was three miles southwest of Morro,
being two and two-tenths miles from the shore west of the mouth of the
harbor. The Texas was eight-tenths of a mile east of the Brooklyn;
the Iowa one and eight-tenths miles east and south of the Brooklyn,
and the Oregon a half mile east of the Iowa, the Iowa being three
miles directly south of Morro. The Indiana was two and two-tenths
miles southwest of Morro and the Gloucester one mile almost directly
north of the Indiana, a mile and four-tenths from Morro.

"Position No. 2, 9:50 a.m. When the Pluton came out all the Spanish
vessels had come out of the harbor and their positions were: Maria
Teresa two and a half miles southwest of Morro, the Vizcaya, Colon and
Oquendo, in the order named, behind the Teresa and from four-tenths
to half a mile apart. The position of the American vessels were: The
New York had moved up two and one-tenth miles westward. The Brooklyn
had started north, swerved to the northeast and toward the mouth of
the harbor, and was turning east on the swing it made to the right
and around to the westward course; it was eight-tenths of a mile from
the Vizcaya. At position No. 2 the Texas first went east a half mile,
swinging toward the harbor, then turning to the left it is at No. 2
a half mile directly north of the first position. The Iowa moved by
a varying course northwest and was a mile and four-tenths from the
Vizcaya, the Oregon being two-tenths of a mile behind the Iowa, the
Indiana three-tenths behind the Iowa. The Gloucester's first start was
half a mile directly away from the harbor, but swinging to the right,
had advanced toward the Spanish ships, being one and seven-tenths
miles from the nearest, the Oquendo.

"Position No. 3, 10:15 a.m. Maria Teresa turned to run ashore. It
was five and one-half miles from Morro. The Vizcaya was two and
three-tenths miles westward from the Teresa, the Oquendo one and
two-tenths miles, and the Colon one and four-tenths miles in advance
of the Teresa. The American vessels were as follows: The New York had
come within three miles of Morro, being southeast of that point. The
Brooklyn had made its swing to the westward, crossing its track, and
was two and one-half miles south and west of the Teresa, and one and
three-tenths miles directly south of the Colon, and one and one-tenth
miles and a little behind the Vizcaya, one and three-tenths miles and
a little in advance of the Oquendo. The Texas was one and two-tenths
miles from the Teresa, a little behind it, and one and four-tenths
miles from and behind the next Spanish ship, the Oquendo. The Iowa
was one and one-tenth miles from the Teresa and a little closer in,
but not quite as far west as the Texas. The Oregon had pulled up
and passed the Texas and Iowa, being a little further in shore than
the Texas and a little further out than the Iowa. It was in advance
of the Teresa, being one and seven-tenths miles from that vessel,
six-tenths of a mile from and directly in the line of the Oquendo,
seven-tenths of a mile from the Colon, and one and two-tenths miles
behind the Vizcaya. The Indiana was two miles from the Texas and two
and six-tenths miles from the Oquendo, the nearest Spanish vessel. The
Gloucester had moved up six-tenths of a mile and was just a mile
directly south of Morro.

"Position No. 4, 10:20 a. m. Oquendo turned to run ashore. Only five
minutes elapsed from position No. 3. All vessels had been running
westward without material changes in their positions. The Colon had
run one and three-tenths miles, the Vizcaya about one-tenth of a mile
less, and swerved to the left, bringing it to within one and one-tenth
miles of the Brooklyn. The Iowa was the same distance, but almost
directly astern, and the Oregon was one and three-tenths miles from
the Vizcaya, but farther out to sea. The Iowa was eight-tenths of a
mile from the Oquendo, the Oregon nine-tenths of a mile from the same
vessel, and both somewhat in advance of the doomed Spanish ship. The
Indiana had advanced eight-tenths of a mile and was two and six-tenths
miles away from the Oquendo, the nearest Spanish ship. The New York
had advanced nearly a mile, but was not yet abreast of Morro. The
Gloucester had run over two miles and was now well west of Morro,
but five miles east of the Oquendo.

"Position No. 5, 10:30 a. m. Furor blew up and Pluton turned to run
ashore. This is ten minutes later than position No. 4. The Gloucester
had run a little more than two miles, and was four-tenths of a mile
from the Furor and but little further from the Pluton. The New York
had run two and two-tenths miles, and was three and three-tenths miles
from the Furor, the nearest Spanish ship, and two and two-tenths miles
south and a little west of Morro. The Colon had run two and nine-tenths
miles, and the Vizcaya two and seven-tenths miles. The Brooklyn had
run two and three-tenths miles, and was one and two-tenths miles from
the Vizcaya and one and six-tenths miles from the Colon, which was
running nearer the shore. The Oregon had sailed two and a half miles,
and was one and one-half miles from the Vizcaya, and about the same
distance from the Colon. The Texas was one and two-tenths miles astern
of the Oregon, two and four-tenths miles from the Oregon. The Indiana
was one and one-half miles astern of the Texas.

"Position No. 6, 11:05 a.m. Vizcaya turned to run ashore. In
thirty-five minutes the Vizcaya had sailed about seven miles, and
was off the mouth of the Aserradero River. The Colon had run five and
one-half miles further, and was more than that distance in advance of
any of the American vessels. The Brooklyn was one and three-tenths
miles distant from the Vizcaya and slightly behind it. The Oregon
was one and a half miles from the Vizcaya, but nearer the shore and
somewhat more astern of the enemy. The Texas was two and seven-tenths
miles from the Vizcaya and directly astern of the Oregon. The Iowa
was three and two-tenths miles directly astern of the Vizcaya. The New
York was five miles behind the Iowa. The Ericsson had kept along with
the New York all the time, and was, at this position, one-half a mile
in advance of it. The Indiana was nearly four miles behind the Iowa.

"Position No. 7, 1:15 p.m. The Colon surrendered. In the two hours
and ten minutes from the last position given the vessels had coursed
westward a great distance. The Colon had run twenty-six and one-half
miles and was off the Tarquino River. The Brooklyn was the nearest
American vessel. It had sailed twenty-eight and one-half miles and was
three and four-tenths miles from the Colon. The Oregon was four and
one-half miles from the Colon and more in shore than the Brooklyn. The
Texas was three and four-tenths miles behind the Oregon. The New York
was nine and one-half miles from the Colon. No one of the other vessels
had come up save the Vixen, which was abreast of the New York. This
little vessel in the beginning of the fight steamed out to sea and
sailed westward on a course about two and one-quarter miles from that
of the nearest Spanish ships.

"The tracings of the chart show that the Spanish vessels sailed on
courses not more than three-tenths of a mile apart until the Oquendo
ran ashore. Then the Vizcaya veered out to sea and the Colon kept
nearer the shore, their courses being about seven-tenths of a mile
apart. Up to the time the Oquendo went ashore the Iowa, Indiana,
Oregon, and Texas sailed on courses within three-tenths of a mile
of each other, the Iowa being the nearest and the Texas the farthest
from the course of the Spanish ships. The Brooklyn's course was from
three-tenths to one-half of a mile outside that of the Texas. The swing
to the right which the Brooklyn made at the beginning of the engagement
shows an oval four-tenths of a mile across. It crossed the courses of
the Texas, Oregon, and Indiana twice while making the turn, but before
these vessels had gone over them. The course of the New York after
passing Morro was nearer the shore than any other United States vessel
except the Gloucester, and a mile behind where the Oquendo turned to
run ashore it passed inside the courses of the Spanish vessels. Ten
miles west of the Vizcaya disaster it crossed the Colon's track, but
followed close the course of that vessel until the latter surrendered.

"The Iowa, Indiana, and Ericsson did not go further west than where
the Vizcaya ran ashore. The Gloucester stopped by the Maria Teresa
and Oquendo, as also did the Hist. The latter vessel was not able to
keep pace with the New York and Ericsson, the vessels it was with at
the beginning of the battle."

Major General Nelson A. Miles was carrying on, as master of the art
and science of war, a prospering campaign in Porto Rico, when the
protocol of peace between the United States and Spain was signed,
and "the war drum throbbed" no longer. It is the testimony of those
who have studied the management of the invasion of Porto Rico by the
military head of the army, that it was going on guided with consummate
skill when the war closed. The American forces had the pleasure in
Porto Rico of moving in a country that had not been desolated as Cuba
was. The island was a tropical picture of peace, only the glitter of
armies breaking the spell. The defenders had the help of good roads,
by which they could, on the inner lines, shift their columns with
rapidity and ease. But the Porto Rico people were largely favorable to
United States sovereignty--just as the Cubans would be if it were not
for the selfishness and jealousies, hatreds and scheming, regardless
of the favor or prosperity of the people, that the most deplorable
warfare known in the later years of the earth has engendered. It was
on October 18, 1898, that the American flag was raised over San Juan
de Porto Rico. The telegram of the Associated Press contained this
announcement of the ceremony and symbol by which was announced the
glorious initial chapter of a new dispensation that adds to America's
territory one of the loveliest islands of the sea:

San Juan de Porto Rico, Oct. 18.--Promptly at noon to-day the American
flag was raised over San Juan. The ceremony was quiet and dignified,
unmarred by disorder of any kind.

The Eleventh Regular Infantry, with two batteries of the Fifth
Artillery, landed this morning. The latter proceeded to the forts,
while the infantry lined up on the docks. It was a holiday for San
Juan, and there were many people in the streets.

Rear Admiral Schley and General Gordon, accompanied by their staffs,
proceeded to the palace in carriages. The Eleventh infantry Regiment
and band, with Troop H of the Sixth United States Cavalry, then marched
through the streets and formed in the square opposite the palace.

At 11:40 a. m. General Brooke, Admiral Schley, and General Gordon, the
United States Evacuation Commissioners, came out of the palace, with
many naval officers, and formed on the right side of the square. The
streets behind the soldiers were thronged with townspeople, who stood
waiting in dead silence.

At last the city clock struck the hour of 12 and the crowds, almost
breathless and with eyes fixed upon the flagpole, watched for
developments. At the sound of the first gun from Fort Morro, Major
Dean and Lieutenant Castle, of General Brooke's staff, hoisted the
Stars and Stripes, while the band played the "Star Spangled Banner."

All heads were bared and the crowds cheered. Fort Morro, Fort San
Cristobal, and the United States revenue cutter Manning, lying in
the harbor, fired twenty-one guns each.

Senor Munoz Rivera, who was President of the recent autonomist council
of secretaries, and other officials of the late insular government,
were present at the proceedings.

Congratulations and handshaking among the American officers followed,
Ensign King hoisted the Stars and Stripes over the intendencia,
but all other flags on the various public buildings were hoisted by
military officers. Simultaneously with the raising of the flag over
the Captain General's palace many others were hoisted in different
parts of the city.

Washington, D. C., Oct. 18.--The War Department has received the
following to-day:

"San Juan, Porto Rico, Oct. 18.--Secretary of War, Washington, D. C.:
Flags have been raised on public buildings and forts in this city
and saluted with national salutes. The occupation of the island is
now complete.

"_Brooke_, Chairman."

The two Spanish fleets--of the East and West Indies, were annihilated,
the former May 1st, and the latter July 2nd, two months and two
days between the events. The respective fleets in Manila bay were
as follows:

_American Fleet_.


Name         Class              Armanent                         Men and
                                                                 Officers
Olympia      Protected Cruiser  Four 8-in., ten 5-in., 24 R.F.   466
Baltimore    Protected Cruiser  Four 8-in., six 6-in., 10 R.F.   395
Boston       Par. Ptd. Cruiser  Two 8-in., six 6-in., 10 R.F.    272
Raleigh      Protected Cruiser  One 6-in., ten 5-in., 14 R.F.    295
Concord      Gunboat            Six 6-in., 9 R.F.                150
Petrel       Gunboat            Four 6-in., 7 R.F.               100
McCulloch    Revenue Cutter     Four 4-in                        180


_Spanish Fleet_.


Name.                 Class.              Armament.                     Men and
                                                                        Officers
*Rema Cristina        Steel Cruiser       Six 6.2-in., two 2.7,
                                          13 R.F.                       370
Castilla              Wood Cruiser        Four 5.9, two 4.7, two 3.4,
                                          two 2.9, 12 R.F.              300
Don Antonio de Ulloa  Iron Cruiser        Four 4.7, 5 R.F.              173
Don Juan de Austria   Iron Cruiser        Four 4.7, two 2.7, 21 R.F.    173
Isla de Luzon         Steel Ptd. Cruiser  Six 4.7, 8 R.F                164
Isla de Cuba          Steel Ptd. Cruiser  Six 4.7, 8 R.F                164
Velasco               Iron Cruiser        Three 6-in., two 2.7, two
                                          R.F.                          173
Marques del Duero     Gunboat             One 6.2, two 4.7, 1 R.F.       98
General Lezo          Gunboat             One 3.5, 1 R.F.                97
El Correo             Gunboat             Three 4.7, 4 R.F.             116
Quiros                Gunboat             4 R.F.                         60
Villalobos            Gunboat             4 R.F.                         60
Two torpedo boats and two transports.


The American squadron was thus officered:

Acting Rear Admiral George Dewey, Commander-in-Chief.

Commander B.P. Lamberter, Chief-of-Staff.

Lieutenant L.M. Brumby, Flag Lieutenant.

Ensign H.H. Caldwell, Secretary.





_Olympia_ (Flagship).

Captain, Charles V. Gridley.

Lieutenant-Commander, S. C. Paine.

Lieutenants: C.G. Calkins, V.S. Nelson, G.S. Morgan, S.M. Strite.

Ensigns: M.M. Taylor, F.B. Upham, W.P. Scott, A.G. Kavanagh,
H.V. Butler.

Medical Inspector, A.F. Price; Passed Assistant Surgeon, J.E. Page;
Assistant Surgeon, C.H. Kindleberger; Pay Inspector, D.A. Smith;
Chief Engineer, J. Entwistle; Assistant Engineer, S.H. DeLany;
Assistant Engineer, J.F. Marshall, Jr.; Chaplain, J.B. Frazier;
Captain of Marines, W.P. Biddle; Gunner, L.J.G. Kuhlwein; Carpenter,
W. Macdonald; Acting Boatswain, E.J. Norcott.





_The Boston_.

Captain, F. Wildes.

Lieutenant-Commander, J.A. Norris.

Lieutenants: J. Gibson, W.L. Howard.

Ensigns: S.S. Robinson, L.H. Everhart, J.S. Doddridge.

Surgeon, M.H. Crawford; Assistant Surgeon, R.S. Balkeman; Paymaster,
J.R. Martin; Chief Engineer, G.B. Ransom; Assistant Engineer,
L.J. James; First Lieutenant of Marines, R. McM. Dutton; Gunner,
J.C. Evans; Carpenter, L.H. Hilton


_U. S. Steamship Baltimore_.

Captain, N. M. Dyer.

Lieutenant-Commander, G. Blocklinger.

Lieutenants: W. Braunersreuther, F. W. Kellogg, J. M. Ellicott,
C. S. Stanworth.

Ensigns: G. H. Hayward, M. J. McCormack, U. E. Irwin.

Naval Cadets, D. W. Wurtsbaugh, I. Z. Wettersoll, C. M. Tozer
T. A. Karney; Passed Assistant Surgeon, F. A. Heiseler; Assistant
Surgeon, E. K. Smith; Pay Inspector, E. Bellows; Chief Engineer,
A. C. Engard; Assistant Engineers, H. B. Price, H. I. Cone; Naval Cadet
(engineer), C. P. Burt; Chaplain. T. S. K. Freeman; First Lieutenant
of Marines, D. Williams; Acting Boatswain, H. R. Brayton; Gunner,
L. J. Connelly; Acting Gunner, L. J. Waller; Carpenter, O. Bath.

_U. S. Steamship Raleigh_.

Captain, J. B. Coghlan.

Lieutenant-Commander, F. Singer.

Lieutenants: W. Winder, B. Tappan, H. Rodman, C. B. Morgan,

Ensigns: F. L. Chidwick, P. Babin.

Surgeon, E. H. Marsteller; Assistant Surgeon, D. N. Carpenter; Passed
Assistant Paymaster, S. E. Heap; Chief Engineer, F. H. Bailey;
Passed Assistant Engineer, A. S. Halstead; Assistant Engineer,
J. E. Brady; First Lieutenant of Marines, T. C. Treadwell; Acting
Gunner, G. D. Johnstone; Acting Carpenter, T. E. Kiley.

_The Concord_.

Commander, A. S. Walker.

Lieutenant-Commander, G. P. Colvocoreses.

Lieutenants: T. B. Howard, P. W. Hourigan.

Ensigns: L. A. Kiser, W. C. Davidson, O. S. Knepper.

Passed Assistant Surgeon, R. G. Broderick; Passed Assistant Paymaster,
E. D. Ryan; Chief Engineer, Richard Inch; Passed Assistant Engineer,
H. W. Jones; Assistant Engineer, E. H. Dunn.

_The Petrel_.

Commander, E. P. Wood.

Lieutenants: E. M. Hughes, B. A. Fiske, A. N. Wood, C. P. Plunkett.

Ensigns: G. L. Fermier, W. S. Montgomery.

Passed Assistant Surgeon, C. D. Brownell; Assistant Paymaster,
G. G. Siebells; Passed Assistant Engineer, R. T. Hall.

The marvel of the naval engagements that disarmed Spain in both the
Indies, is that only one American was killed in the Santiago action,
and the only man who lost his life on Dewey's fleet was overcome by
heat. The Spaniards were deceived as well as surprised at Manila, the
deception being their dependence upon the belief that the Americans
would take it for granted that the falsified official charts were
correct, and stand off. The course of the American fleet, finding with
the lead on the first round 32 feet of water where the chart said 15,
dismayed the enemy. The Spanish had but one chance to cripple Dewey,
and that was by closing with him, but they never seem, except in the
case of the flagship, to have contemplated taking the offensive.





In the course of the war crowded with victory, two Spanish fleets were
destroyed, two Spanish armies surrendered, thirty-six thousand soldiers
and sailors of Spain made prisoners of war, the only heavy losses of
Americans were at Santiago, and they happened because in the terrible
climate of Cuba in summer, for those unaccustomed to it and forced
to be in the rain and sleep on the ground, it was necessary to carry
the enemy's lines of defense by assault, because it was certain that
delay would be destruction of the troops. The campaign was hurried and
short, but such was the effect of the few weeks spent in Cuba that,
bloody as were the first days of July, the weeks succeeding witnessed
the death from sickness of more soldiers than fell in battle.

Not until November 5,1898, did the State Department make public the
complete text of the Protocol between the United States and Spain
for the preliminary settlement of the war. A copy was cabled to this
country from the French translation, but the department here never
gave out the text of the document in official form. The Protocol
textually is as follows:

"Protocol of agreement between the United States and Spain, embodying
the terms of a basis for the establishment of peace between the two
countries, signed at Washington Aug. 12, 1898. Protocol: William
R. Day, Secretary of State of the United States, and his Excellency,
Jules Cambon, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the
Republic of France at Washington, respectively possessing for this
purpose full authority from the government of the United States
and the government of Spain, have concluded and signed the following
articles, embodying the terms on which the two governments have agreed
in respect to the matters hereinafter set forth, having in view the
establishment of peace between the two countries--that is to say:


_Article_ I.

"Spain will relinquish all claim of sovereignty over and title to Cuba.





_Article_ II.

"Spain will cede to the United States the Island of Porto Rico and
other islands now under Spanish sovereignty in the West Indies, and
also an island in the Ladrones, to be selected by the United States.





_Article_ III.

"The United States will occupy and hold the City, Bay, and Harbor
of Manila, pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace, which shall
determine the control, disposition, and government of the Philippines.





_Article_ IV.

"Spain will immediately evacuate Cuba, Porto Rico, and other islands
now under Spanish sovereignty in the West Indies, and to this end each
government will, within ten days after the signing of this protocol,
appoint commissioners, and the commissioners so appointed shall,
within thirty days after the signing of this protocol, meet at
Havana for the purpose of arranging and carrying out the details of
the aforesaid evacuation of Cuba and the adjacent Spanish islands;
and each government will, within ten days after the signing of this
protocol, also appoint other commissioners, who shall, within thirty
days after the signing of this protocol, meet at San Juan, Porto
Rico, for the purpose of arranging and carrying out the details of
the aforesaid evacuation of Porto Rico and other islands now under,
Spanish sovereignty in the West Indies.





_Article_ V.

"The United States and Spain will each appoint not more than five
commissioners to treat of peace, and the commissioners so appointed
shall meet at Paris not later than Oct. 1, 1898, and proceed to the
negotiation and conclusion of a treaty of peace, which treaty shall
be subject to ratification according to the respective constitutional
forms of the two countries.


_Article_ VI.

"Upon the conclusion and signing of this protocol hostilities between
the two countries shall be suspended, and notice to that effect shall
be given as soon as possible by each government to the commanders of
its military and naval forces.

"Done at Washington in duplicate, in English and in French, by the
undersigned, who have hereunto set their hands and seals, the 12th
day of August, 1898.

"William R. Day.
Jules Cambon."



CHAPTER XVI

The Peace Jubilee.

The Lessons of War in the Joy Over Peace in the Celebrations at Chicago
and Philadelphia--Orations by Archbishop Ireland and Judge Emory
Speer--The President's Few Words of Thrilling Significance--The Parade
of the Loyal League, and Clover Club Banquet at Philadelphia--Address
by the President--The Hero Hobson Makes a Speech--Fighting Bob Evans'
Startling Battle Picture--The Destruction of Cervera's Fleet--The
Proclamation of Thanksgiving.

The lessons of war--that which has been through it accomplished for the
country--the new lands over which our sovereignty is established--the
gain in the national character--the increased immensity of the outlook
of destiny, found impressive expression in the peace jubilee, the
President of the United States participating, and interpreting history
with dignity, in great Chicago, the giant of the West and North, and
Philadelphia, the holy city of Independence Hall and the liberty bell.

Of the celebrations of Peace with honor and victory, the first was
that at Chicago, and it will be memorable for remarkable speeches in
which many orators rose to the height of the occasion, their speeches
worthy of celebrity and certain to give imperishable passages to the
school books of the future. We have to pass over much of meritorious
distinction, and confine ourselves in the selections for these pages,
to the utterances of the President--Archbishop Ireland, whose golden
periods of Americanism ring through the land, and the Southern orator,
Judge Emory Speer, of Georgia, whose patriotism springs forth and
elevates the nobility of his thought, and touches with sacred fire
the ruddy glow of his eloquence.

"Lead, my country, in peace!" was Archbishop Ireland's passionate
exclamation, the key-note of his oration. He said:

"War has passed; peace reigns. Stilled over land and sea is the
clang of arms; from San Juan to Manila, fearless and triumphant,
floats the star spangled banner. America, 'Be glad and rejoice, for
the Lord hath done great things.' America, with whole heart and soul,
celebrate thy jubilee of peace.

"Welcome to America, sweet, beloved peace; welcome to America, honored,
glorious victory. Oh, peace, thou art heaven's gift to men. When
the Savior of humanity was born in Bethlehem the sky sang forth,
'Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace and good will to
men.' Peace was offered to the world through Christ, and when the
spirit of Christ is supreme, there is universal peace--peace among men,
peace among nations.

"Oh, peace, so precious art thou to humanity that our highest ideal
of social felicity must ever be thy sovereignty upon earth. Pagan
statesmanship, speaking through pagan poetry, exclaims: 'The best of
things which it is given to know is peace; better than a thousand
triumphs is the simple gift of peace.' The regenerated world shall
not lift up sword against sword; neither shall they he exercised any
more in war.

"Peace is the normal flow of humanity's life, the healthy pulsation of
humanity's social organism, the vital condition of humanity's growth
and happiness.


"'O first of human blessings and supreme,
Fair Peace! how lovely, how delightful thou.







Oh peace! thou soul and source of social life,
Beneath whose calm inspiring influence
Science his views enlarges, art refines,
And swelling commerce opens all her ports.
Blessed be the man divine who gave us thee.'


"The praise of peace is proclaimed beyond need of other words,
when men confess that the only possible justification of war is the
establishment of peace. Peace, we prize thee.


             "'But the better thou,
The richer of delight, sometime the more
  Inevitable war.'


"'Pasis imponero morem'--to enforce the law of peace: this, the
sole moral argument which God and humanity allow for war. O peace,
welcome again to America.

"War--how dreadful thou art! I shall not, indeed, declare thee to be
immoral, ever unnecessary, ever accursed. No; I shall not so arraign
thee as to mete plenary condemnation to the whole past history of
nations, to the whole past history of my own America. But that thou
art ever dreadful, ever barbarous, I shall not deny. War! Is it
by cunning design--in order to hide from men thy true nature--that
pomp and circumstance attend thy march; that poetry and music set
in brightest colors, the rays of light struggling through thy heavy
darkness, that history weaves into threads of richest glory the woes
and virtues of thy victims? Stripped of thy show and tinsel, what art
thou but the slaying of men?--the slaying of men by the thousands,
aye, often by the tens, by the hundreds of thousands.

"With the steady aim and relentless energy tasking science to its
utmost ingenuity, the multitudes of men to their utmost endurance,
whole nations work day and night, fitting ourselves for the quick
and extensive killing of men. This preparation for war. Armies
meet on the field of battle; shot and shell rend the air; men fall
to the ground like leaves in autumnal storms, bleeding, agonizing,
dying; the earth is reddened by human blood; the more gory the earth
beneath the tread of one army the louder the revel of victory in the
ranks of the other. This, the actual conflict of war. From north to
south, from east to west, through both countries whose flags were
raised over the field of battle, homes not to be numbered mourned in
soul-wrecking grief, for husband, father, son or brother who sank
beneath the foeman's steel or yielded life within the fever tent,
or who, surviving shot and malady, carries back to his loved ones a
maimed or weakened body. This, the result of war.

"Reduced to the smallest sacrifice of human life the carnage of the
battlefields, some one has died and some one is bereft. 'Only one
killed,' the headline reads. The glad news speeds. The newsboys cry:
'Killed only one.' 'He was my son. What were a thousand to this
one--my only son.'

"It was Wellington who said: 'Take my word for it, if you had seen
but one day of war you would pray to Almighty God that you might
never see such a thing again.' It was Napoleon who said: 'The sight
of a battlefield after the fight is enough to inspire princes with
a love of peace and a horror of war.'

"War, be thou gone from my soul's sight! I thank the good God that
thy ghastly specter stands no longer upon the thresholds of the homes
of my fellow countrymen in America, or my fellow beings in distant
Andalusia. When, I ask heaven, shall humanity rise to such heights
of reason and of religion that war shall be impossible, and stories
of battlefields but the saddening echoes of primitive ages of the race?

"And yet, while we await that blessed day, when embodied justice shall
sit in judgment between peoples as between individuals, from time to
time conditions more repellant than war may confront a nation, and to
remove such conditions as the solemn dictates of reason and religion
impose was as righteous and obligatory. Let the life of a nation or
the integrity of its territory be menaced, let the honor of a nation
be assailed, let the grievous crime against humanity be perpetrated
within reach of a nation's flag or a nation's arm, reiterated appeals
or argument and diplomacy failing, what else remains to a nation which
is not so base as to court death or dishonor but to challenge the
fortunes of war and give battle while strength remains in defense of
'its hearthstones and its altars'? War, indeed, is dreadful; but let
it come; the sky may fall, but let justice be done. War is no longer
a repudiation of peace, but the means to peace--to the soul peace a
self-sacrificing people may enjoy--peace with honor.

"A just and necessary war is holy. The men who at country's call
engage in such a war are the country's heroes, to whom must be given
unstinted gratitude and unstinted praise. The sword in their hands is
the emblem of self-sacrifice and of valor; the flag which bears them
betokens their country and bids them pour out in oblation to purest
patriotism the life blood of their hearts; the shroud which spreads
over the dead of the battlefield is the mantle of fame and of glory.

"Happy the nation which has the courage of a just war, no less than
that of a just peace, whose sons are able and willing to serve her
with honor alike in war and in peace. Happy the nation whose jubilee
of peace, when war has ceased, is also a jubilee of victory.

"'We love peace, not war, but when we go to war we send it the best
and bravest of the country.' These words, spoken a few days ago by the
chief magistrate of America, embody a great principle of American life.

Six months ago the congress of the United States declared that in the
name of humanity war should be waged in order to give to the island
of Cuba a stable and independent government. Magnificent patriotism
of America. The people of the United States at once rose in their
might. They argued not, they hesitated not. America had spoken;
theirs was not to judge but to obey. In a moment the money of America,
the lives of America, were at the disposal of the chief magistrate of
the nation, whose embarrassment was the too generous response to his
appeal for means to bring victory to the nation's flag. America had
spoken. Partisan politics, sectional disputes instantly were stilled
beneath the majesty of her voice. Oft it had been whispered that we
had a North and a South. When America spoke we knew that we were but
one people; that all were Americans. It had been whispered that social
and economic lines were hopelessly dividing the American people, and
that patriotism was retreating before the growth of class interests
and class prejudices.

"But when America spoke there was no one in the land who was not an
American; the laborer dropped his hammer; the farmer turned from his
plow; the merchant forgot his counting-room; the millionaire closed the
door of his mansion; and side by side, equal in love of country; their
resolve to serve her, they marched to danger and to death. America
can never doubt the united loyalty of her whole population, nor the
power which such united loyalty puts into her hand.

"And what may I not say in eulogy of the sentiment of humanity, that in
union with their patriotism swayed the hearts of the American people,
and in their vision invested the war with the halo of highest and
most sacred duty to fellow-men? I speak of the great multitude, whom
we name the American people. They had been told of dire suffering by
neighboring people--struggling for peace and liberty; they believed
that only through war could they acquit themselves of the sacred
duty of rescuing that people from their sufferings. I state a broad,
undeniable fact. The dominating, impelling motive of the war in
the depths of the national heart of America was the sentiment of
humanity. The people of America offered their lives through no sordid
ambition of pecuniary gain, of conquest of territory, of national
aggrandizement. Theirs was the high-born ambition to succor fellowmen.

"What strength and power America was found to possess. When war was
declared, so small was her army, so small her navy that the thought of
war coming upon the country affrighted for the moment her own citizens
and excited the derisive smiles of foreigners. Of her latent resources
no doubt was possible; but how much time was needed to utilize them,
and, meanwhile, how much humiliation was possible. The President waved
his wand; instantly armies and navies were created as by magic. Within
a few weeks a quarter of a million of men were formed into regiments
and army corps; vessels of war and transport ships were covering the
seas; upon water and land battles were fought and great victories won,
from one side of the globe to the other. I know not of similar feats
in history. What if in this bewildering rush of a nation to arms
one department or another of the national administration was unable
to put in a moment its hand upon all the details which a thoroughly
rounded equipment required? The wonder is that the things that were
done could at all have been done, and that what was done so quickly
could have been done so well. The wonder is that this sudden creation
of such vast military forces was possible, even in America.

"What prowess in action, what intellect in planning, what skill
in execution, were displayed by soldiers and seamen, by men and
officers. Magnificent the sweep of Dewey's squadron in Manila
harbor. Magnificent the broadsides from Sampson's fleet upon Cervera's
fleeing ships. Magnificent the charge of regiments of regular infantry,
and of Roosevelt's riders up the hills of El Caney. Never daunted,
never calculating defeat, every man determined to die or conquer, every
man knowing his duty, how to do it--the soldiers and seamen of America
were invincible. Spanish fleets and Spanish armies vanished before
them as mists before the morning sun; the nations of the earth stood
amazed in the presence of such quick and decisive triumphs, at what
America had done and at what, they now understood, America could do.

The war is ended. It would ill become me to say what details shall
enter into the treaty of peace which America is concluding with her
vanquished foe. I stand in the presence of the chief magistrate
of the republic. To him it belongs by right of official position
and of personal wisdom to prescribe those details. The country has
learned from the acts of his administration that to his patriotism,
his courage, his prudence, she may well confide her safety, her honor,
her destiny, her peace. Whatever the treaty of Sapin, America will be
pleased when appended to this treaty is the name of William McKinley.

"What I may speak of on this occasion is the results of the war,
manifest even in this hour to America and to the world, transcending
and independent of all treaties of peace, possessing for America and
the world a meaning far mightier than mere accumulation of material
wealth or commercial concessions or territorial extension.

"To do great things, to meet fitly great responsibilities, a
nation, like a person, must be conscious of its dignity and its
power. The consciousness of what she is and what she may be has come
to America. She knows that she is a great nation. The elements of
greatness were not imparted by the war; but they were revealed to her
by the war, and their vitality and their significance were increased
through the war.

"To take its proper place among the older nations of the earth a
nation must be known as she is to those nations. The world to-day
as ne'er before knows and confesses the greatness and the power of
America. The world to-day admires and respects America. The young
giant of the West, heretofore neglected and almost despised in his
remoteness and isolation, has begun to move as becomes his stature;
the world sees what he is and pictures what he may be.

"All this does not happen by chance or accident. An all-ruling
Providence directs the movements of humanity. What we witness is a
momentous dispensation from the master of men. 'Magnus ab integro
saeclorum nascitur ordo--with the revolution of centuries there is
born to the world a new order of things,' sang the Mantuan poet at
the birth of the Augustan age. So to-day we proclaim a new order of
things has appeared.

"America is too great to be isolated from the world around her and
beyond her. She is a world power, to whom no world interest is alien,
whose voice reaches afar, whose spirit travels across seas and mountain
ranges to most distant continents and islands--and with America goes
far and wide what America in the grandest ideal represents--democracy
and liberty, a government of the people, by the people, for the
people. This is Americanism more than American territory, or American
shipping, or American soldiery. Where this grandest ideal of American
life is not held supreme America has not reached, where this ideal is
supreme America reigns. The vital significance of America's triumphs
is not understood unless by those triumphs is understood the triumph
of democracy and of liberty.

"If it was ever allowed to nations to rejoice over the result of
their wars, America may rejoice to-day. Shall we then chant the
praises of war and change this jubilee of peace into a jubilee of
war? Heaven forbid!

"'We love peace, not war.' The greatness of America makes it imperative
upon her to profess peace--peace to-day, peace to-morrow. Her mission
as a world power demands that she be a messenger, an advocate of peace
before the world. Fain would we make her jubilee of peace a jubilee
of peace for all nations. At least the message from it to the world
shall be a message of peace.

"That at times wonderful things come through war, we must admit; but
that they come through war and not through the methods of peaceful
justice, we must ever regret. When they do come through war, their
beauty and grandeur are dimmed by the memory of the sufferings and
carnage which were their price.

"We say in defense of war that its purpose is justice; but is it worthy
of Christian civilization that there is no other way to justice than
war, that nations are forced to stoop to the methods of the animal
and savage? Time was when individuals gave battle to one another in
the name of justice; it was the time of social barbarism. Tribunals
have since taken to themselves the administration of justice, and
how much better it is for the happiness and progress of mankind.

"It is force, or chance, that decides the issue of the battle. Justice
herself is not heard; the decision of justice is what it was before
the battle, the judgment of one party. Must we not hope that with the
widening influence of reason and of religion among men, the day is
approaching when justice shall be enthroned upon a great international
tribunal, before which nations shall bow, demanding from it judgment
and peace? Say what we will, our civilization is a vain boast.


"'Till the war drum throbs no longer, and the battle flags are furled
In the parliament of man, the federation of the world.
There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe,
And the kindly earth shall slumber, wrapt in universal law.'


"It is America's great soldier who said:

"'Though I have been trained as a soldier, and have participated in
many battles, there never was a time when, in my opinion, some way
could not have been found of preventing the drawing of the sword. I
look forward to an epoch when a court, recognized by all nations,
will settle international differences, instead of keeping large
standing armies, as they do in Europe.' Shall we not allow the words
of General Grant to go forth as the message of America?

"Some weeks ago the Czar of Russia said: 'The maintenance of general
peace and possible reduction of the excessive armaments which weigh
upon all nations present themselves in the existing condition of the
whole world as an ideal towards which the endeavors of all governments
should be directed,' and in accordance with those views he invited all
nations to send representatives to an international peace congress, in
which the question of reducing the armaments of the several countries
of the world and otherwise preparing some plan for the prevention of
wars might be discussed.

"Shall not America send to St. Petersburg a message of good will,
a promise of earnest co-operation? America, great and powerful, can
afford to speak of peace. Words of peace from her will be the more
gracious and timely, as they who do not know her say that, maddened
by her recent triumphs, she is now committed beyond return to a policy
of militarism and of conquest.

"Lead, my country, in peace--in peace for thyself, in peace for the
world. When war is necessary, lead, we pray thee, in war; but when
peace is possible, lead, we pray thee yet more, lead in peace; lead
in all that makes for peace, that prepares the world for peace.

"America, the eyes of the world are upon thee. Thou livest for the
world. The new era is shedding its light upon thee, and through
thee upon the whole world. Thy greatness and thy power daze me; even
more, thy responsibilities to God and to humanity daze me--I would
say affright me. America, thou failing, democracy and liberty fail
throughout the world.

"And now know, in the day of thy triumphs and victories, what guards
democracy and liberty, what is thy true grandeur. Not in commerce
and industry, not in ships and in armies, are the safety and the
grandeur of nations, and, more especially, of republics. Intelligence
and virtue build up nations and save them; without intelligence and
virtue, material wealth and victorious armies bring corruption to
nations and precipitate the ruin of liberty.

"And now, America, the country of our pride, our love, our hope,
we remit thee for to-day and for to-morrow into the hands of the
Almighty God, under whose protecting hand thou canst not fail, whose
commandments are the supreme rules of truth and righteousness."

The Archbishop was followed by Judge Speer, of Georgia:

"Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: Spain had long been our near
and dangerous neighbor. Its people have a degree of reverence almost
superstitious for monarchy, and regard republican institutions
with great disfavor. It has been said of Spain that some incurable
vice in her organization, or it may be in the temper of her people,
neutralizes all of the advantages she ought to derive from her sturdy
hardihood, her nearly perfect capacity for endurance and the somber
genius alike for war, for art and for literature, which has so often
marked her sons. While this seems to be true, the Spaniard is not
only a formidable antagonist, but there is a wealth of interest and
charm in his rich, romantic history which commands the admiration of
a generous foeman. This must be accorded, whether we contemplate that
ancient people as they alternately resist the aggressions of Carthage
and of Rome, the fierce cavalry of Hamilcar, the legions of Scipio, of
Pompey and of Caesar, or in more recent times the achievements of their
renowned infantry which broke to fragments the best armies of Europe,
or the infuriated people in arms against the hitherto unconquered
veterans of Napoleon, or but now as with patient and dogged courage,
with flaming volleys, they vainly strive to hold the works of Caney and
San Juan against the irresistible and rushing valor of the American
soldier. In art the Spaniard has been not less famous. In the royal
collection of Madrid, in the venerable cathedrals of Seville, in the
Louvre, in the London National Gallery, the lover of the beautiful
may be charmed by the warmth of color, the accuracy of technique,
the rounded outline and saintly salvation of Murillo.

"Many a quaint moralist, many a stately poet, many a priestly
chronicler attests the genius of Spanish literature, but if these
had not been, Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had been its title to
immortality. The admirable attributes of Spanish character nowhere
found warmer appreciation than with our own countrymen. What Prescott
did for the statecraft, and stern martial renown of the Spaniards,
Washington Irving, with melodious prose and gentle humor, surpassed in
his kindly portrayal of Spanish character in his charming romance, The
Conquest of Granada. It is perhaps due to the drollery and Addisonian
humor of that gifted American that we have never been able to estimate
the Spaniard quite so seriously as he estimates himself, or, indeed,
as his stern and uncompromising nature deserves. The truth is, Spanish
policy has ever been insidiously and persistently inimical to the
American people, and has culminated in deeds more atrocious than those
which have rendered infamous the baleful memory of Pedro the Cruel.

"We all know how in 1492 his holiness, Alexander VI., in order to
prevent unseemly collisions between Christian princes, published a
bull by which he assigned to Spain all discoveries lying west of an
imaginary line drawn 300 leagues to the westward of the Cape Verde
islands. All discoveries to the east were confined to Portugal.

"All of South America save Brazil and the two Guineas, all Central
America, Mexico, the entire territory west of the Mississippi, now
embraced by the United States, beautiful Cuba, from whose eastern
province of Santiago Ponce de Leon across the lucent waves of the
tropical sea coveted the ambrosial forests and fertile meadows of Porto
Rico, whence he was to sail to the floral empire of Florida. But this
was not all of Spain's magnificent domain. Far across the waters of
the South Pacific was the now famous cluster of islands bearing the
name of the Spanish king. And from their great cities, via Guam, and
Hawaii, and San Francisco, to Acapulco, sailed the famous Manila fleet,
huge galleons, loaded to the gunwales with the silken and golden wealth
of the orient. Where are her colonies now? The declaration of the
senior senator from the noble state of Illinois has been fulfilled:
No race outside of her own borders, even if Spanish by origin, has
ever been able to endure her reign, and every race which has resisted
her ultimately succeeded in withdrawing from her control.

"In the meantime the Americans, as declared by the German philosopher,
Lessing, were building in the new world the lodge of humanity. The
determined malignity of the Spaniard toward the adventurous men of
our race who were fringing the Atlantic coast with sparsely peopled
and widely separated settlements was promptly disclosed. They had
threatened to send an armed ship to remove the Virginia planters. They
laid claim to Carolina, and they directed powerful armed expeditions
against the young colony of Georgia. They were now to meet, not the
helpless savages who had been their victims, but men of that same
fighting strain who in this good year breasted the hail of death,
swarmed up the heights and planted the colors on the intrenchments
of Santiago.

"That field where the Georgian and Spaniards on that momentous day
in 1742 met is yet called the Blood Marsh. The commander of our
colonial forces was James Edward Oglethorpe. To his military genius
and the heroism of his slender force is due the fact that the southern
territory of the United States was not added to the dependencies of
Spain. That illustrious Englishman should ever live in the memory and
veneration of the American people. He did more to exclude the Spaniards
from American soil than any other man of the English speaking race,
save that successor of Washington, the president, who evinces his
fervid love of country and graces the occasion by his presence to-day.

"Defeated in their scheme of invasion, the Spaniards remained intensely
inimical to our fathers. What more striking demonstration of that
superintending providence, which administers justice, not only to
individuals, but to nations, than the spectacle in this mighty city,
builded on the heritage of which Spain would have deprived this people
of this gathering of Americans to mark the epoch when the last Spanish
soldier has been driven from the last foot of soil of that hemisphere
discovered by Columbus. May we not justly exclaim with the psalmist
of old: 'Oh, clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the
voice of triumph.'

"It is perhaps impossible for Americans of this day and time to
conceive how vast was the control Spain might have exerted over the
destinies of our republic. The independence of the United States had
been recognized, the constitution had been adopted and the government
organized, and yet for many years she claimed without dispute the
peninsula of Florida, thence a strip along the gulf extending to and
including the city of New Orleans, and she held all of that territory
west of the Mississippi extending from the Father of Waters to the
Pacific ocean, and from the Gulf of Mexico northward to the undefined
boundaries of the British possessions.

"Even as it is to-day, that empire mentioned in Bishop Berkely's
prophetic stanza, 'Westward the course of empire takes its way,' which
sprang into being with the first shot of the simple, God-fearing
husbandmen on the green at Lexington extends more than half way
across the Pacific ocean, and the miner or the fisherman standing
on the ultimate island of Alaska and gazing eastward across the icy
waters may with the naked eye behold the dominions of the czar. Nor
in this do we include those distant islands, where one May morning,
ever to be famous in the annals of our race, the spicy breezes that
blow o'er Manila bay were rent by the guns of the noble Dewey as they
proclaimed that the genius of liberty had come to rid of cruelty and
avarice and crime that charming land 'where every prospect pleases
and only man is vile.'

"In this connection may it not be well for us and for some of our
distinguished representatives now in Paris to consider if it can
be ever possible for men with the American and Spanish ideas of
government to live in proximity and in peace? Contrast the character
of the average American citizen with that of the Spaniard. The
native and distinctive modesty of the national character forbids
me to pronounce an extravagant eulogium upon the American citizen,
but behold him and see what he has done and can do.

"While the human intellect has been making prodigious and unheard-of
strides, while the world is ringing with the noise of intellectual
achievements, Spain sleeps on untroubled, unheeding, impassive,
receiving no impression upon it. There she lies at the farther
extremity of the continent, a huge and torpid mass, the sole
representative now remaining of the feelings and knowledge of the
middle ages. And, what is the worst symptom of all, she is satisfied
with her own condition. Though she is the most backward country
in Europe she believes herself to be the foremost. She is proud of
everything of which she ought to be ashamed.

"How incompatible is the temperament of the American and the Spaniard.

"May the worn and wasted followers of Gomez and Garcia come to
appreciate the blessings of liberty under the law. No other wish is in
consonance with the aims of the American people. We would not, if we
could, be their masters. The gigantic power of the country has been
put forth for their salvation and for their pacification. Connected
with them by bonds of genuine sympathy and indissoluble interest,
we will labor with them to secure for them established justice,
domestic tranquility, general welfare and the blessings of liberty
to themselves and to their posterity. For the common defense, in the
blue ether above the beautiful island of Cuba is poised the eagle.'


      'Whose golden plume
Floats moveless on the storm and in the blaze
Of sunrise gleams when earth is wrapt in gloom.'


"It was not enough, however, for the American people to recognize
the independence of the Spanish-American republics. It soon became
our duty to notify the world that in certain eventualities it was
our purpose to defend their national existence. The holy alliance,
as it was termed, had been formed. The great powers who signed the
famous compact declared its purpose to maintain as Christian doctrine
the proposition that useful or necessary changes in legislation, or in
the administration of states, can only emanate from the free will and
well-weighed convictions of those whom God has rendered responsible for
power. Whom had God made responsible for power? What is a well-weighed
conviction? These are questions about which the irreverent Americans
might perchance differ with royalty. We had been lead to believe, and
yet believe, that the voice of the people is the voice of God. When,
therefore, the absolution of the holy alliance, not content with
smothering a feeble spark of liberty in Spain, initiated a joint
movement of their arms against the Spanish-American republics, it
gave the people of our country the gravest concern. In the meantime
our relations with Great Britain had grown cordial. That they may
grow ever stronger and more cordial should be the prayer of every man
of the English speaking race. An unspeakable blessing to mankind of
the struggle from which we are now emerging is the genuine brotherly
sympathy for the people of the United States flowing from that land.

"And it is returned in no unstinted measure. But two months ago
the flagship of Admiral Dewey steamed slowly into the battle line
at Manila. As she passed the British flagship Immortalite its band
rang out the inspiring air 'See the Conquering Hero Comes,' and as
the gorgeous ensign of the republic was flung to the breeze at the
peak of the Olympia there now came thrilling o'er the waters from
our kinsmen's ship the martial strains of the 'Star Spangled Banner.'

"Finally, when our gallant seamen, reposing in fancied security in
the scorching blast of the treacherous explosion were cruelly and
remorselessly slain, and calm investigation had developed the truth,
we had been despicable on the historic page had we not appealed to the
god of battle for retribution. The pious rage of seventy millions of
people cried aloud to heaven for the piteous agony, for the shameful
slaughter of our brethren. Our noble navy was swiftly speeding to its
duty. Poetic genius bodied forth the spirit of our gallant seamen as
the mighty ships sped on their way.

"Let the waters of the orient as they moan through the shell-riven
wrecks at Cavite, the booming waves of the Caribbean as fathoms
deep it sweeps over Pluton and Furor and breaks into spray on the
shapeless and fire-distorted steel of Vizcaya and Oquendo, tell how
the navy has paid our debt to Spain. Nor is the renown which crowns
the standards of our army one whit less glorious. Nothing in the
lucid page of Thucydides nor in the terse commentaries of Caesar,
nothing in the vivid narrative of Napier or the glowing battle scenes
of Allison, can surpass the story how, spurning the chapparal and the
barbed wire, pressing their rifles to their throbbing hearts, toiling
up the heights, and all the while the machine guns and the Mausers
mowing the jungle as if with a mighty reaper, on and yet right on,
they won the fiery crests, and Santiago fell. Well may we exclaim
with the royal poet of Israel:

"'Oh, sing unto the Lord a new song, for he hath done marvelous things;
his right hand and his holy arm hath gotten him the victory.'

"America! Humane in the hour of triumph, gentle to the vanquished,
grateful to the Lord of Hosts, a reunited people forever:


"'Great people. As the sands shalt thou become;
Thy growth is swift as morn, when night must fade
The multitudinous earth shall sleep beneath thy shade.'"


The band burst into the strains of "Dixie" in honor of the Southern
birth of Judge Speer, as he concluded his oration. President
McKinley, as on other occasions during the program, joined in the
hearty applause. Cries of "McKinley," "McKinley," "The President,"
"The President," were heard all over the hall, and in a moment it
was seen that the President was going to respond. Every one stood
up. Ex-Governor Oglesby approached the front of the box, and said, "I
have the honor to introduce the guest of the occasion, the President."

"Leaning forward," we quote the Tribune, "from his box in the
earnestness of his utterance, speaking in the tones of emotion
having birth in the fullness of heart, President William McKinley,
at the Auditorium jubilee meeting yesterday morning gave to the
people a message of simple thanks and significant augury. Save for
a wave of applause at the mention of American charity, the terse,
reverent address was heard in silence. An added hush fell upon the
intent throng when the President began the portentous concluding
paragraph, and when he ceased speaking and stood before them grave
and masterful, the quiet was breathless, tense under the force of
repression. Then the meaning of the words of the Executive coursed
from heart to brain, and men's minds grasped the fact that they had
heard the President's lips declare that he had seen the direction of
the flow of the currents of destiny, that he recognized their majesty,
and that his purpose was in harmony with the common will--the force
working for the retention of the conquered islands in the distant
Pacific and for the policy of national growth.

"The applause broke the louder for the preceding calm and the deeper
for the inspiring motive. Hats were swung and handkerchiefs waved. Men
climbed on chairs to lead the cheering and women forgot gloved hands
and applauded with energy. At the last, ex-Governor Richard J. Oglesby,
who had a seat in the President's box, led in three cheers."

The message of the President was:

"My Fellow Citizens: I have been deeply moved by this great
demonstration. I have been deeply touched by the words of patriotism
that have been uttered by the distinguished men so eloquently in your
presence. It is gratifying to all of us to know that this has never
ceased to be a war of humanity. The last ship that went out of the
harbor of Havana before war was declared was an American ship that
had taken to the suffering people of Cuba the supplies furnished
by American charity, and the first ship to sail into the harbor
of Santiago was another American ship bearing food supplies to the
suffering Cubans.

"I am sure it is the universal prayer of American citizens that
justice and humanity and civilization shall characterize the final
settlement of peace as they have distinguished the progress of the war.

"My countrymen, the currents of destiny flow through the hearts
of the people. Who will check them? Who will divert them? Who will
stop them? And the movements of men, planned by the master of men,
will never be interrupted by the American people."





The Philadelphia celebration was a scene of a demonstration of
popular interest and patriotic feeling amazing in its multitudinous
enthusiasm. The Loyal League was out in full force, the parade was
a prodigy of display, and the Clover Club gave a brilliant dinner,
and the cleverness of the President's speech carried the club by
storm. He said:

"I cannot forego making acknowledgment to this far-famed club for the
permission it has granted me to meet with you here to-night. You do
not seem half so bad at this stage as you have been pictured. No one
can unfold the future of the Clover Club. (Laughter.)

It has been so gratifying to me to participate with the people of the
city of Philadelphia in this great patriotic celebration. It was a
pageant the like of which I do not believe has been seen since the
close of the great Civil War, when the army of Grant, Sherman and
Sheridan, and the navy of Dupont, Dahlgren and Porter gave the great
review in the capital city of the nation. And I know of no more fitting
place to have a patriotic celebration than in this great city, which
witnessed the first consecration of liberty and of the Republic. As
I stood on the great reviewing stand, witnessing the soldiers and
sailors passing by, my heart was filled only with gratitude to the
God of battles, who has so favored us, and gratitude to the brave
soldiers and sailors who had won such signal victories on land and
on sea, and had given a new meaning to American valor.

"It has been especially gratifying to me to participate not only with
the people of Philadelphia, but with the people of the great West,
where I have recently visited, in doing honor to the American army
and the American navy. No nobler soldiers or sailors ever assembled
under any flag. You had with you to-day the leaders of Santiago,
Porto Rico and Guantanamo. We unfortunately had none of the heroes of
Manila with us. But I am sure that our hearts go out to them to-night
and to the brave Dewey and Otis and Merritt, and all the other gallant
men that are now sustaining the flag in the harbor city of Manila."

(A voice, "How about Hobson?")

"The American people are always ready for any emergency, and if
the Merrimac is to be sunk there is an American officer to do it. He
succeeded in doing what our foe has been unable to do, sink an American
ship. (Applause.)

"I ask you, gentlemen of the Clover Club, to unite with me in
toasting the Army and Navy of the United States, without whose
valor and sacrifice we could not celebrate the victory we have been
celebrating to-day. Not only the men at the front, not only the men
on the battleships and in the battle line, but the men at home with
ambition to go to fight the battles of American civilization, should
be the recipients of the gratitude of the American people."

Hobson and his men were a great feature of the parade in the
four-in-hand. Hobson, during this visit to Philadelphia was caught,
surrounded and captured at his hotel and was forced to make a speech,
of which there is this report:

"The young officer was plainly embarrassed. His red face suggested it,
his trembling voice told it. In a low tone and frequently pausing,
as if from a loss of a word, he said:

"'Your reception has been so very kind that it seems almost as if I
had lost the power to say anything.'

"Someone called out: 'Never mind, you had nerve enough to go into
Santiago Harbor,' and then the crowd gave three cheers for Hobson.

"He began again. 'The incident you have referred to is one you unduly
magnify. Believe me, it was really nothing more than a little bit of
work, which came to my men and to me to do in the ordinary course
of strategy in warfare. That was all it was, a little bit of work,
and it is sheer exaggeration to say anything else.'

"'Can't agree with you! Can't agree with you!' was the shouted answer
from the crowd."

At the Clover Club jubilee dinner, Captain "Fighting Bob" Evans gave a
wonderfully interesting account of the destruction of Cervera's fleet,
closing with a grim picture of war the celebration of peace. He had
been speaking of the blockade of Cuba, and insistently called upon
to tell about Santiago, said:

"Of our little scrap, it was the prettiest mix-up that was ever
seen. I want to say that no fleet ever met a braver enemy than we
did at Santiago. Those Spaniards stood up and got killed in the best
possible shape. Six hundred of them died in less than thirty minutes,
so you can see that there was very little flinching on Cervera's ships.

"During the fight there were two very interesting moments, the
first when the four big cruisers of the enemy came outside of the
harbor, firing away with mechanical regularity and presenting a most
magnificent spectacle. They were not hitting anything, but that made
little difference at that time, they tried hard enough. As we closed
in, there came a moment when the fleeing Spanish ships had an almost
perfect chance to use their rams on our vessels. I submit now that
not a single one changed his course a single inch. They came out
of that harbor and ran away, and that was all they attempted to do,
fighting as they went.

"The second point was when 'Dick' Wainwright misread a signal. I
know he won't admit that he did misread it; however, I'll tell you
the incident. In the Gloucester Wainwright was just off the harbor
mouth when the two Spanish torpedo boat destroyers were noticed making
straight at him. The Indiana signaled 'The enemy's torpedo boats are
coming out.' Wainwright read it 'Close in and attack enemy's torpedo
boats,' and you know the rest of the story.

"There was a dramatic picture which I want to call your attention
to. It was after the Vizcaya had run ashore, and I had to stop the
Iowa, some 400 yards away. I saw the survivors on a sand bar, which
was merely a narrow strip of about 200 yards from shore, on either
side of a small inlet. On one side a school of hungry sharks were
making fierce rushes toward the men, and on the other, the Cubans were
shooting away, utterly regardless of the fact that they were fighting
a helpless foe. Out in front we were not supposed to be very friendly.

"Finally, I saw Captain Eulate, of the destroyed ship, coming toward my
vessel in a small boat. Now Eulate is what you call a black Spaniard,
one of those fellows that would cry as though his heart would break
every few minutes when in trouble. He sat in the stern of a small
boat that had belonged to his vessel. She was partly stove in and had
about a foot of water, or I should say blood and water, in her bottom.

"As I looked down in the gangway I think it was the most horrible
sight that I ever witnessed. In the bottom of the boat lay two dead
Spaniards, one with his head completely shot away. The Spanish Captain
was wounded in three places, and each of the four men who rowed his
boat was more or less cut up. We slung a chair over the side and
carefully hauled him on board.

"As he came up to the starboard gangway the marine guard saluted and
he was received with all the honors of his rank. As he stepped toward
me he burst into tears, threw his hands up in the air, and then,
with a gesture of utter despair, but with all the grace of the pretty
gentleman, loosed his sword belt and pressing a fervent kiss on the
hilt of the weapon he extended it toward me. Every man on that ship
knew that that Spaniard was giving up something of value equal to
his life. I am not very good-natured, but I could not take that sword."

This met with loud cries of "You did right, Bob," and one lusty-lunged
individual announced that there was not a man in the country that
would take it. Captain Evans, who recognized the speaker, a friend
from the rural districts, answered: "Oh, you don't know what some of
those up-country Pennsylvanians would do. It was a pretty good sword."

Continuing, Captain Evans said: "I didn't know exactly what to do
with the Spanish Captain to get him into our sick bay. As I was about
to ask him of his wound he stepped toward the gangway and looked
shoreward. About a quarter of a mile off lay the once magnificent
vessel in which he had boasted he would tow the Brooklyn back to Spain.

"She was burning fore and aft, terrific columns of flame shooting
up around her, and suddenly, with a burst of tears, Captain Eulate
kissed his hand and bade fond farewell to the burning hulk and said
with impassioned voice, 'Adios Viscaya.' As he did this the very same
instant there came a tremendous roar and the Vizcaya's magazine blew
her superstructure hundreds of feet into the air. Had the incident
occurred that way on the stage anybody would have said it was too
well timed.

"He turned back and we got him into the ship's hospital, where the
surgeons placed him on his stomach to shave the hair around a small
cut on the back of his head. I stood alongside of him, and rolling his
eyes into the starboard corner he said to me, with a rather comical
expression, 'I think I have heard of you before.' I told him I did
not know how that could have been, and he asked: 'Did you not command
the Indiana?' 'Yes,' I said; then he said, shaking his head as well
as circumstances would permit, 'Yes, I have heard of you. You are
"Bob" Evans.'

"I have often wondered just what he referred to. I have a notion
that it would fit certain remarks regarding certain language that I
was credited with having used in reference to an attack on Havana;
language, by the way, which I never used. As I said before, the battle
before Santiago was the prettiest imaginable kind of effect. Why,
two torpedo boat destroyers came out, and inside of ten minutes we
had them sounding. One sounded in 200 fathoms of water and sunk to
rest there. The other preferred a berth with her nose on the beach.

"The Maria Teresa and Admiral Oquendo were on fire inside of five
minutes after the fight had started. They made beautiful sweeps toward
the shore, and were regular Fourth of July processions as they swept
in on the beach. We helped them along a bit by landing a few shells
in the stern. It was a pretty fight, but it should never be forgotten
that the Spaniards fought their ships as hard and with as much valor
as any men in any ships ever fought."

After the first cabinet meeting succeeding the peace jubilee, the
President issued his annual Thanksgiving proclamation:


"_By the President of the United States_.

_A Proclamation_.

"The approaching November brings to mind the custom of our ancestors,
hallowed by time and rooted in our most sacred traditions, of giving
thanks to Almighty God for all the blessings he has vouchsafed to us
during the past year.

"Few years in our history have afforded such cause for thanksgiving as
this. We have been blessed by abundant harvests, our trade and commerce
have been wonderfully increased, our public credit has been improved
and strengthened, all sections of our common country have been brought
together and knitted into closer bonds of national purpose and unity.

"The skies have been for a time darkened by the cloud of war; but as
we were compelled to take up the sword in the cause of humanity, we
are permitted to rejoice that the conflict has been of brief duration
and the losses we have had to mourn, though grievous and important,
have been so few, considering the great results accomplished, as to
inspire us with gratitude and praise to the Lord of Hosts. We may laud
and magnify His holy name that the cessation of hostilities came so
soon as to spare both sides the countless sorrows and disasters that
attend protracted war.

"I do, therefore, invite all my fellow citizens, as well those at
home as those who may be at sea or sojourning in foreign lands, to
set apart and observe Thursday, the twenty-fourth day of November,
as a day of national thanksgiving, to come together in their several
places of worship, for a service of praise and thanks to Almighty
God for all the blessings of the year, for the mildness of seasons
and the fruitfulness of the soil, for the continued prosperity of the
people, for the devotion and valor of our countrymen, for the glory
of our victory and the hope of a righteous peace, and to pray that the
Divine guidance, which has brought us heretofore to safety and honor,
may be graciously continued in the years to come.

"In witness whereof, etc.

(Signed)

"_William M'Kinley_.

"By the President:

"_John Hay_, Secretary of State."



CHAPTER XVII

Early History of the Philippines.

The Abolishment of the 31st of December, 1844, in Manila--The Mystery
of the Meridian 180 Degrees West--What Is East and West?--Gaining and
Losing Days--The Tribes of Native Filipinos--They Had an Alphabet and
Songs of Their Own--The Massacre of Magellan--His Fate Like That of
Captain Cook--Stories of Long Ago Wars--An Account by a Devoted Spanish
Writer of the Beneficent Rule of Spain in the Philippines--Aguinaldo
a Man Not of a Nation, But of a Tribe--Typhoons and Earthquakes--The
Degeneracy of the Government of the Philippines After It Was Taken
from Mexico--"New Spain"--The Perquisites of Captain-Generals--The
Splendor of Manila a Century Ago.

The 31st of December was abolished in Manila in 1844. Up to that time
it had been retained as the discoverers fixed it by pure piety and
patriotism. Pope Alexander VI had issued a bull on the 4th of May,
1493, dividing the world into two hemispheres, which was quite correct,
though it did not correspond to the secular lines of more modern
days. The gracious object of His Holiness was to keep the peace of
the world by dividing the lands taken from the heathen between the
Spaniards and Portuguese. The East was to belong to Portugal. The
line was drawn to include Brazil. The west was the hunting ground
for heathen of Spain. The claim of Spain for the Philippines was that
they were west. That was the way Magellenas (Magellan), the Portuguese
navigator sailed through the straits named for him, and westward found
the alleged Oriental islands, in which we, the people of the United
States, are now so much interested. When sailing into the sunset
seas he picked up a day, and never discovered his error for he did
not get home, and the Captain who navigated his ship did not know he
was out of time with the European world until he got as far around as
the Cape Verde Islands. An added day was held in Manila, as a kind
of affirmation of clear title, or trade mark of true righteousness,
on the part of Spain. It is one of the enduring puzzles in going
around the world that a day is gained or lost, and it is not always
a sure thing whether there is a loss or gain. The perplexing problem
is increased in its persistence if one sails westward over the 180
Meridian west from Greenwich, and goes beyond that line (which is not
the one drawn by Alexander VI)--say to the Philippines, and turns back,
as is done in the voyage from San Francisco to Manila, and vice versa.

In this case, the mystery of the meridian becomes something
dreadful. One loses a day going west and gains one coming east, and it
is a difficulty for a clear mind not to become cloudy over the account
of loss and gain--or perhaps we may say profit and loss, when the
account is closed. "The historian of the Philippine Expedition" lost
a Wednesday going out, jumping from Tuesday to Thursday, and found an
extra Thursday on the return--celebrated his birthday on another day
than that on which he was born, and had to correct the ship account
of his board bill, by adding a day. The Captain's clerk had forgotten
it because it was not in the Almanac. Ship time begins a day at noon
(and ends another), so when we crossed the meridian 180 degrees west
at 2 p. m. by the sun, and the day was Thursday and to-morrow was
Thursday also, the forenoon was yesterday by the ship. Therefore,
Thursday was yesterday, to-day and to-morrow on the same day. The
forenoon was yesterday--from 12 to 2 p. m. was to-day--and from 2
p. m. to midnight was to-morrow! It is no wonder "the historian,"
whose birthday was September the 2nd, found as he was on the west
side of the meridian with the mystery that the folks at home in the
states had celebrated it for him two days ago--one day he had lost,
and the other they had gained. Jagor, the historian of the Philippines,
before the days when Admiral Dewey grasped the reins of a thousand
islands, and a thousand to spare, says in his "Philippine Islands,"
that "when the clock strikes 12 in Madrid, it is 8 hours 18 minutes and
41 seconds past 8 in the evening at Manila. The latter city lies 124
degrees 40 min. 15 sec. east of the former, 7 h. 54 min. 35 sec. from
Paris. But it depends upon whether you measure time by moving with
the sun or the other way. If westward the course of empire takes its
way, Manila is a third of a day catching up with Madrid time. If we
face the morning and go to meet it Manila is ahead. The absence of
the right day for Sunday has long been gravely considered by the
missionaries who have gone to heathen lands beyond the mysterious
meridian that spoils all the holidays. One might establish a bank on
that line and play between days, but there is only one little speck
of land on the 180 degree meridian from pole to pole.

It may be very well worth considering whether the United States
should not reestablish the 31st of December in Manila, and assert
that we hold title to the Philippines not only by the victories
of the fleet and armies of the United States, but by the favor of
Alexander VI, whose bull the Spaniards disregarded after it had grown
venerable with three centuries of usage. We quote a Spanish historian
who colors his chapters to make a favorable show for his country
on this subject, as follows: "From the Spaniards having traveled
westwards to the Philippines, there was an error of a day in their
dates and almanacs. This was corrected in 1844, when, by order of
the Captain-General and the Archbishop, the 31st of December, 1844,
was suppressed, and the dates of Manila made to agree with those
of the rest of the world. A similar correction was made at the same
time at Macao, where the Portuguese who had traveled eastward had an
error of a day in an opposite direction." It will be noticed that
the authority of the Archbishop was carefully obtained and quoted,
but it was beyond his prerogative.

The early history of the Philippines bears few traces of the traditions
and romances of the natives, but they were in possession of an alphabet
when "discovered," and were then, as now, fond of music, singing their
own melodies. The Hawaiians were enabled to get their old stories into
print because they suddenly fell into the hands of masterful men who
had a written language. The Icelanders were too literary for their
own good, for they spoiled their history by writing it in poetry and
mixing it with fiction, losing in that way the credit that belongs
to them of being the true discoverers of America. The Filipinos were
spared this shape of misfortune, not that they lacked imagination
within a narrow range of vision, but they were wanting in expression,
save in unwritten music. Their lyrical poetry was not materialized. The
study of the natives must be studied as geology is. Geology and native
history have been neglected in the Tagala country. The rocks of the
Philippines have not been opened to be read like books. More is known
of the botany of the islands than of the formation of the mountains
and their foundations. The original inhabitants were Negritos--a
dwarfish race, very dark and tameless, still in existence, but driven
to the parts of the country most inaccessible. They are of the class
of dark savages, who smoke cigars holding the fiery ends between
their teeth! The islands were invaded and extensively harassed by
Malay tribes--the most numerous and active being the Tagala. Of this
tribe is General Aguinaldo, and it is as a man with a tribe not a
nation that he has become conspicuous. The other tribes of Malays
will not sustain him if he should be wild enough to want to make war
upon the United States. The Tagalas are cock fighters and live on the
lowlands. They eat rice chiefly, but are fond of ducks and chickens,
and they have an incredibly acute sense of smell, not a bad taste in
food, and do not hanker to get drunk.

The Visayas are also a tribe. The Igolatas are next to the Tagala
in numbers and energy. They show traces of Chinese and Japanese
blood. There are no Africans in the Philippines, no sign of their
blood. This may be attributed to Phillip's prohibition of negro
slavery. General Greene, of New York, took with him to Manila a
full-blooded black manservant, and he was a great curiosity to the
Filipinos. When the English conquered Manila in 1762 they had Sepoy
regiments, and held the city eighteen months. A good deal of Sepoy
blood is still in evidence. The Chinese have been growing in importance
in the Philippines. Their men marry the women of the islands and have
large families, the boys of this class being wonderfully thrifty. The
children of Englishmen by the native women are often handsome, and
of strong organization. The females are especially comely.

The early history of the islands consists of accounts of contests
with frontier rebels, attacks by pirates, and reprisals by the
Spaniards, great storms and destructive earthquakes. It is remarkable
that Magellan was, like Captain Cook, a victim of savages, whose
existence he made known to civilized people, falling in a sea-side
contest. Magellan had converted a captive chief to Christianity and
baptised him as King Charles. More than two thousand of his subjects
were converted in a day, and the great navigator set forth to conquer
islands for the dominion of the Christian King, who lived on the
isle of Zebu. The Christian monarch was entertained and received many
presents, making return in bags of gold dust, fruit, oil and wine. His
Queen was presented with a looking glass, and then she insisted upon
baptism, and so great was the revival that Magellan set out to capture
more people for the newly made Christian couple--invaded the island
of Matau, and with forty-two men landed where the water was shallow,
his allies remaining afloat by invitation of Magellan, to see how the
Spaniards disposed of enemies. The Spanish landed at night, and on the
morning found a great multitude of savages opposed to them, and fought
for life, but were overwhelmed by thousands of warriors. The Admiral
was in white armor, and fighting desperately, was at last wounded in
his sword arm, and then in the face, and leg. He was deserted by his
men, who sought to save themselves in the water, and killed many of his
enemies, but his helmet and skull were crushed at one blow by a frantic
savage with a huge club. There were thirty-two Spaniards killed,
and one of the squadron of three ships was burned as there were not
men enough to sail all the vessels. There is in Manila, in the walled
city, where it is seen every day by thousands of American soldiers, a
stately monument to the navigator who found the Philippines, and whose
adventurous discoveries insured him immortality. His first landing on
the Philippines was March 12th, 1521, less than thirty years after
Columbus appeared in the West Indies, believing that he was in the
midst of the ancient East Indies, and judging from the latitude in
the neighborhood of the island empire of the Great Kahn. [9]

"After the death of Magellan, Duarte Barbosa took the command and he
and twenty of his men were treacherously killed by the Christian King,
with whom they had allied themselves, one Juan Serrano was left alive
amongst the natives. Magellan's 'Victory' was the first ship that
circumnavigated the globe.

"Magellanes passed over to the service of the King of Castile,
from causes which moved him thereto; and he set forth to the Emperor
Charles V., our sovereign, that the Islands of Maluco fell within the
demarcation of his crown of Castile, and that the conquest of them
pertained to him conformably to the concession of Pope Alexander;
he also offered to make an expedition and a voyage to them in the
emperor's name, laying his course through that part of the delimitation
which belonged to Castile, and availing himself of a famous astrologer
and cosmographer named Ruyfarelo, whom he kept in his service.

"The Emperor (from the importance of the business) confided this
voyage and discovery of Magellanes, with the ships and provisions
which were requisite for it, with which he set sail and discovered
the straits to which he gave his name. Through these he passed to the
South Sea, and navigated to the islands of Tendaya and Sebu, where he
was killed by the natives of Matan, which is one of them. His ships
went on to Maluco, where their crews had disputes and differences with
the Portuguese who were in the island of Terrenate; and at last, not
being able to maintain themselves there, they left Maluco in a ship
named the Victory, which had remained to the Castilians out of their
fleet, and they took as Chief and Captain Juan Sebastian del Cano, who
performed the voyage to Castile, by the way of India, where he arrived
with very few of his men, and he gave an account to His Majesty of the
discovery of the islands of the great archipelago, and of his voyage."

The work of De Morga has value as a novelty, as it is more than a
defense--a laudation of the Spanish rule in the Philippines in the
sixteenth century. The title page is a fair promise of a remarkable
performance, and it is here presented:

    The
    Philippine Islands,
    Moluccas, Siam, Cambodia,
    Japan and China,

    at the close of the Sixteenth Century

    By _Antonio de Morga_.

    Translated from the Spanish, with Notes and a Preface, and a
    Letter from Luis Vaez De Torres, Describing His Voyage Through
    the Torres Straits, by the

    _Hon. Henry E. J. Stanley_.

The original work of De Morga was printed in Mexico in 1609, and has
become extremely rare; there is no copy of it in the Bibliotheque
Imperiale of Paris. This translation is from a transcription made
for the Hakluyt Society from the copy in the Grenville Library of the
British Museum; the catalogue of which states that "this book, printed
at Mexico, is for that reason probably unknown to Bibliographers,
though a book of great rarity."

The translator gives a new view to Americans of the part that Spaniards
have played in the Philippines. He plunges deep into his subject,
saying:

"The great point in which Manila has been a success, is the fact that
the original inhabitants have not disappeared before the Europeans,
and that they have been civilized, and brought into a closer union
with the dominant race than is to be found elsewhere in similar
circumstances. The inhabitants of the Philippines previous to
the Spanish settlement were not like the inhabitants of the great
Indian peninsula, people with a civilization as old as that of their
conquerors. Excepting that they possessed the art of writing, and an
alphabet of their own, they do not appear to have differed in any way
from the Dayaks of Borneo as described by Mr. Boyle in his recent
book of adventures amongst that people. Indeed, there is almost
a coincidence of verbal expressions in the descriptions he and De
Morga give of the social customs, habits, and superstitions of the
two peoples they are describing; though many of these coincidences
are such as are incidental to life in similar circumstances, they are
enough to lead one to suppose a community of origin of the inhabitants
of Borneo and Luzon." Mr. Consul Farren, Manila, March 13th, 1845,
wrote and is quoted in support of this view as follows:

"The most efficient agents of public order throughout the islands
are the local clergy, many of whom are also of the country. There are
considerable parts of these possessions in which the original races,
as at Ceylon, retain their independence, and are neither taxed nor
interfered with; and throughout the islands the power of the government
is founded much more on moral than on physical influence. The laws are
mild, and peculiarly favorable to the natives. The people are indolent,
temperate and superstitious. The government is conciliatory and
respectable in its character and appearance, and prudent, but decisive
in the exercise of its powers over the people; and united with the
clergy, who are shrewd, and tolerant, and sincere, and respectable in
general conduct, studiously observant of their ecclesiastical duties,
and managing with great tact the native character."

March 29, 1851, Mr. Consul Farren wrote: "Without any governing
power whatever, the greatest moral influence in these possessions
is that which the priests possess, and divide among the monastic
orders of Augustines, Recoletos, Dominicans, and Franciscans (who
are all Spaniards), and the assistant native clergy. A population
exceeding 3,800,000 souls is ranged into 677 pueblos or parishes,
without reckoning the unsubdued tribes. In 577 of those pueblos
there are churches, with convents or clerical residences attached,
and about 500 of them are in the personal incumbency of those Spanish
monks. The whole ecclesiastical subdivisions being embraced in the
archbishopric of Manila and three bishoprics."

"The Philippines were converted to Christianity and maintained in it by
the monastic orders, energetically protected by them (and at no very
past period) against the oppressions of the provincial authorities,
and are still a check on them in the interests of the people. The
clergy are receivers in their districts of the capitation tax paid
by the natives, and impose it; they are the most economical agency
of the government."

The Archbishop of Manila is substantially of this judgment. De Morga
opens his address to the reader:

"The monarchy of Kings of Spain has been aggrandized by the zeal
and care with which they have defended within their own hereditary
kingdoms, the Holy Catholic Faith, which the Roman Church teaches,
against whatsoever adversaries oppose it, or seek to obscure the truth
by various errors, which faith they have disseminated throughout
the world. Thus by the mercy of God they preserve their realms and
subjects in the purity of the Christian religion, deserving thereby
the glorious title and renown which they possess of Defenders of
the Faith. Moreover, by the valor of their indomitable hearts, and
at the expense of their revenues and property, with Spanish fleets
and men, they have furrowed the seas, and discovered and conquered
vast kingdoms in the most remote and unknown parts of the world,
leading their inhabitants to a knowledge of the true God, and to
the fold of the Christian Church, in which they now live, governed
in civil and political matters with peace and justice, under the
shelter and protection of the royal arm and power which was wanting
to them. This boast is true of Manila, and of Manila alone amongst
all the colonies of Spain or the other European states. If the natives
of Manila have been more fortunate than those of Cuba, Peru, Jamaica,
and Mexico, it has been owing to the absence of gold, which in other
places attracted adventurers so lawless that neither the Church nor
Courts of justice could restrain them."

It is against the orders named as worthy exalted praise that the
insurgents are most inflamed, and whose expulsion from the islands is
certain in case of Philippine jurisdiction. The truth appears to be
that the Spanish Colonial system was slower in the East Indies than
in the West Indies and South America in producing the revolutionary
rebellion that was its logical consequence, and the friars more
and more became responsible for official oppression and gradually
became odious.

It was New Spain--Mexico--that ruled the Philippines, until Mexican
independence restricted her sovereignty. When a Commander-in-Chief
died in the Philippines, it was sufficient to find amongst his
papers a sealed dispatch, as Morga records, "From the high court
of Mexico, which carried on the government when the fleet left New
Spain, naming (in case the Commander-in-Chief died) a successor to
the governorship." It was in virtue of such an appointment that
Guido de Labazarris, a royal officer, entered upon those duties,
and was obeyed. He, with much prudence, valor, and tact, continued
the conversion and pacification of the islands, and governed them,
and Morga states that in his time there came the corsair Limahon
from China, with seventy large ships and many men-at-arms, against
Manila. He entered the city, and having killed the master of the
camp Martin de Goiti, in his house, along with other Spaniards who
were in it, he went against the fortress in which the Spaniards,
who were few in number, had taken refuge, with the object of taking
the country and making himself master of it. The Spaniards, with
the succor which Captain Joan de Salzado brought them from Vigan, of
the men whom he had with him (for he had seen this corsair pass by
the coast, and had followed him to Manila), defended themselves so
valiantly, that after killing many of the people they forced him to
re-embark, and to leave the bay in flight, and take shelter in the
river of Pangasinam, whither the Spaniards followed him. There they
burned his fleet, and for many days surrounded this corsair on land,
who in secret made some small boats with which he fled and put to sea,
and abandoned the islands.

The change of the name of the islands from Lazarus, which Magellan
called them, to the Philippines and the capture of the native town
of Manila and its conversion into a Spanish city is related by Morga
in these words:

"One of the ships which sailed from the port of Navidad in company
with the fleet, under the command of Don Alonso de Arellano, carried as
pilot one Lope Martin, a mulatto and a good sailor, although a restless
man; when this ship came near the islands it left the fleet and went
forward amongst the islands, and, having procured some provisions,
without waiting for the chief of the expedition, turned back to New
Spain by a northerly course; either from the little inclination which
he had for making the voyage to the isles, or to gain the reward for
having discovered the course for returning. He arrived speedily, and
gave news of having seen the islands, and discovered the return voyage,
and said a few things with respect to his coming, without any message
from the chief, nor any advices as to what happened to him. Don Alonzo
de Arellano was well received by the High Court of Justice, which
governed at that time, and was taking into consideration the granting
of a reward to him and to his pilot; and this would have been done, had
not the flagship of the Commander-in-Chief arrived during this time,
after performing the same voyage, and bringing a true narrative of
events, and of the actual condition of affairs, and of the settlement
of Sebu; also giving an account of how Don Alonzo de Arellano with
his ship, without receiving orders and without any necessity for it,
had gone on before the fleet on entering among the isles, and had
never appeared since. It was also stated that, besides these islands,
which had peacefully submitted to His Majesty, there were many others,
large and rich, well provided with inhabitants, victuals and gold,
which they hoped to reduce to subjection and peace with the assistance
which was requested; and that the Commander-in-Chief had given to all
these isles the name of Philippines, in memory of His Majesty. The
succor was sent to him immediately, and has been continually sent every
year conformably to the necessities which have presented themselves;
so that the land was won and maintained.

"The Commander-in-Chief having heard of other islands around Sebu
with abundance of provisions, he sent thither a few Spaniards to bring
some of the natives over in a friendly manner, and rice for the camp,
with which he maintained himself as well as he could, until, having
passed over to the island of Panay, he sent thence Martin de Goiti,
his master of the camp, and other captains, with the men that seemed
to him sufficient, to the side of Luzon, to endeavor to pacify it and
bring it under submission to His Majesty; a native of that island,
of importance, named Maomat was to guide them.

"Having arrived at the Bay of Manila, they found its town on the sea
beach close to a large river, in the possession of, and fortified by
a chief whom they called Rajamora; and in front across the river,
there was another large town named Tondo; this was also held by
another chief, named Rajamatanda. These places were fortified with
palms, and thick arigues filled in with earth, and a great quantity
of bronze cannon, and other large pieces with chambers. Martin de
Goiti having began to treat with the chiefs and their people of the
peace and submission which he claimed for them, it became necessary
for him to break with them; and the Spaniards entered the town by
force of arms, and took it, with the forts and artillery, on the
day of Sta. Potenciana, the 19th of May, the year 1571; upon which
the natives and their chiefs gave in, and made submission, and many
others of the same island of Luzon did the same.

"When the Commander-in-chief, Legazpi, received news in Panay of the
taking of Manila, and the establishment of the Spaniards there he left
the affairs of Sebu, and of the other islands which had been subdued,
set in order; and he entrusted the natives to the most trustworthy
soldiers, and gave such orders as seemed fitting for the government
of those provinces, which are commonly called the Visayas de los
Pintados, because the natives there have their whole bodies marked
with fire. He then came to Manila with the remainder of his people,
and was very well received there; and established afresh with the
natives and their chiefs the peace, friendship and submission to His
Majesty which they had already offered. The Commander-in-Chief founded
and established a town on the very site of Manila (of which Rajamora
made a donation to the Spaniards for that purpose), on account of its
being strong and in a well provisioned district, and in the midst of
all the isles (leaving it its name of Manila, which it held from the
natives). He took what land was sufficient for the city, in which the
governor established his seat and residence; he fortified it with care,
holding this object more especially in view, in order to make it the
seat of government of this new settlement, rather than considering
the temperature or width of the site, which is hot and narrow, from
having the river on one side of the city, and the bay on the other,
and at the back large swamps and marshes, which make it very strong.

"From this post he pursued the work of pacification of the other
provinces of this great island of Luzon and of the surrounding
districts; some submitting themselves willingly, others being conquered
by force of arms, or by the industry of the monks who sowed the Holy
Gospel, in which each and all labored valiantly, both in the time
and governorship of the adelantado Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, and in
that of other governors who succeeded him. The land was entrusted
to those who had pacified it and settled in it, and heads named, on
behalf of the crown, of the provinces, ports, towns, and cities, which
were founded, together with other special commissions for necessities
which might arise, and for the expenses of the royal exchequer. The
affairs of the government, and conversion of the natives, were treated
as was fit and necessary. Ships were provided each year to make the
voyage to New Sapin, and to return with the usual supplies; so that
the condition of the Philippine Islands, in spiritual and temporal
matters, flourishes at the present day, as all know.

"The Commander-in-Chief, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, as has been said,
discovered the islands, and made a settlement in them, and gave a good
beginning to their subjection and pacification. He founded the city of
the Most Holy Name of Jesus in the provinces of the Pintados, and after
that the city of Manila in the island of Luzon. He conquered there the
province of Ylocos; and in its town and port, called Vigan, he founded
a Spanish town, to which he gave the name of Villa Fernandina. So also
he pacified the province of Pangasinan and the island of Mindoro. He
fixed the rate of tribute which the natives had to pay in all the
islands, and ordered many other matters relating to their government
and conversion, until he died, in the year of 1574, at Manila, where
his body lies buried in the monastery of St. Augustine.

"During the government of this Guido de Labazarris, trade and commerce
were established between great China and Manila, ships coming each
year with merchandise, and the governor giving them a good reception;
so that every year the trade has gone on increasing."

The Encyclopaedia Britannica says that the Island Samai was called
Filipina by Vellalohos, who sailed from Mexico in February, 1543. The
capital was fixed at Manila in 1571, a distinction enjoyed three
hundred and twenty-seven years. It was in a letter of Lagozpis in
1567 that the name Ilas Filipinos appeared for the first time.

The Dutch became very enterprising and venturesome in the Asiatic
archipelagoes and gave the Philippines much attention, having many
fights with the Spaniards. The Ladrones became well known as a resting
place between the islands of Philip and New Spain--Mexico. The Chinese
Pirates were troublesome, and the Spaniards, between the natives,
the pirates and the Dutchmen, kept busy, and had a great deal of
naval and military instruction. There were other varieties of life
of an exciting character, in terrible storms and earthquakes. The
storm season is the same in the Philippines as in the West Indies,
and the tempests have like features. October is the cyclone and
monsoon month. The most destructive storm in the island of Luzon
of record was October 31st, 1876. Floods rolled from the mountains,
and there was a general destruction of roads and bridges, and it is
reported six thousand persons were killed.

So extensive and exposed is the Bay of Manila, it is one hundred and
twenty knots in circumference--that it is not properly a harbor, but
a stormy sheet of water. Admiral Dewey's fleet has had low steam in
the boilers all the while to quickly apply the power of the engines
for safety in case of a visitation from the dreaded typhoon, which
comes on suddenly as a squall and rages with tornado intensity.

There are many volcanoes in the islands, and they exist from the
North of Luzon to the Sulus in the extreme South, a distance as great
as from Scotland to Sicily. There is one on Luzon that bears a close
resemblance both in appearance and phenomena to Vesuvius. The likeness
in eruptions is startling. The city of Manila has repeatedly suffered
from destroying shocks, and slight agitations are frequent. Within
historic times a mountain in Luzon collapsed, and a river was filled
up while the earth played fountains of sand. The great volcano
Taal, 45 miles south of Manila, is only 850 feet high, and on a
small island in a lake believed to be a volcanic abyss, having an
area of 100 square miles. Monte Cagua, 2,910 feet high, discharges
smoke continually. In 1814 12,000 persons lost their lives on Luzon,
the earth being disordered and rent in an appalling way. There were
awful eruptions July 20 and October 24, 1867, forests of great trees
buried in discharges of volcanoes. June 3, 1863, at 31 minutes after
7 in the evening, after a day of excessive heat, there was a shock
at Manila lasting 30 seconds, in which 400 people were killed, 2,000
wounded, and 26 public and 570 private houses seriously damaged. The
greater structures made heaps of fragments. That these calamities have
taught the people lessons in building is apparent in every house, but
one wonders that they have not taken even greater precautions. The
forgetfulness of earthquake experiences in countries where they are
familiar, always amazes those unaccustomed to the awful agitations
and troubled with the anticipations of imagination. However, there
never has been in the Philippines structural changes of the earth
as great as in the center of the United States in the huge fissures
opened and remaining lakes in the New Madrid convulsions.

In a surprising extent the Spanish government in the Philippines
has been in the hands of the priests, especially the orders of the
church. In the early centuries there was less cruel oppression than
in Mexico and Peru. And yet there is in the old records a free-handed
way of referring to killing people that shows a somewhat sanguinary
state of society even including good citizens.

Blas Ruys de Herman Gonzales wrote to Dr. Morga from one of his
expeditions, addressing his friend:

"To Dr. Antonio de Morga, Lieutenant of the Governor of the
Filipine isles of Luzon, in the city of Manila, whom may our Lord
preserve. From Camboia." This was in Cochin China, one of the Kings
being in trouble, called upon Gonzales, who sympathized with him and
wrote of the ceremony in which he assisted: "I came at his bidding,
and he related to me how those people wished to kill him and deprive
him of the kingdom, that I might give him a remedy. The Mambaray was
the person who governed the kingdom, and as the king was a youth and
yielded to wine, he made little account of him and thought to be king
himself. At last I and the Spaniards killed him, and after that they
caught his sons and killed them. After that the capture of the Malay
Cancona was undertaken, and he was killed, and there was security
from this danger by means of the Spaniards. We then returned to the
war, and I learned that another grandee, who was head of a province,
wished to rise up, and go over to the side of Chupinanon; I seized
him and killed him; putting him on his trial. With all this the
King and kingdom loved us very much, and that province was pacified,
and returned to the King. At this time a vessel arrived from Siam,
which was going with an embassy to Manila, and put in here. There
came in it Padre Fray Pedro Custodio. The King was much delighted at
the arrival of the priest, and wished to set up a church for him."

Unquestionably there was degeneracy that began to have mastery in high
places, and this can be distinctly made out early in this century,
becoming more obvious in depravity, when Spain fell into disorder
during the later years of the Napoleonic disturbances, and the
authority and influence of Mexico were eliminated from Spain. I may
offer the suggestion and allow it to vindicate its own importance,
that if we have any Philippine Islands to spare, we should turn them
over to the Republic of Mexico, taking in exchange Lower California
and Sonora, and presenting those provinces to California to be
incorporated in that State as counties. It was under Mexican rule
that the Philippines were most peaceable and flourishing.

The late Government of the islands as revealed to the American officers
who came into possession of Manila, was fearfully corrupt. It was
proven by documents and personal testimony not impeachable, that a
Captain-General's launch had been used to smuggle Mexican dollars,
that the annual military expedition to the southern islands was a
stated speculation of the Captain-General amounting to $200,000,
in one case raised to $400,000, that the same high official made an
excursion to all the custom houses on the islands ordered the money
and books aboard his ship and never returned either, that one way
of bribery was for presents to be made to the wives of officials of
great power and distinction; one lady is named to whom business men
when presenting a splendid bracelet, waited on her with two that she
might choose the one most pleasing, and as she had two white arms,
she kept both.

The frequent changes in Spanish rulers of the islands are accounted
for by the demand for lucrative places, from the many favorites to
whom it was agreeable and exemplary to offer opportunities to make
fortunes. It goes hard with the deposed Spaniards that they had no
chance to harvest perquisites, and must go home poor. This is as a
fountain of little tears.

The city of Manila is not lofty in buildings, because it has been twice
damaged to the verge of ruin by earthquakes and many times searched
and shaken by tremendous gales, and is situated on the lands so low
that it is not uplifted to the gaze of mankind--is not a city upon
a hill, and yet it is "no mean city." Antonio de Morga says:

"The entrance of the Spaniards into the Philippines since the year
1564, and the subjection and conversion which has been effected in
them, and their mode of government, and that which during these years
His Majesty has provided and ordered for their good, has been the
cause of innovation in many things, such as are usual to kingdoms and
provinces which charge their faith and sovereign. The first has been
that, besides the name of Philippines, which they took and received
from the beginning of their conquest, all the islands are now a new
kingdom and sovereignty, to which His Majesty Philip the Second,
our sovereign, gave the name of New Kingdom of Castile, of which by
his royal privilege, he made the city of Manila the capital, giving
to it, as a special favor among others, a coat of arms with a crown,
chosen and appointed by his royal person, which is a scutcheon divided
across, and in the upper part a castle on the red field, and in the
lower part a lion of gold, crowned and rampant, with a naked sword
in the dexter hand, and half the body in the shape of a dolphin upon
the waters of the sea, signifying that the Spaniards passed over them
with arms to conquer this kingdom for the crown of Castile.

"The Commander-in-Chief, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, first governor of
the Philippines, founded the city of Manila, in the isle of Luzon,
in the same site in which Rajamora had his town and fort (as has
been said more at length), at the mouth of the river which pours out
into the bay, on a point which is formed between the river and the
sea. He occupied the whole of it with this town and divided it among
the Spaniards in equal building plots, with streets and blocks of
houses regularly laid out, straight and level leaving a great place,
tolerably square, where he erected the cathedral church and municipal
buildings; and another place of arms, in which stood the fort and
there also the royal buildings; he gave sites to the monasteries and
hospital and chapels, which would be built, as this was a city which
would grow and increase every day, as has already happened; because
in the course of time which passed by, it has become as illustrious
as the best cities of all those parts.

"The whole city is surrounded by a wall of hewn stone of more than two
and a half yards in width, and in parts more than three, with small
towers and traverses at intervals; it has a fortress of hewn stone at
the point, which guards the bar and the river, with a ravelin close
to the water, which contains a few heavy pieces of artillery which
command the sea and the river, and other guns on the higher part of the
fort for the defense of the bar, besides other middling-sized field
guns and swivel guns, with vaults for supplies and munitions, and a
powder magazine, with its inner space well protected, and an abundant
well of fresh water; also quarters for soldiers and artillerymen and
a house for the Commandant. It is newly fortified on the land side,
in the place of arms, where the entrance is through a good wall, and
two salient towers furnished with artillery which command the wall
and gate. This fortress named Santiago, has a detachment of thirty
soldiers, with their officers, and eight artillerymen, who guard the
gate and entrance in watches, under the command of an alcalde who
lives within, and has the guard and custody of it.

"There is another fortress, also of stone, in the same wall, at the
ditance of the range of a culverin, at the end of the wall which runs
along the shore of the bay; this is named Nuestra Senora de Guia; it
is a very large round block, with its courtyard, water and quarters,
and magazines and other workshops within; it has an outwork jutting out
towards the beach, in which there are a dozen of large and middle-sized
guns, which command the bay, and sweep the walls which run from it
to the port and fort of Santiago. On the further side it has a large
salient tower with four heavy pieces, which command the beach further
on, towards the chapel of Nuestra Senora de Guia. The gate and entrance
of this is within the city, it is guarded by a detachment of twenty
soldiers, with their officers, and six artillerymen, a commandant,
and his lieutenant, who dwell within.

"On the land side, where the wall extends, there is a bastion called
Sant Andres, with six pieces of artillery, which can fire in all
directions, and a few swivel guns; and further on another outwork
called San Gabriel, opposite the parian of the Sangleys, with the
same number of cannon, and both these works have some soldiers and
an ordinary guard.

"The wall is sufficiently high, with battlements and turrets for
its defense in the modern fashions; they have a circuit of a league,
which may be traversed on the top of the walls, with many stairs on
the inside at intervals, of the same stonework, and three principal
city gates, and many other posterns to the river and beach for the
service of the city in convenient places. All of these gates are shut
before nightfall by the ordinary patrol, and the keys are carried to
the guard-room of the royal buildings; and in the morning, when it
is day, the patrol returns with them and opens the city.

"The royal magazines are in the parade; in them are deposited and kept
all the munitions and supplies, cordage, iron, copper, lead, artillery,
arquebuses, and other things belonging to the royal treasury, with
their special officials and workmen, who are under the command of
the royal officers.

"Close to these magazines is the powder magazine, with its master,
officials, and convicts, in which, on ordinary occasions, thirty
mortars grind powder, and that which is damaged is refined.

"In another part of the city, in a convenient situation, is the
cannon foundry, with its moulds, furnaces, and instrument founders,
and workmen, who carry on the works.

"The royal buildings are very handsome, with a good view, and very
roomy, with many windows opening seaward and to the parade; they are
all of hewn stone, with two courts and high and low corridors with
thick pillars."

The city of to-day verifies the descriptive talent and accuracy of
this writer.



CHAPTER XVIII

The Southern Philippines.

Important Facts About the Lesser Islands of the Philippine
Archipelago--Location, Size and Population--Capitals and
Principal Cities--Rivers and Harbors--Surface and Soil--People and
Products--Leading Industries--Their Commerce and Business Affairs--The
Monsoons and Typhoons--The Terrors of the Tempests and How to Avoid
Them.

The island and province of Mindoro lies in the strait of its name
and south of Luzon. It has in the center an elevated plain, we quote
from the military notes issued by the War Department, from which
many sierras extend in different directions to the coast, making the
latter rugged and dangerous. The island is of an oval form, with
a prolongation of the northern portion toward the west. Though an
easy day's sail from Manila, it is one of the least populous islands
of the archipelago, being extremely mountainous, covered with dense
forests, and in the more level parts near the coast full of marshes,
and very unhealthful. The inhabitants of the coast are Tagals, but in
the interior there is a low tribe of the Malayan race, probably the
indigenes of the island, and called Manguianos, speaking a peculiar
language and living in a very miserable manner on the products of
a rude agriculture. There are also said to be some Negritos, but of
these very little is known. There are many short streams. The island is
110 miles long and has an area of 3,087 square miles. The population
is 106,170. There is little known of the mountains of the interior,
as the inhabitants dwell mainly on the coasts. Mindoro constitutes
one of the provinces of the Philippines under an alcalde.

The capital is Calapan, with a population of 5,585. It is situated to
the north, on the harbor of its name, defended by a fort of regular
construction; it has about 500 houses, among the notable stone ones
being the parish, court house and jail, and casa real. It is the
residence of the alcalde mayor and several public functionaries. The
city is situated 96 miles from Manila.

Mount Kalavite is a long-backed promontory, the western slope of
which forms Cape Kalavite, and the northern slope Point del Monte;
the summit, about 2,000 feet high, appears dome-shaped when seen from
the west, but from the north or south it shows a long ridge fairly
level; the western end of this ridge is the highest part.

The capital of the province, Calapan, is a coast town. The inhabitants
are occupied in hunting, fishing, and ordinary weaving. The commerce
is insignificant. Sand banks extend in front of the town to a distance
of one-half mile. To clear these, the northern Silonai islet should
not be shut out by Point Calapan. On this line, near the north edge
of the banks, the soundings are 36 to 46 fathoms.

The Semirara Islands form a group of eight islands, all surrounded
by reefs.

Semirara, the largest of the group, is hilly, about 512 feet high
at the highest part. The west coast includes several little bays
almost entirely obstructed by reefs, on the edge of which are depths
of 4 3/4 to 13 fathoms; and off the town of Semirara, which stands
on the top of the hill facing the largest bay, the anchorage is
very bad, even for coasters. The east coast is bordered by a reef,
which extends about a mile from the northeast part of the island; on
coming from the north this coast of the island must not be approached
within three miles until the town of Semirara bears full west. There
is anchorage at the south of the island in 5 to 8 fathoms, sand,
during the northeast monsoon. Good coal for steaming purposes was
found on the island by Captain Villavicencio, of the Spanish navy.

Tablas Island is, mountainous, and on its northern extremity is
the peak Cabezo de Tablas, 2,405 feet high; generally the coasts
are clear and steep-to. Off the north end are two rocky islets,
distant one cable from the coast; the larger one is clear and steep,
the smaller one has rocks around it.

The west coast of Mindoro Island has no soundings off it excepting in
the bays, or within one or two miles of the shore in some places. In
the interior double and treble chains of mountains extend through
the island, and some low points of land project from them into the sea.

Paluan Bay affords excellent shelter in the northeast monsoon, and is
also a convenient place for vessels to obtain supplies when passing
through Mindoro Strait. The bay is five miles wide at the entrance,
of a semi-circular form, running back three miles in a northerly
direction. There are no dangers in it.

A small river disembogues where good water can be obtained with
facility; and on the beach there is plenty of driftwood. The coral
projects one-half mile from the entrance of the river, and has 10
and 12 fathoms close to its edge.

Care must be taken when working into Paluan Bay, for the squalls
come violently off the high land, and very sudden, and at night do
not give the least warning.

The Calamianes are a group of high islands lying between the northeast
end of Palawan and Mindoro, and extending between the parallels of
11 degrees 39 minutes and 12 degrees 20 minutes N., and the meridians
of 119 degrees 47 minutes and 120 degrees 23 minutes E. Busuanga, the
largest island of the group, is about 34 miles in extent NW. by W. and
SE. by E., and 18 miles broad. It is very irregular in form, being
indented with numerous deep bays. The islands and reefs which front
its northeast side form the western side of Northumberland Strait.

These islands form, with the northern part of Palawan and the
Cuyos Islands, a province, the capital of which is at Port
Tai Tai. The climate of these islands is in general hot and
unhealthful. Intermittent fevers and cutaneous diseases prevail,
attributable, in all probability, to the great moisture and the
insalubrious quality of the drinking water. All these islands are,
generally speaking, hilly and broken. The industry of the locality
is in collecting Salanganes (edible birds' nests), honey, and wax;
but cultivation is not practiced to any great extent. The forests
produce good timber for building or cabinet work.

Tara Island, when seen from the northward, shows a triple summit
to its northwest end; while its southern part looks like a separate
island, saddle-shaped. The island does not appear to be permanently
inhabited; in March, 1885, it was occupied by parties from Busuanga,
burning the grass and digging cassava.

Lagat is a small island 334 feet high, surrounded by a reef with a
narrow passage between it and the reef off the south of Tara.

Botak Island, 800 feet high, is fairly well cultivated. Off its
northern end there is a queer pin-shaped rock, and off its southern
end are same sharp-pointed rocks. The vicinity has not been sounded.

The space included between the Sulu Archipelago to the south and
Mindoro to the north, and having the Philippine Islands on the
east and Palawan on the west, is distinguished by the name of the
Sulu Sea. Although of great depth, 2,550 fathoms, this sea, which
is in connection with the China and Celebes seas, and also with the
Pacific by San Bernardino and Surigao straits, has a minimum deep-sea
temperature of 50.5 degrees, reached invariably at 400 fathoms. As this
temperature in the China Sea is at the depth of 200 fathoms, and in the
Celebes Sea at 180 fathoms, and in the Pacific at 230 fathoms, it may
be inferred that the Sulu Sea is prevented from freely interchanging
its waters with those seas by ridges which do not exceed those depths.

In the Sulu Sea easterly winds with fine weather prevail in October,
and the northeast monsoon is not established until November. In
January and February it blows hardest, but not with the force of
the China seas, and it is felt strongest before the openings between
Panay and Negros, and Negros and Mindanao. At the end of May southwest
winds begin to blow, and in a month become established, to terminate
in October, bringing with them a season made up of rain squalls
and tempests, which take place principally in July and August. In
September a heavy mist hangs about the coast of Mindanao.

The island and province of Paragua is the most western of the
Philippine Archipelago, and is situated to the north of Borneo. It is
long and narrow, following a northeast direction, and nearly closes
on the southwest the Sea of Mindanao, which enters from the China
Sea by Balabac Strait on the south and between Mindoro and Paragua
on the north. A chain of high mountains, some 6,560 feet high, runs
lengthwise of the narrow belt formed by the island, whose length is
266 miles. The northwest and northeast slopes are narrow. The island
has extensive and well protected harbors and bays. The area is 2,315
square miles and the population 45,000.

The capital is Puerto Princesa, with a population of 1,589.

Panay is divided into three provinces, viz: Capiz to the north,
Iloilo to the southeast, and Antique to the southwest. In general
it is wild, with very high coasts, except in the northeastern part,
where the latter are somewhat marshy. A mountain chain crosses the
island from Point Juraojurao on the south as far as Point Potol
on the north, following a direction almost parallel to the western
coast. Large groups of sierras branch out to the right and left of
the central chain; on the eastern slope begins another chain, running
northeast to the extreme northeasterly point of the island. Owing to
its cragginess, it has a great number of streams running in different
directions. The area is 4,540 square miles.

The town of Iloilo stands on a low sandy flat on the right bank of a
river; at the end of this flat is a spit on which a fort is built,
and close to which there is deep water. Vessels of moderate draft
(15 feet) can ascend the river a short distance and lie alongside
wharves which communicate with the merchant houses, but large vessels
must anchor outside near the spit. It is a town of great commercial
importance, and a brisk coasting trade is carried on from it. The
better class of houses in Iloilo are built on strong wooden posts,
2 or 3 feet in diameter, that reach to the roof; stone walls to the
first floor, with wooden windows above, and an iron roof. The poorer
class of dwellings are flimsy erections of nipa, built on four strong
posts. The roads and bridges are in a deplorable condition and almost
impassable in the rainy season.

The chief imports are Australian coal, and general merchandise from
Europe, but most sailing ships arrive in ballast.

The exports are sugar, tobacco, rice, coffee, hides, and hemp; it is
also the principal place of manufacture of pina, juse, and sinamoya,
a tissue greatly in use among the Philippines. In 1883, 93,750 tons
of sugar were exported, principally to America.

Typhoons do not occur regularly, but in most years the tail of
one passes over the place, which suffers also from the visitations
of locusts.

Provisions of all kinds can be obtained, but the prices are higher than
at Manila. In 1886 beef was 12 1/2 cents per pound, bread 11 cents,
vegetables 11 cents, fowls $2 per dozen. Water is scarce and is brought
across from Guimaras in tank boats; it is supplied to the shipping
at the rate of $1 per ton; the Europeans depend mainly upon rain water.

There are generally about 500 tons of coal in store, chiefly
Australian; it is kept for the supply of local steamers that take
in what they require alongside the wharves. Vessels in the roads can
have it brought off in bulk in lighters or schooners at a cost of 50
cents a ton. Coolies can be hired at 75 cents per ton, but they will
not coal vessels if they can get other work. Notice is required the
day before coaling, as men are not kept in readiness. The price of
coal in 1886 was $11.00 per ton.

There is regular weekly communication with Manila, which is 250
miles distant.

The Province of Capiz is bounded on the north by the Archipelago Sea,
on the east by the District of Concepcion, on the south by the ridge
separating it from Iloilo, and on the southwest by the mountains,
separating it from the Province of Antique. Its very high mountains are
covered with luxuriant vegetation, and give rise to many rivers which
water the valleys of the province. There are gold and copper mines, and
much tobacco, sugar, rice, and abaca is raised. During the year three
fairs are held, in which articles of the country are bartered. The
province is divided into two parts, called Ilaya and Aclan, which
are irrigated by the rivers Panay and Adan, respectively. The area
is 1,543 square miles and the population 189,171, distributed among
36 pueblos and 287 barrios.

The capital is Capiz, with a population of 13,676. It is situated 290
miles from Manila. It has a harbor for vessels of ordinary draft, and
highroads to Iloilo, Antique, and the District of Concepcion. There
is a steamer kept by the state, stopping at the harbor every 28 days
and keeping up communication with Manila, Romblon, Iloilo, and Cebu.

The Province of Iloilo is to the southeast of the Province of Capiz and
west of Antique. The ground is generally level, and, being irrigated
by numerous rivers, is fertile, so that tobacco, cacao, sugar cane,
abaca, rice, and maize are grown; besides, there is good pasturage
for raising herds of cattle and horses, and gold and other mines are
known. The principal industry is the manufacture of fabrics of sinamay,
pina, jusi, etc., requiring over 30,000 looms. The dimensions are 99
miles in length by 27 miles in width, and the population is 472,728.

The capital is Iloilo, with a population of 10,380. It is situated
355 miles from Manila, and is the residence of the governor, captain
of port, and a number of treasury, justice, and fomento officials. It
has a pretty cathedral, a seminary, casa real, and court house. It is
one of the most mercantile towns of the Visaya group, and has some
industries, among which are a machine shop and foundry, a carriage
factory, and a hat factory.

The Province of Bohol is bounded on the north by the sea between
Cebu and Leyte, on the east by the Surigao Sea, on the south by
the Sea of Mindanao, and on the west by the channel separating it
from Cebu. The province is composed of the islands of Bohol and
Dauis. They are somewhat mountainous and well wooded, and coffee,
abaca, sugar cane, and tobacco are raised. In the mountains of
Bohol game is plenty, and many coal and phosphate of iron mines are
supposed to exist. Manufactures consist in fabrics of sinamay and other
materials. The area is 1,617 square miles and the population 247,745.

The capital is Tagbilaran, with a population of 8,638. It is situated
365 miles from Manila.

The island and province of Cebu are the most important of the Visayas,
on account of the central position, nature of the soil, and the
industry of its numerous inhabitants. It is bounded on the north by
the sea separating it from Masbate and Leyte, on the east by the sea
separating it from Leyte and Bohol, on the south by the Mindanao Sea,
and on the west by the Tanon Channel and the island of Negros. The
area is 2,092 square miles and the population 504,076. Great mountain
chains cross the island; the chief of these starts at the extreme
north between Point Marab on the west and Baluarte on the east, and,
continuing south between the two coasts, ends almost in the center
of the island. Two other chains run along the coast, and one starts
near Carcas, to the southwest of the city of Cebu, terminating on
the south in Tanon Point. The coasts are high and the rivers of
little importance.

The capital is Cebu, with a population of 35,243. It is the mercantile
center of the islands, and is situated 460 miles from Manila. It
is an Episcopal see, and has a good cathedral, Episcopal palace,
casa real, court house, and private edifices, simple but tasty;
there is also a post office and telegraph station. On the south,
and at the entrance of the channel, is the castle of Point Cauit,
and north of this the tower of Mandaui; both these fortifications
communicate with the capital by means of a wagon road, the city being
midway between them. At the capital reside the politico-military
governor, a secretary, judge and attorney-general, a number of public
functionaries, a captain of engineers, and the captain of the port.

Maktan Island consists of an old coral reef, raised a few feet (8
or 10 at most) above the present sea level. At the northern part of
the island, where a convent stands, a low cliff fringes the shore,
being an upper stratum of the upheaved reef. The raised reef is here
preserved, but over the portion of the island immediately fronting
Cebu it has been removed by denudation, with the exception of a few
pillar-like blocks which remain, and which are conspicuous from the
anchorage. The surface is scooped out into irregular basins and sharp
projecting pinnacles and covered in all directions with mud, resulting
from the denudation. Nearly all the island is covered by mangroves,
but on the part left dry there are plantations of cocoanuts.

The only town on the island is Opon, on the west coast, SW. of Mandaui
Point in Cebu. It was here that Magellan was killed in 1521, after
making the first passage across the Pacific.

The town of Cebu is the most ancient in the Philippines; it is the
seat of government of the Visayan Islands, which include Cebu, Bohol,
Panay, Negros, and Leyte, and it is the residence of a bishop. It
is built on a large plain at the foot of the chain of hills that
traverse the island throughout its length, and is a well-constructed,
thriving place; the merchants' quarter is situated along the port,
and includes some well-built stone houses, though many are of old
construction. The huts of the Malays, for the most part fishermen,
are on the beach, and form the west part of the city. The fort is a
triangular edifice of stone, painted red, with an open square in front.

The island of Leyte is bounded on the north by the canal separating
it from Samar, on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the west by the
sea separating it from Bohol and Cebu, and on the south by the one
separating it from Mindanao. It is extensive and irregular, having
an area of 3,087 square miles and a population of 270,491. A high
and abrupt mountain chain crosses the island nearly parallel to the
west coast; the coasts are high, with good natural harbors. In the
northern part and on the western slopes of the great sierras, streams
of potable water and also many lagoons abound. This is different from
the eastern part, where the latter are scarce. The principal product
of the island is abaca, but rice is also raised and cocoanut oil is
extracted. There are unworked mines of gold, magnetite, and sulphur.

The capital is Tacloban, with a population of 5,226. It is situated
338 miles from Manila. Among the important towns are Baru, population
12,222; Borauen, 21,290; Cauyaia, 13,732; Dagami, 25,000; Hilongos,
13,713; Jaio, 12,475; Massiu, 18,499; Palo, 17,736; Tauauau, 18,509.

The island of Negros is mountainous and wild; its coasts are difficult
of access, and the breakers strong, except on the west coast from Point
Bulucabo on the north of Palompon on the west, where it is marshy. A
high mountain chain crosses it from Point Doong on the north to the
harbor and point Bombonon on the south; from the last third extend
several ramifications of high mountains, terminating on the coast at
the extreme south and in the Sierra Dumaguete. Its streams are not
important, being short and of little value. The ground is uneven but
fertile. The natives irrigate their estates, and produce tobacco,
coffee, sugar cane, and wheat. Manufactures consist in fabrics of
abaca and canonegro, of which boat cables are made. The interior of
the island, covered with thick forests, is almost unexplored, being
inhabited by a few savages.

The Province of Western Negros is situated on Negros Island, it is
bounded on the north by the Visayas Sea, on the west by the Paragua
Sea, and on the south and east by the Province of Eastern Negros. The
area is 1,929 square miles, and the population 226,995.

The capital is Bacolod, with a population of 6,268. It is the
residence of the politico-military governor, the secretary, judge,
attorney-general, and several public functionaries.

It is situated 379 miles from Manila.

The Province of Negros has a population of 94,782--the capital,
Dumaguete, 13,613.

The Province of Romblon consists of the following six islands: Romblon
(the principal one), Tablas, Sibuyan, Banton, Simara, and Maestre
Campo. It is bounded on the north by the Tayabas Sea, on the south by
the Visayas Sea, on the east by the Sea of Masbate, and on the west by
the Sea of Mindoro. The area is 813 square miles, and the population
38,633, distributed among 13 barrios and 3 rancherias of infieles.

The capital is Romblon, with a population of 6,764. It is situated
on the harbor of the same name at the north of the island, 204 miles
from Manila, and is the residence of the politico-military commander.

The Island and Province of Samar is situated to the southeast of
Luzon, it is bounded en the north by the Strait of San Bernardino,
on the south by the Jahanetes Canal, separating it from Leyte Island,
on the east by the Pacific Ocean, and on the west by the Visayas
Sea. It is very mountainous, with high, steep coasts. A number of
sierras and mountains extend in various directions, forming valleys
and glens fertilized by numerous rivers, which, however, have little
current and volume. The length of the island is 155 miles. The chief
products are abaca, rice, and cocoanuts, oil being extracted from
the latter. Among the medicinal plants the most highly valued is the
catbalonga seed. Commerce is quite active in spite of the few means
of communication and the dangerous coasts. The island is visited
yearly by tornadoes which devastate crops and cause much damage to
agriculture. The high mountains and thick forests of the interior are
inhabited by a great number of savages who have sought refuge here. The
area is 4,699 square miles, and the population 200,753, distributed
among 43 pueblos, 208 visitas, and 3 rancherias of subdued infieles.

The capital is Catbalogan, population of 6,459, situated on the harbor
and bay of like name on the west of the island 338 miles from Manila,
and is the residence of the politico-military governor.

The Jolo Archipelago, formed of some 160 islands, is situated southwest
of Mindanao and south of Basilan. It is bounded on the south by the
Jolo Sea, on the northeast by Mindanao and on the west and southwest
by Borneo. The small islands are covered with mangroves, while the
large ones have thick forests of good timber, and the natives raise
rice, maize, and various alimentary roots, ambergris being found
on the coasts. The principal island, called Sulu, or Jolo (ch. 47,
48, 49, 50, p. 285), is occupied in a military way by the Spanish
forces, whose chief, or governor, resides in the old capital,
which has well-constructed and armed forts, a pier, etc. By royal
decree of November 13, 1877, the sultanship was transformed into a
civico-military government. The population consists of 500 aborigines,
612 Chinese traders, and 16,000 negroes.

Next to Luzon, the island of Mindanao is the most extensive and
important of the Philippines.

By decree of July 30, 1860, the territorial division of this island
was definitely established, and a civico-military government, under
the denomination of Mindanao and adjacent islands, was created. It is
divided into eight districts. The island is situated between Visayas
on the north and Borneo on the south; it is bounded on the east by
the Pacific Ocean, and on the west by the island of Paragua, the
Strait of Balabac, and Borneo. The area is 16,595 square miles, and
the population 611,300, of which 211,000 are Christians and the rest
Mohammedans and Pagans. It is very extensive and irregular in form,
possessing high and extended mountain chains, which have not been
entirely explored, and which are grown over with very rich woods. It
is inhabited almost throughout the interior by savages. Its rivers,
some of great volume, are as follows: On the north coast and Butuan
Bay, the Jabonga and Butuan: on the Macajalar coast, the Cagayan;
in Eligan Bay, the Malanao and others of minor importance; in the
cove of Dapitan, the Palaven.

In Port Kakule the greatest rise of tide is seven feet. In
Surigao Strait the flood tide sets to the west, and the ebb to the
east. The velocity of the stream in the strait reaches six knots at
springs. There is a difference of about two hours between the time
of high water at Surigao and in Surigao Strait. Fishermen roughly
estimate that when the moon rises the ebb tide commences to run in
Surigao Strait. From January to June there is but one high water
during the twenty-four hours, in Surigao Strait, which occurs during
the night. From July to December the same phenomenon takes place,
but the time of high water is by day.

From observations made by the Spanish surveyors, it appears that the
highest tide on the west coasts of the islands of the strait takes
place at the same hour as the lowest tide on the east coasts.

The Mindanao river disembogues five miles to the south of Palak
Harbor by two wide arms, on the northernmost of which is the town of
Kota-batu, about 5 1/2 miles from the mouth. The river is navigable
for 60 miles by vessels of 3 1/2 feet draught; it flows through a
beautiful valley 30 miles in width, which scarcely shows any change
of level; the valley is capable of producing tobacco, cacao, sugar,
maize, and cotton; but this is only known at present by specimens
produced. The course of the river lies SE. for 45 miles from its
mouth to the lake Ligauasan, out of which it is seen to flow; from
the other side of the lake the direction of the river is NNE. to its
source in the Sugut Mountains. At 21 miles from the northern mouth
the river divides into two arms, which enter the sea 4 1/2 miles apart.

In the northern part of Mindanao is the province of Surigao, bordered
on the north by the Surigao Sea, on the east by the Pacific, on the
south by the District of Davao, and on the west by the territory
of the infieles. It is mountainous, but the Christian population
resides on the coasts and in the northern point of the territory. The
population is 95,775, distributed among 45 pueblos, 10 barrios,
and 30 rancherias of subdued infieles. Abaca and palay are raised,
and in the gold washings considerable gold of good quality is found.

Military notes on the Philippines affirm that the islands are, in many
respects, Spain's best possessions, due to the abundance and variety
of products, numerous and good ports, character of inhabitants, and on
account of the vicinity of certain countries of eastern Asia, which are
now entering upon a stage of civilization and commerce. The group is
composed of some 2,000 islands. In 1762 Manila was taken and held by
the English for a ransom of 1,000,000 pounds sterling. This, however,
was never paid, and the islands were finally returned to Spain.

The archipelago extends from 5 degrees 32 minutes to 19 degrees 38
minutes, north latitude, and from 117 degrees to 126 degrees, east
longitude. It thus covers about 1,000 miles north and south and 600
east and west.

The whole surface of the Philippines is essentially mountainous, the
only plains that occur being alluvial districts at the river mouths
and the spaces left by the intersection of the ranges. The principal
ranges have a tendency to run north and south, with a certain amount of
deflection east and west, as the case may be, so that the orographic
diagram of the archipelago, as a whole, has a similarity to a fan,
with northern Luzon as its center of radiation.

While none of the mountain peaks greatly exceed 8,000 feet in height,
Apo, in Mindanao, is over 9,000 feet; Halson, in Mindoro, is over
8,900 feet; and Mayon, in Luzon, over 8,200. The latter is an active
volcano, which has been the scene of several eruptions during the
present century. Extinct or active craters are relatively as numerous
in the Philippines as in the eastern archipelago, and as a consequence
of these subterranean forces earthquakes are frequent and violent.

In 1627 one of the most elevated mountains of Cagayan disappeared,
and on the island of Mindanao, in 1675, a passage was opened to the
sea and a vast plain emerged. The more recent of the convulsions
occurred in 1863 and in 1880. The destruction of property was great,
especially in Manila.

The general belief is that the Philippines once formed a part of an
enormous continent from which it was separated by some cataclysm. This
continent probably extended from Celebes to the farthest Polinesian
islands on the east, to New Zealand on the south, and the Mariana
and Sandwich islands on the north.

These islands, according to Ramon Jordana, are divided into two
volcanic regions, the eastern and the western. The principal point is
the volcano Taal, located in the northeastern portion of the province
of Batangas. It is situated on a small island in the center of the
Bombon laguna, and has an altitude of 550 feet above sea level. Its
form is conical, and the rock is composed of basalt feldspar with
a small quantity of augite. The crater is supposed to be 232 feet
deep. Its sides are almost vertical, and there are two steaming
lagunas at its bottom.

In the regions embracing the provinces of Manila, Bulacan, Pampanga,
Tarlac, and Pangasinan the soil is mostly composed of clay containing
remnants of sea shells, a circumstance which gives rise to the belief
that the coast of Manila has risen from the sea in not so remote
an epoch. Smooth, dark gray tophus predominates; it forms the bed
of the Rio Pasig, and rising forms hillocks in the vicinity of the
city of Binangonan. Farther on, trachyte and banks of conchiferous
sand predominate.

The vast plain of Panpanga extends to the north of Manila Bay, to
the south of which is situated Mount Arayat, of doleritic nature.

The disposition of the mountain ranges in parallel chains affords space
for the development of streams both in Luzon and Mindanao. The larger
islands contain inland seas, into which pour countless small streams
from the inland hills. Many of them open out into broad estuaries,
and in numerous instances coasting vessels of light draft can sail to
the very foot of the mountains. Rivers and inland lakes swarm with
varieties of fish and shellfish. By reason of Spanish restrictions,
but little can be said as to the character of the stream banks
and beds. Four of the rivers are navigable, and, by the statements
of those who have spent some little time on the islands, most are
fordable. Drinking water is obtained by many of the towns from the
rivers at points just above tide limits, and the water is said to be
good. Bridges are few and crude, but are generally built to withstand
heavy strain.

The island of Luzon abounds in rivers and streams. The following are
the principal water courses:

Rio Grande de Cagayan, the source of which is in the northern slope
of the Caraballo Norte. It has numerous affluents, among others the
Magat and Bangag, and, after a course of about 200 miles, falls into
the China Sea in the vicinity of Aparri.

Agro Grande starts in the north, in the neighborhood of the ranch
of Loo, receives the affluents Tarlag and Camiling, as well as many
others, has a course of about 112 miles, and falls into the Gulf
of Lingayen.

Abra has its origin on the opposite slope to that where Agno Grande
takes its rise; runs for about 87 miles, and, after receiving the
affluent Suyoc, divides into three arms and falls into the China Sea
over the sand bars of Butao, Nioig, and Dile.

Rio Grande de la Pampanga is called Rio Chico up to the lake of
Canasen, near Arayat, where it changes its name after its junction
with Rio Gapan. Its course is a little over 38 miles; it receives the
Rio de San Jose and divides into a multitude of arms as it falls into
the sea to the north of Manila Bay.

Rio Pasig has its source in the Bay Lagoon, and falls after a course
of 19 miles into Manila Bay.

The military notes on the climate of the Philippines, the official
record of the temperature and the gales and typhoons, and directions
regarding the handling of ships in the peculiar tempests that prevail
at certain seasons around the islands, are of absorbing popular
interest, and of striking special usefulness.

Climate.--In the region of Manila, the hottest season is from March
to June, the greatest heat being felt in May before the rains set in,
when the maximum temperature ranges from 80 degrees to 100 degrees
in the shade. The coolest weather occurs in December and January,
when the temperature falls at night to 60 or 65 degrees, and seldom
rises in the day above 75 degrees. From November to February the sky
is bright, the atmosphere cool and dry, and the weather in every way
delightful. Observations made at the Observatortio Meteorologico
de Manila have been compiled by the United States Weather Bureau,
covering a record of from seventeen to thirty-two years, from which
the following is an extract:


        Temperature, degrees F.:
        Mean annual      80 degrees
        Warmest month    82 degrees
        Coolest month    79 degrees
        Highest          100 degrees
        Lowest           60 degrees


        Humidity:
        Relative per cent                78
        Absolute grains per cubic foot    8.75


        Wind movements in miles:
        Daily mean                       134
        Greatest daily                   204
        Least daily                       95


Prevailing wind direction--N.E., November to April; SW., May to
October.


        Cloudiness, annual per cent       53
        Days with rain                   135


        Rainfall in inches:
        Mean annual                   75.43
        Greatest monthly             120.98
        Least monthly                 55.65


The following is the mean temperature for the three seasons, at
points specified:


                 Cold.         Hot.          Wet.
        Manila   72 degrees    87 degrees    84 degrees
        Cebu     75 degrees    86 degrees    75 degrees
        Davao    86 degrees    88 degrees    87 degrees
        Sulu     81 degrees    82 degrees    83 degrees


Seasons vary with the prevailing winds (monsoons or trade winds) and
are classed as "wet" and "dry." There is no abrupt change from one to
the other, and between periods there are intervals of variable weather.

The Spanish description of seasons is as follows:


        Seis meses de lodo--six months of mud.
        Seis meses de polvo--six months of dust.
        Seis meses de todo--six months of everything.


The northern islands lie in the track of the typhoons which, developing
in the Pacific, sweep over the China Sea from NE. to SW. during the
southwest monsoon. They may be looked for at any time between May and
November, but it is during the months of July, August, and September
that they are most frequent. Early in the season the northern region
feels the greatest force, but as the season advances the typhoon
gradually works southward and the dangerous time at Manila is about
the end of October and the beginning of November. Typhoons rarely,
if ever, pass south of 9 degrees N. latitude. Sometimes the typhoon is
of large diameter and travels slowly, so far as progressive movement is
concerned; at others it is of smaller dimensions, and both the circular
and progressive motions are more rapid. However they are always storms
of terrific energy and frequently cause terrible destruction of crops
and property on shore and of shipping at sea. Thunderstorms, often of
great violence, are frequent in May and June, before the commencement
of the rainy season. During July, August, September, and October the
rains are very heavy. The rivers and lakes are swollen and frequently
overflow, flooding large tracts of low country.

At Manila the average rainfall is stated to be from 75 to 120 inches
per annum, and there the difference between the longest and shortest
day is only 1 hour 47 minutes and 12 seconds. This rainfall, immense
though it be, is small as compared with that of other parts of the
archipelago; e.g., in Liano, NE. of Mindanao, the average yearly
downpour is 142 inches.

Gales.--The gales of the Philippines may be divided into three
classes, known by the local names of Colla, Nortada, and Baguio. The
Colla is a gale in which the wind blows constantly from one quarter,
but with varying force and with alternations of violent squalls,
calms, and heavy rains, usually lasting at least three days; these
gales occur during the southwest monsoon and their direction is from
the southwest quarter. The Nortada is distinguished from the Colla,
in that the direction is constant and the force steady, without the
alternations of passing squalls and calms. The Nortada is generally
indicative that a typhoon is passing not very far off. These gales
occur chiefly in the northern islands, and their direction, as the
name implies, is from the northward. Baguio is the local name for the
revolving storm known as the typhoon, which, being the more familiar
term, will be used in these notes.

Typhoons.--These storms have their origin to the east or to the
southeast of the Philippines, whence their course is westward, with
a slight divergence to the north or south, the average direction
appearing to be west by north. They occur in all months of the year,
but the greater number take place about the time of the equinoxes. The
most violent ones occur at the autumnal equinox, and on an average, two
or three occur every year, and sometimes one follows another at a very
short interval. It is believed that when one of these typhoons passes
a high latitude in September there will be another in October of that
year, and one may be looked for in November in a lower latitude. These
tempests are not encountered in latitudes below 9 degrees N. The rate
of progress of these storms is about 13 miles an hour; in none of
those observed has it exceeded 14 miles nor fallen below 11 miles. The
diameter of the exterior revolving circle of the storm varies from 40
to 130 miles, and the diameter of the inner circle or calm region, may
be estimated at from 8 to 15 miles. The duration of the true typhoon
at any one place is never longer than ten hours and generally much
less. These storms are always accompanied by abundant rain, with low,
dense clouds, which at times limit the horizon to a few yards distance,
and are generally accompanied by electrical discharges. The barometer
falls slowly for some days before the typhoon, then falls rapidly
on its near approach, and reaches its lowest when the vortex is but
a little way off. It then rises rapidly as the vortex passes away,
and then slowly when it has gained some distance. Near the vortex
there are usually marked oscillations. The typhoon generally begins
with a northerly wind, light drizzling rain, weather squally and
threatening, a falling barometer and the wind veering to the eastward,
when the observer is to the northward of the path of the storm, and
backing to the westward when he is to the southward of it; the wind
and rain increase as the wind shifts, and the storm generally ends
with a southerly wind after abating gradually.

The following warnings of the approach of a typhoon, and directions
for avoiding the most dangerous part of it, are taken from the China
Sea Directory: The earlier signs of a typhoon are clouds of a cirrus
type, looking like fine hair, feathers or small white tufts of wool,
traveling from east or north, a slight rise in the barometer, clear
and dry weather, and light winds. These signs are followed by the
usual ugly and threatening appearance of the weather which forbodes
most storms, and the increasing number and severity of the gusts with
the rising of the wind. In some cases one of the earliest signs is
a long heavy swell and confused sea, which comes from the direction
in which the storm is approaching and travels more rapidly than the
storm's center. The best and surest of all warnings, however, will
be found in the barometer. In every case there is great barometric
disturbance. Accordingly, if the barometer falls rapidly, or even if
the regularity of its diurnal variation be interrupted, danger may
be apprehended. No positive rule can be given as to the amount of
depression to be expected, but at the center of some of the storms
the barometer is said to stand fully 2 inches lower than outside the
storm field. The average barometric gradient, near the vortex of the
most violent of these storms, is said to be rather more than 1 inch
in 50 nautical miles. As the center of the storm is approached the
more rapid become the changes of wind, until at length, instead of
its direction altering gradually, as is the case on first entering the
storm field, the wind flies around at once to the opposite point, the
sea meanwhile breaking into mountainous and confused heaps. There are
many instances on record of the wind suddenly falling in the vortex
and the clouds dispersing for a short interval, though the wind soon
blows again with renewed fury.

In the northern hemisphere when the falling barometer and other signs
create suspicion that a typhoon is approaching, facing the wind and
taking 10 or 12 points to the right of it, will give the approximate
bearing of its center. Thus, with the wind NE., the center will
probably be from S. to SSE. of the observer's position. However,
it is difficult to estimate the center of the vortex from any given
point. This partly arises from the uncertainty as to the relation
between the bearing of the center and the direction of the wind,
and greatly from there being no means of knowing whether the storm be
of large or small dimensions. If the barometer falls slowly, and the
weather grows worse only gradually, it is reasonable to suppose that
the storm center is distant; and conversely, with a rapidly falling
barometer and increasing bad weather the center may be supposed to
be approaching dangerously near.

Practical Rules.--When in the region and in the season of revolving
storms, be on the watch for premonitory signs. Constantly observe
and carefully record the barometer.

When on sea and there are indications of a typhoon being near, heave to
and carefully observe and record the changes of the barometer and wind,
so as to find the bearing of the center, and ascertain by the shift of
the wind in which semicircle the vessel is situated. Much will often
depend upon heaving to in time. When, after careful observation, there
is reason to believe that the center of the typhoon is approaching,
the following rules should be followed in determining whether to
remain hove to or not, and the tack on which to remain hove to:

In the northern hemisphere, if the right-hand semicircle, heave to on
the starboard tack. If in the left-hand semicircle, run, keeping the
wind if possible, on the starboard quarter, and when the barometer
rises, if necessary to keep the ship from going too far from the
proper course, heave to on the port tack. When the vessel lies in the
direct line of advance of the storm--which position is, as previously
observed, the most dangerous of all--run with the wind on the starboard
quarter. In all cases increase as soon as possible the distance from
the center, bearing in mind that the whole storm field is advancing.

In receding from the center of a typhoon the barometer will rise
and the wind and sea subside. It should be remarked that in some
cases a vessel may, if the storm be traveling slowly, sail from the
dangerous semicircle across the front of the storm, and thus out of
its influence. But as the rate at which the storm is traveling is
quite uncertain, this is a hazardous proceeding, and before attempting
to cross the seaman should hesitate and carefully consider all the
circumstances of the case, observing particularly the rate at which
the barometer is falling.

Northward of the Equator the current is divided into north and south
equatorial currents by the equatorial counter-current, a stream
flowing from west to east throughout the Pacific Ocean. The currents
in the western part of the Pacific, to the northward of the Equator,
are affected by the monsoons, and to the southward of the Equator
they are deflected by the coast of Australia.

The trade drift, which flows to the westward between the parallels
of 9 degrees and 20 degrees N., on reaching the eastern shores of
the Philippine Islands again turns to the northward, forming near the
northern limit of that group the commencement of the Japan stream. The
main body of the current then flows along the east coast of Formosa,
and from that island pursues a northeasterly course through the
chain of islands lying between Formosa and Japan; and sweeping along
the southeastern coast of Japan in the same general direction, it is
known to reach the parallel of 50 degrees N. The limits and velocity
of the Japan stream are considerably influenced by the monsoons in
the China. Sea, and by the prevailing winds in the corresponding
seasons in the Yellow and Japan seas; also by the various drift
currents which these periodic winds produce.

Admiral Dewey has forwarded to the navy department a memorandum
on mineral resources of the Philippines prepared at the admiral's
request by Professor George W. Becker of the United States geological
survey. Only about a score of the several hundred islands, he says,
are known to contain deposits of valuable minerals. He includes a
table showing the mineral bearing islands and their resources. This
table follows:

"Luzon, coal, gold, copper, lead, iron, sulphur, marble, kaolin;
Sataanduanes, Sibuyan, Bohol and Panaoan, gold only; Marimduque,
lead and silver; Mindoro, coal, gold and copper; Carraray, Batan, Rapu
Rapu, Semarara, Negros, coal only; Masbete, coal and copper; Romblon,
marble; Samar, coal and gold; Panay, coal, oil, gas, gold, copper,
iron and perhaps mercury; Biliram, sulphur only; Leyte, coal, oil and
perhaps mercury; Cebu, coal, oil, gas, gold, lead, silver and iron;
Mindanao, coal, gold, copper and platinum; Sulu archipelago, pearls."

The coal, Mr. Becker says, is analogous to the Japanese coal and that
of Washington, but not to that of the Welsh or Pennsylvania coals. It
might better be characterized as a highly carbonized lignite, likely to
contain much sulphur as iron pyrites, rendering them apt to spontaneous
combustion and injurious to boiler plates. Nevertheless, he says,
when pyrites seams are avoided and the lignite is properly handled,
it forms a valuable fuel, especially for local consumption.

Not least among the promising resources of the Philippines is a curious
natural product. Several vegetable growths appear to possess the
faculty of secreting mineral concretions, in all respects resembling
certain familiar precious stones. The famous James Smithson was the
first to give any real attention to these curious plant gems, but,
though there can be no doubt of their authenticity, neither scientist
nor merchant has followed this lead. One of the jewels, the bamboo
opal, rivals the best stones in its delicate tints of red and green,
but it is among the rarest, and 1,000 stems may be cut up before a
single specimen be found.



CHAPTER XIX

Specifications of Grievances of the Filipinos.

An Official Copy of the Manifesto of the Junta Showing the Bad Faith
of Spain in the Making and Evasion of a Treaty--The Declaration
of the Renewal of the War of Rebellion--Complaints Against the
Priests Defined--The Most Important Document the Filipinos Have
Issued--Official Reports of Cases of Persecution of Men and Women in
Manila by the Spanish Authorities--Memoranda of the Proceedings in
Several Cases in the Court of Inquiry of the United States Officers.

The pages following, showing a cynical disregard of a solemn treaty
by the Spaniards, a complete exposure of the reasons the Filipinos had
for renewing the war, and the particulars of cases of individual wrongs
suffered, as they were made known in the course of legal investigation,
have been received direct from Manila, and enable us to complete the
story of the Philippines with the testimony that the depravity of bad
faith in regard to treaties, and incidents of personal cruelties in
Spanish colonial governments, have illustrations in the Philippines
as in Cuba, and demand of the American Nation in the hour of victory
that Spain shall lose now and forever all her possessions in the East
and West Indies, and be restricted to the peninsula and islands--the
Canary and Balearic groups--that is, in two words to home rule. The
circumstances of the treaty between the Philippine Junta--the treaty
of Biyak--and the Spanish authorities, are of great notoriety, but
the Philippine story has not until now reached the English speaking
peoples. We give it from the official paper:

"On signing the Treaty of Biyak na bato, we, the natives of the
Philippines and the government of Spain, agreed that between our
armies be established an armistice which was to last three years from
the date of the mentioned treaty.

"The natives were to lay down their arms and turn them over to the
Spanish authorities with all their depot (maestranza, a manufactory
of ammunition, for repairs of rifles, etc., etc.) their ammunitions
and forts.

"The Spanish authorities, on the other hand, bound themselves to
consent to the reforms (of public opinion amongst) the natives of the
country claim; reforms which, according to the text of the decree of
9th August, 1897, the Captain and Guberno General assured us were
granted and the execution of which was suspended on account of the
insurrection.

"The reforms asked for and granted were the following:

1. Expulsion or at least exclaustration of the religious orders.

2. Representation of the Philippines in the Spanish Cortes.

3. Application of real justice in the Philippines, equal for the
Indian and for the Peninsular. Unity of laws between Spain and the
Philippines. Participation of the Indians in the chief offices of
the Civil Administration.

4. Adjustment of the property of the Parishes (church property)
and of contributions in favor of the Indians.

5. Proclamation of the individual rights of the Indians, as also of
the liberty of the press and of association.

"The same Spanish government agreed to pay the liberating government a
war indemnity, reduced to the limited sum of 600,000 pesos, in payment
of the arms, ammunitions, depots and forts which were surrendered,
and in order to indemnify those who were to be obliged to live abroad
during the term of the armistice, as an assistance to stay out of
the Philippines while they were trying to establish themselves and
looking for legitimate and decorous means of existence.

"It was agreed in like manner that General Don Fernando Primo de
Rivera, Goberno General of the islands, should remain in his post
during the time of the armistice, as a guarantee that the reforms
be established.

"And, finally, said authority promised that he would propose and
there would be conceded a very ample amnesty.

"Contrary to what was stipulated, the mentioned General was removed
from his post shortly after the agreement was signed; and although
the liberating government had fulfilled the laying down and delivery
of the arms, ammunitions, depot and forts of its general encampment,
the reforms were not established, only part of the offered indemnity
has been paid and the amnesty remains a project only, some pardons
being given.

"The government of Madrid, deriding the natives, and with contempt
of what had signed as a gentleman the General Commander of their
army in the field, tried, instead of carrying out the expulsion or
exclaustration of the Priests, to elevate them more, nominating at
once for the two bishoprics, vacant in the colonies, two Priests
of those same religious orders that oppressed the country and were
the first cause of the insurrection, the disorder and the general
dissatisfaction in the islands; thus ridiculing the virtue, knowledge
and worth of the numerous secular Spanish clergy, and especially of
that of the Philippines.

"Not contented with this, they have raised and rewarded those
Peninsulars who in the Philippines, as in Madrid, more cowardly and
miserable still, because they abused their position and the protection
of those same authorities who signed the treaty, insulted at banquets,
assemblies and through the press, with epithets and jokes offensive and
vulgar, the patient natives; as happened with the Peninsular Rafael
Comenge, the protege and farcical table companion of the Priest,
who amongst us performs the duties of the Archbishopric of Manila;
the Minister of War has just conceded the said Comenge the grand
cross of military merit, for shouting against us and imputing to
us every kind of baseness and vices, knowing that he was lying, and
for exacting from the gamblers of the Casino Espanol of Manila, as
their president; the contribution of 30,000 pesos, to present General
Primo de Rivera with a golden statute of that value, and, a curious
coincident, this brave was one of the first who escaped from Manila,
full of fear when the news arrived there that an American squadron
would attack that port and that the risk he would run was real.

"You have seen before now, how that insect Wencestao Retana was
rewarded with a cooked up deputyship to the Cortes, that salaried
reptile of the Philippine convents, who, with the aid of that tyrant
General Weyler, his worthy godfather, the despotic incendiary of
the town of Calamba, of ominous memory amongst us, does nothing but
vomit rabid foam, insulting us by day and night with calumnies and
shrieks, in that paper whose expenses the Procurators of the Manila
convents pay.

"Prepare yourselves also for seeing that a titled nobility be given
to the well known 'Quioguiap' (fecer y Temprado), writer in the
'El Liberat,' of Madrid, who, to be in unison with the priests,
does not cease to call us inferior race, troglodytes, without human
nature or understanding, big boy; the same who, in order to deprive
the rich 'Abellas' (father and son) of Carnarines, of the position
they had conquered by their industry, economy and intelligence as
almost exclusive purchasers of the Abaco (Manila hemp) of that region,
tried and succeeded villainously in having them accused and shot in the
camp of Bagumbayan; the same who afterwards sought in vain the reward
of his criminal attempts, although conscious of his perverseness,
to deliver to himself the produce of their harvest and their labor.

"Peace was hardly made, when General Primo de Rivera denied the
existence of the agreement and shot day after day those same persons
whom he had promised to protect, believing foolishly that, the nucleus
of the revolution once destroyed, the insurgents would need thirty or
forty years in order to reunite themselves; but he accepted freely
the pension of the grand cross of San Fernando, which, as a reward
for the peace, he was given.

"The same happened with bloodthirsty Monet, the author of the hecatomb
of Zambales, who was promoted to the rank of a general and honored
by a grand cross; also with his competitor in brutal deeds, General
Tejeirs, the assassin of the Bisayos, and with the Vice Admiral
Montojo, so severely punished later on, by whose orders the city of
Cebu was destroyed and demolished, to revenge the death of an impure
Recoleto Priest.

"In eloquent contrast with what the natives had to expect, there has
not been one single concession or reward for the credulous Pedro
A. Paterno, a Filipino, the only real agent of the miracle of the
Peace, to whom they have denied even the modest historical title
'Maguinong' (Don).

"Add to all these infamies and indignities the removal of General
Primo de Rivera, who, we repeat, was bound to remain in Manila during
the three years of the armistice, and the nomination in his stead of
another governor, General Augusti, who, completely without knowledge of
the country, brought with him as his counsellor the unworthy Colonel
Olive, the same who had proceeded with the utmost haste and greatest
partiality and passion against the pretended chieftains, authors,
protectors and followers of the sacred movement begun in August, 1896;
who had, as military prosecutor for the 'Captain General,' exacted
with insolent cynicism, and with the knowledge and consent of his
superior officers, considerable sums of money from those who wished to
be absolved, in order to imprison them again when they did not comply
with all his extortions; the same who, with shameless partiality
worked and used his influence all he could towards the shooting of
the immortal Tagalo martyr, Dr. Jose Rizal; the same finally, who,
during the command of weak General Blanco and of bloodthirsty and
base General Polariyi demanded continually the imprisoning of the
so-called 'Sons of the Country,' the descendants of the Europeans,
that is, who had amongst us any importance by their learning, their
industry, their fortunes or their lineage, and who were not willing
to bribe him so as to be left in liberty.

"In view of this series of acts of faithlessness, of contempt, of
insults, of crimes, and before all, the forgetting of the treaty,
so recently as well as solemnly entered upon, those same who signed
the treaty of Biyak na bato, have considered themselves free of the
obligation to remain abroad and of keeping any longer the promised
armistice.

"And, taking advantage of the Providential coming to the Philippines
of the revenging squadron of the Great Republic of the United States
of North America, they come back to their native soil proud and
contented, to reconquer their liberty and their rights, counting
on the aid and protection of the brave, decided, and noble Admiral
Dewey, of the Anglo-Saxon squadron which has succeeded in beating
and destroying the forces of the tyrants who have been annihilating
the personality and energy of our industrious people, model of noble
and glorious qualities.

"The moment has come, therefore, for the Filipinos to count themselves
and to enter into rank and file in order to defend with zeal and
resolution and with a virility of strong men, the soil that saw
their birth as well as the honor of their name, making publicly
and universally known their competence, ability and their civic,
political and social virtues.

"Let us all fight united; seconding the revenging and humanitarian
action of the North American Republic; and let us learn from her,
accepting her counsels and her system, the way of living in order,
peace and liberty, copying her institutions, which are the only
adequate ones for the nations who wish to reconquer their personality
in history, in the period we are passing.

"On going to battle, let us inscribe on our flag with clearness and
accuracy the sacred legend of our aspirations.

"We want a stable government, elected by the people themselves; the
laws of which are to be voted for by those same who have to keep them
faithfully, conserving or modifying their present institutions in the
natural times in the life of nations, but modeling them and taking us
their own, the democratic ones of the United States of North America.

"We want the country to vote its taxes; those necessary for public
services and to satisfy (pay in full) the assistance North America
and the corporations, organizations and individuals who help us to
rise out of our lethargic state, are rendering us; taking care at the
same time to abolish all those which have for basis a social vice or an
immoral action, like the lottery, the tax on gambling dens, on galleras
(arenas for fights of game cocks) and the farming out of the sale of
opium. But before all, may there nevermore appear again that repugnant
tax levied on Pederasty, which, to get two thousand pesos offended
the universal conscience and the chaste name of 'Chinese Comedies.'

"We want plainest liberty in all its bearings, including that of
ideas, association and the press, without arriving at lawlessness and
disorder; just as it is established in that great, so well regulated
Republic.

"We want to see the religion of the natives and of those that come
to this country rigorously respected by the public powers and by the
individuals in particular.

"We want Christianism, the basis of present civilization, to be
the emblem and solid foundation of our religious institutions,
without force or compulsion; that the native clergy of the country
be that which direct and teach the natives in all the degrees of the
ecclesiastical hierarchy.

"We want the maintenance of this clergy to be effected as the different
regional governments may see fit, or, as the city councils or popular
elective institutions established in every locality may determine.

"We want personal property to be absolutely and unconditionally
respected; and, as a consequence, the recognition to the land holder
of the property he cultivates and has improved by his labor, of the
so-called Haciendas of the religious orders, who have usurped them
and robbed them by the perverse acts of the confessionary, beguiling
the fanaticism of ignorant women and or more than timid aged man,
afraid of the vengeance the priests in their innate wickedness
might meditate against their families, who extorted from them dues
at the last moments of their existence denying them spiritual aid
and divine rewards without the cession of their material interests
before departing from this earth.

"We want the possessions of these land holders to be respected
without their being obliged to pay any canon, lease or tax whatsoever
of religious character, depressive or unjust, ceasing thus their
detainment, anti-juridicial and anti-social, on the part of monarchial
orders, rapacious orders whom, on the strength of their being a
'necessary evil,' the ignorant functionaries of Spanish administration,
like themselves insatiable extortioners, have been aiding, in disdain
of right, reason and equity.

"We want in order to consolidate the property, the ominous 'Inspection
de Montes,' to disappear and cease in its actual functions, as a
disorganizing and fiscalizing center of the titles of property of
the natives, which on pretense of investigating and discovering
the detainment of State lands, had the custom of declaring the
property of the State or of others, such as was already cultivated
and producing by the improvements made by the poor peasant, awarding
such to their friends or to those who bribe them if the legitimate
proprietor refused to give them, in shameless auction, what they asked
for as a remuneration for what they called 'shutting their eyes,'
as has happened lately, amongst other scandalous cases, in Mindoro,
when staking out the limits of the new Hacienda adjudged there to
the Recoleto Priests.

"We want public administration to be founded and to act on a basis
of morality, economy and competence, in the charge of natives of the
country or of such others who by their experience and learning can
serve us as guides and teach us the basis and the system of those
countries who have their economical, political and administrative
offices and proceedings simplified and well organized.

"We want the recognition of all the substantive rights of the human
personality; guaranteed by judicial power, cemented in the principles
in force in all the cultured nations; that the judicial authorities,
when applying the laws, be penetrated by and identified with the
spirit and the necessities of the locality; that the administration of
justice be developed by simple, economical and decisive proceedings;
and that judges and magistrates have their attributions limited by
the functions of a jury and by verbal and public judgment, making
thus disappear the actual state of affairs, of which prevarication
and crooked dealings are the natural and necessary mark.

"We want sensible codes, adapted to our manner of being without
differentiation of races and without odious privileges contrary to
the principle of equality before the law.

"We want the increase and protection of our industries by means of
subventions and of local and transient privileges without putting
barriers to the general exchange of produce and of mercantile
transactions with all the nations of the globe without exception.

"We want liberty of banking business, liberty of mercantile and
industrial societies and companies, commercial liberty, and that the
Philippines cease to be shut up amongst the walls of its convents,
to become again the universal market, like that of Hongkong, that of
Singapore, that of the Straits, that of Borneo, that of the Moluccas,
and that of some of the autonomous colonies of Australia, countries
which surround us; and that capital may with confidence develop all
the elements of wealth of this privileged soil, without more duties
or charges on import and export than those the circumstances of each
epoch may require for determined purposes.

"We want roads, canals and ports, the dredging of our rivers and
other waterways, railroads, tramways and all the means of locomotion
and transport, on water and earth, with such help and assistance as
may be needed to carry them out within a certain time and develop
them conveniently.

"We want the suppression of the so-called 'Guardia Civil,' this
pretorian and odious institution in whose malignment and inhuman meshes
so many Philippine martyrs have suffered and expired; that center of
tortures and iniquities, those contemptible flatterers of small tyrants
and of the concupiscense of the priests, those insatiable extortioners
of the poor native; those hardened criminals animated constantly
in their perverseness by the impunity with which their accomplices,
the representatives of despotism and official immorality, covered them.

"In their stead we want a judicial and gubernatorial police, which
is to watch over and oblige the fulfillment of existing laws and
regulations without tortures and abuses.

"We want a local army, composed of native volunteers, strictly limited
to what order and natural defense demands.

"We want a public instruction less levitical and more extensive
in what refers to natural and positive sciences; so that it may be
fitted to industrate woman as well as man in the establishment and
development of the industries and wealth of the country, marine
and terrestrial mining, forestal and industrial of all kinds, an
instruction which is to be free of expenses in all its degrees
and obligatory in its primary portion, leaving and applying to
this object all such property as is destined to-day to supply the
sustainment of the same; taking charge of the administration of such
property a Council of Public Instruction, not leaving for one moment
longer in the hands of religious institutions, since these teach
only prejudice and fanaticism, proclaiming, as did not long since
a rector of the university of Manila, that 'medicine and physical
sciences are materialistic and impious studies,' and another, that
'political economy was the science of the devil.'

"We want to develop this public instruction, to have primary schools,
normal schools, institutes of second degree, professional schools,
universities, museums, public libraries, meteorological observatories,
agricultural schools, geological and botanical gardens and a general
practical and theoretical system of teaching agriculture, arts and
handicraft and commerce. All this exists already in the country,
but badly organized and dispersed, costing the contributors a good
deal without practical results, which might have been expected,
by the incompetency of the teachers and the favoritism employed in
their nominations and remunerations.

"We want laws for hunting and fishing, and teaching and regular
vigilance for the faithful carrying on of pisciculture, well-known
already to the natives, for the advantageous disposing of their marine
products, such as conch shell, mother of pearl, pearls, bichi de mer,
ray skins, fish lime, etc., and for the raising of all kinds of animals
useful for agricultural and industrial purposes and as victuals for
the natives and for export.

"We want liberty of immigration and assistance for foreign settlers and
capitalists, with such restrictions only, when there be an opportunity,
as limit actually Chinese immigration, similar to legislature on this
point in North America and Australia.

"We want, finally, anything that be just, equitable and orderly;
all that may be basis for development, prosperity and well being;
all that may be a propelling element of morality, virtue and respect
to the mutual rights of all the inhabitants, in their minor relations
and in those with the foreigner.

"Do not believe that the American nation is unbelieving or fanatically
protestant, that it take to the scaffold or to the fire those who
do not believe determined principles and practice special religious
creeds; within that admirable organization, masterly and living
model of perfection for the old nations of Europe and Asia, lives
and prospers the Roman Catholic Church.

"There are some seven million inhabitants who profess that religion
directed by natural clergy with their proper ministers, taken from
that fold of Christ.

"Then there are bishops, archbishops, cardinals of the Roman Church,
American subjects, beloved faithful of the Pope Leo XIII.

"There then is a Temporal Apostolical Delegate representative of
the legitimate successor of St. Peter; there are parsons, canons,
dignitaries and provisors, who live and teach in order peace and
prosperity, respected by one and all, as you yourselves will be the
day the American flag will influence in the spiritual direction of
the Philippine people.

"Then there are cathedrals, parish churches, temples and chapels,
sumptuous and admired, where they adore the same God of the Sinai and
Golgotha, where severs and ostensive cult is rendered to Immaculate
Virgin Mary and to the Saints you have on your altars and none dare
to destroy, attack or prostitute them.

"There then are seminaries, convents, missions, fraternities, schools,
everything Catholic, richly furnished, well kept up and perfectly
managed to the glory of the religion.

"There resides His Eminence Cardinal Gibbons, a wise Roman Catholic
prelate, American citizen, who recently and on occasion of the
present war, has ordered, with consent of His Sanctity, that all
the catholic clergy of the American nation raise daily prayers to
the Most High to obtain the triumph of the arms of their country,
for the good of religion and humanity, which cause, in the present
conflict legitimately and unquestionably represents that government.

"And just as Christ, to be Messiah, had to be according to the
prophecies, Jew and of the Tribe of Judah, that is: By right of his
political fatherland, as by that of his native soil, of the chosen
people, thus amongst you who ever wants to be a clergyman or merit
being canon, dignitary, provisor, bishop, archbishop and cardinal,
must as an indispensable condition, have been born on your proper
soil, as is occurring absolutely in all the civilized nations of the
old and new world, with the only exception of the Philippines.

"There may be priests, religious congregations, nuns and convents, but
submissive to the laws of the country and obliged to admit in their
bosom as formerly happened in these isles, as estimable and superior
members of such institutions, those feel a vocation for a conventual
life, as the noble and generous people of North America will demand,
and will, do not doubt it, recognize these your legitimate rights.





_Filipinos and Countrymen._

"The protection of the great American Republic will make you respected
and considered before the cultured powers, legitimately constituted;
and your personality will be proclaimed and sanctioned everywhere.

"We have the duty to exact the rights we have just proclaimed and the
'natives' in all the isles and in all their different races, as well
as the 'Mestizo Sangley,' as the 'Mestizo Espanol,' and the 'Son of
the Country,' we all have the honorable duty of defending ourselves
against the whip and the contempt of the Spaniards, accepting the
protection and direction of the humane North American nation.





_Viva Filipinos_


Hurrah for liberty and right.
Hurrah for the Grand Republic of the United States of North America.
Hurrah for President McKinley and Rear Admiral Dewey.
[ERROR: unhandled comment start]

-->_The Junta Patriotica_.

"Hongkong, April, 1898."


Under the authority of the United States there have been inquiries
by a court into the causes of the imprisonment of the inmates of the
penitentiary and common jail at Manila, and others who have suffered
from the enmities of the members of the government that ceased when
the Spanish flag was taken down and the American flag raised. The
memoranda following were made in the court proceedings, and state
the facts as judicially established.





_Fulgencia Tuazon_.

This lady was confined in Bilibid seven years ago (though the record
shows July 11, 1898,) by order of the Governor-General, on a charge of
selling counterfeit stamps. She was tried, and sentenced to six years'
confinement; but the Judge accepted a bribe of $900 and released
her about a week after her trial. A year afterwards she was again
arrested by a new judge on the same charge, and $3,000 was demanded
as the price of her liberty. This was refused, and imprisonment
followed. She claims to have bought the stamps (which were telegraph
stamps), from the Government.

_Dorotea Arteaga_.

This young lady, who was a school teacher in her native province,
Montinlupa, Manila province, was confined in Bilibid, August 8th,
1895, charged with "sacrilege and robbery," and insurrection. She
came to Malate to see about her license as a school teacher, and
was arrested by the civil guard on the above charge. She claims her
arrest was instigated by a priest who had made overtures to her to have
carnal intercourse with him, and had attempted the same, and had been
repulsed and refused. To cover up his ill-doing he caused her arrest on
the charge of having stolen part of the vessels used in the communion
service of the Roman Catholic church. She has never been married and
the Alcalde says, "Her conduct in prison has been very good."





_Senora Maxima Guerrera_.

This woman was born in Santa Cruz, in 1838, and has been confined in
Bilibid since 1890, though the record shows that she was imprisoned
July 11, 1898, by order of the Governor-General. This date, however,
is admitted to be an error by the Alcalde, without any explanation
of the error. The record shows that she was imprisoned because she
objected to the Government taking wood off her property without paying
for it. She claims that since her imprisonment, the Government has
confiscated $10,000 worth of her property.





_Felipe Rementina_.

This prisoner was confined in the year 1889, when only 12 years
old. At that time a revolution was in progress in the province in
which he resided, and he was "captured" by the Spanish forces and
sent to Bilibid Carcel. He did not know with what he was charged,
and while he was tried, he never received any sentence.





_Jose David_.

"I was put in here June 13th, 1898. Am a civilian and a
'Katipunan.' Was tried, but never sentenced." The foregoing is
the testimony of the prisoner Jose David, and is quoted here as an
example of the testimony of some hundreds of others, which is almost
identical. Large numbers of the natives seem to be members of the
"Katipunan" society, which appears to be a revolutionary brotherhood
of some kind. They have been imprisoned for terms varying from one
or two months to several years (in some cases ten or twelve years),
upon the charge of belonging to this society; in very many cases
without trial, and in the majority with no sentence whatever, and,
very largely, simply "on suspicion."





_Agapito Calibugar_.

This man was arrested by the Civil Guard, in July, 1889, in his own
house, and was tried but not sentenced, or rather did not know what
his sentence was. He was told that his sentence was served out, but
he could not be returned to his own province of Negros because the
Governor had no ships available for that purpose. He had no idea why
he was arrested and tried. There are several other cases similar to
this one, in which the charge is "resisting armed forces"--most of
which were tried by court martial, and never sentenced.





_Gregorio Domingo_.

This prisoner was confined in Bilibid Carcel on the 25th of November,
1896, the entry on the prison record against his name being "no se
espresa"--"no charge expressed." He was, of course, neither tried nor
sentenced, but had been in prison almost two years, with absolutely
no reason attempted to be made for his confinement. This case is also
cited as an example of many similar ones.





_Jose Trabado_.

This is the case of a man who was a member of the Katipunan society,
but who was tried and sentenced. He was imprisoned in Bilibid Carcel,
May 5th, 1898, his sentence being confinement "cardena perpetua"--"in
chains forever." He was one of five men who received the same sentence
for a like offence. He, with the others, was set free August 31st,
1898.





_Silvino De Castro_.

In this case the prisoner, who was formerly employed as a clerk in
a grocery store, was imprisoned in Bilibid Carcel on the 25th of
December, 1897, charged with having stolen $4.50 (Spanish, which
represents about $2.25 American). His story was that he was sent
out to collect a bill, but lost the said bill, and was therefore
accused by his employer of stealing the money, and was imprisoned,
He was tried, but never received any sentence.


_Don Fernando Sierra_.

The prisoner above named is a full-blooded Spaniard, thirty-eight
years of age, married, and has one child, three months old. He was
confined in Bilibid, May 28, 1893, for "insulting" a civil guard,
while drunk, and was tried and sentenced to six years and six months
imprisonment. He had already served over five years of this sentence,
when he was released September 2nd, 1898.

_Cristan del Carmen_.

This man was confined in the Carcel De Bilibid, the "common prison,"
May 4th, 1898, and his offense was that he was "suspected of being an
American!" For this heinous crime he was neither tried nor sentenced.

_Julian Soriano_.

In this case the prisoner was confined in Bilibid, March 25th, 1895,
after having been in prison one year in his province on suspicion of
being implicated in the killing of a civil guard at a place colled
Balauga. He was tried by a sergeant of the civil guard, who caused him
to be tortured in order to wring a confession from him. This torture
was inflicted by means of a thin rope or cord, tied very tightly around
the muscles of the arm above the elbow (cutting into the flesh deeply),
and left there in some instances for thirty days. In some cases the
men were also hung up, the weight of the body being sustained by the
cords around the arms. Several of the prisoners have deep scars on
their arms caused by the torture. This man was never sentenced.

_Leon Bueno_.

The charge against this man was that he had stolen a pig, and he was
confined in Bilibid, March 21st, 1893, after being tried and sentenced
to eight years' imprisonment. He had already served over five years
when released Sept. 3, 1898.

_Jose Castillo_.

This man was confined in Bilibid Carcel, December loth, 1894, charged
with "insulting the armed forces of Spain." His version of the reason
for his imprisonment is as follows: His cousin and a lieutenant in the
guardia civile were very close friends, and the said cousin, wishing
to present a cow to the lieutenant, applied to the prisoner for one,
which was given to him. Later on the cousin thought he would like to
present his friend with another cow, so applied to the prisoner for
cow No. 2, and was this time refused. In order to take vengeance on the
prisoner, the cousin denounced him to the civil guard lieutenant as a
"bandit," and he was arrested and imprisoned as above. The prisoner
was sixty years of age.

_Anastacio de Mesa_.

The story of this prisoner seems to be particularly sad. He was
a chorister or sacristan in a Roman Catholic church, with several
others, and was arrested, with his companions, by the civil guard,
charged with "sacrilege." The truth of the matter, however, seems to
be as follows: The prisoner had a sweetheart with whom a lieutenant of
the civil guard, named de Vega, appears to have been infatuated. After
imprisoning Anastacio de Mesa and his companions upon the above charge,
which seems to be without foundation entirely, de Vega took the girl,
and compelled her by force and against her will to live with him as
his mistress. The girl soon died, her end, no doubt, being hastened
by the brutal cruelty of de Vega. These young men, hardly more than
boys, were imprisoned on August 3, 1895, after having been tried by
court martial, but not sentenced. They have now been liberated. It
should be stated that de Vega himself constituted the "court martial"
before which these boys were tried.





Note.--There are several cases of arrests for "insulting and resisting
the armed forces of Spain." In the case of Pedro Javier, the accused
was over seventy years old, and in that of Miguel de la Cruz, he was
seventy-five years old; while in one or two other cases boys of ten
or twelve years of age were arrested on the same charge.



CHAPTER XX

Hawaii As Annexed.

The Star Spangled Banner Up Again in Hawaii, and to Stay--Dimensions
of the Islands--What the Missionaries Have Done--Religious Belief
by Nationality--Trade Statistics--Latest Census--Sugar Plantation
Laborers--Coinage of Silver--Schools--Coffee Growing.

The star spangled banner should have been waving in peaceful triumph
over our central possessions in the Pacific for five years. Now Old
Glory has ascended the famous flag-staff, from which it was mistakenly
withdrawn, and is at home. Its lustrous folds are welcomed by a city
that is strangely American, in the sense that it is what the world
largely calls "Yankee," and does not mean bad manners by the most
expressive word that has so vast a distinction. The shops of Honolulu
are Americanized. There is a splendid blossoming of the flag of the
country. The British parties of opposition have faded out. There is
the wisdom in English statesmanship to be glad to see us with material
interest in the Pacific Ocean. In this connection there is something
better than a treaty.

Do not mispronounce the name of the capital city of the Hawaiian
Islands. Call it Hoo-noo-luu-luu and let it sing itself. Remember
that this city is not on the larger of the islands, but the third
in size. The area of Hawaii, the greater island, is 4,210 square
miles. Oahu, the Honolulu island, has 600 square miles, with a
population of 40,205, and Hawaii has 33,285 people. The area of the
islands, told in acres is, Hawaii, 2,000,000; Nani, 400,000; Oahu,
260,000; Kauai, 350,000; Malokai, 200,000; Lauai, 100,000; Nichan,
70,000; Kahloolawe, 30,000. The dimensions of the tremendous volcanoes
that are our property now are startling:


        _Dimensions of Kilauea, Island of Hawaii._
        (The largest active Volcano in the World.)

        Area, 4.14 square miles, or 2,650 acres.
        Circumference, 41,500 feet, or 7.85 miles.
        Extreme width, 10,300 feet, or 1.95 miles.
        Extreme length, 15,500 feet, or 2.93 miles.
        Elevation, Volcano House, 1,040 feet.


        _Dimensions of Mokuaweoweo_.
        (The Summit Crater of Mauna Loa, Island of Hawaii.)

        Area, 3.70 square miles, or 2,370 acres.
        Circumference, 50,000 feet, or 9.47 miles.
        Length, 19,500 feet, or 3.7 miles.
        Width, 9,200 feet, or 1.74 miles.
        Elevation, 13,675 feet.


        _Dimensions of Haleakala_.
        (The great Crater of Maui, the Largest in the World.)

        Area, 19 square miles, or 12,160 acres. Circumference,
        105,600 feet, or 20 miles. Extreme length, 39,500 feet,
        or 7.48 miles. Extreme width, 12,500 feet, or 2.37 miles.
        Elevation of summit, 10,032 feet. Elevation of principal
        cones in crater, 8,032 and 7,572 feet. Elevation of cave
        in floor of crater, 7,380 feet.


        _Dimensions of Iao Valley, Maui._

        Length (from Wailuku) about 5 miles.
        Width of valley, 2 miles.
        Depth, near head, 4,000 feet.
        Elevation of Puu Kukui, above head of valley, 5,788 feet.
        Elevation of Crater of Eke, above Waihee Valley, 4,500 feet.


Honolulu's importance comes from the harbor, and the favor of
the missionaries. As to the general judgment of the work of the
missionaries, there is nothing better to do than to quote Mr. Richard
H. Dana's "Two Years Before the Mast." He said in that classic:

"It is no small thing to say of the missionaries of the American Board,
that in less than forty years they have taught this whole people to
read and write, to cipher and to sew. They have given them an alphabet,
grammar and dictionary; preserved their language from extinction;
given it a literature and translated into it the Bible, and works
of devotion, science and entertainment, etc. They have established
schools, reared up native teachers, and so pressed their work that now
the proportion of inhabitants who can read and write is greater than
in New England. And, whereas, they found these islanders a nation of
half-naked savages, living in the surf and on the sand, eating raw
fish, fighting among themselves, tyrannized over by feudal chiefs
and abandoned to sensuality, they now see them decently clothed,
recognizing the law of marriage, knowing something of accounts,
going to school and public worship more regularly than the people
do at home, and the more elevated of them taking part in conducting
the affairs of the constitutional monarchy under which they live,
holding seats on the judicial bench and in the legislative chambers,
and filling posts in the local magistracies."

Take away the tropical vegetation and the gigantic scenery and we have
here, in our new Pacific possessions, a new Connecticut. The stamp of
New England is upon this lofty land, especially in Honolulu, where the
spires of the churches testify. There is much that is of the deepest
and broadest interest in the possible missionary work here, on account
of the remarkable race questions presented. Here are the nations and
the people of mixed blood--the Chinese, Japanese and Portuguese--a
population immensely representative of Oriental Asia. The measure
of success of the missionaries under our flag in dealing with these
people can hardly fail to be accepted by the world as a test of the
practical results of the labor with the Asiatica. In this connection,
the figures following, from the Hawaiian Annual of 1898, furnish a
basis of solid information for study:


            _Table of Religious Belief, By Nationality_.
            (So Far as Reported in Census Returns, 1896.)

                                               Roman
Nationalities.              Protestants.     Catholics.
Mormons.
Hawaiians...................   12,842          8,427              4,368
Part Hawaiians..............    3,242          2,633                396
Hawaiian born foreigners....    1,801          6,622                 15
Americans...................    1,404            212                 34
British.....................    1,184            180                  7
Germans.....................      592             83                  2
French......................        6             57              .....
Norwegians..................      154              8              .....
Portuguese..................      146          7,812                  1
Japanese....................      711             49                  4
Chinese.....................      837             67                 49
South Sea Islanders.........      178             42                  3
Other nationalities.........      176            171                  7
                               ======         ======              =====
   Totals...............       23,273         26,363              4,886


_Note_.--This table shows but 54,522 of the population (just about
one-half) to have made returns of their religious belief. With 21,535
Japanese and 18,429 Chinese (probably Buddhists and Confucians)
unreported because not provided for in the schedules, the great
difference is largely accounted for.

The latest census returns show that of the whole population, 109,020,
there are: Males, 72,517; females, 36,503. The latest information of
labor, under contract for sugar-making, make the number of males on
the island more than double that of the females. There has been an
increase of population of more than 50,000 in the eighteen years from
1878 to 1896. The census of the several islands, taken September 27,
1896, shows:


                  Population.               Dwellings.
                                         Unin-
          Male.  Female. Total. Inhab-   habi- Build- Total.
                                 ited.   ted.   ing.
Oahu.... 26,164  14,041  40,205  6,685   1,065   60   7,010
Hawaii.. 22,632  10,653  33,285  5,033     955   35   6,027
Molokai.  1,335     972   2,307    651      92    3     746
Lanai...     51      54     105     23      13   ..      36
Maui.... 11,435   6,291  17,726  3,156     650   18   3,824
Niihau..     76      88     164     31       3   ..      34
Kauai .. 10,824   4,404  15,228  2,320     299    8   2,627
         ======  ====== ======= ======   =====  ===  ======
         72,517  36,503 109,020 17,099   3,081  124  21,104


Hawaii's annual trade balance since 1879 is a notable record:


                                 Excess Export  Custom House
Year  Imports.     Exports.      Values.        Receipts.
1880 $3,673,268.41 $4,968,444.87 $1,295,176.46 $402,181.63
1881  4,547,978.64  6,885,436.56  2,337,457.92  423,192.01
1882  4,974,510.01  8,299,016,70  3,324,506.69  505,390.98
1883  5,624,240.09  8,133,343.88  2,509,103.79  577,332.87
1884  4,637,514.22  8,184,922.63  3,547,408.41  551,739.59
1885  3,830,544.58  9,158,818.01  5,328,273.43  502.337.38
1886  4,877,738.73 10,565,885.58  5,688,146.85  580,444.04
1887  4,943,840.72  9,707,047.33  4,763,206.61  595,002.64
1888  4,540,887.46 11,903,398.76  7,362,511.30  546,142.63
1889  5,438,790.63 14,039,941.40  8,601,150.77  550,010.16
1890  6,962,201.13 13,142,829.48  6,180,628.35  695,956.91
1891  7,438,582.65 10,395,788.27  2,957,205.62  732,594,93
1892  4,028,295.31  8,181,687.21  4,153,391.90  494,385.10
1893  4,363,177.58 10,962,598.09  5,599,420.51  545,754.16
1894  5,104,481.43  9,678,794.56  4,574,313.13  524,767.37
1895  5,714,017.54  8,474,138.15  2,760,120.61  547,149.40
1896  7,164,561.40 15,515,230.13  8,350,668.73  656,895.82


The percentage of imports from the United States in 1896 was 76.27;
Great Britain, 10.54; Germany, 2.06; France, .25*; China, 4.17;
Japan, 3.86. In 1895 the export of sugar was 294,784,819 pounds;
value, $7,975,500.41.


Nationality of Vessels Employed in Foreign Carrying Trade, 1889-1896.


               1889.          1890.          1891.          1892.
Nations.     No.   Tons.    No.   Tons.    No.   Tons.    No.   Tons.
American    185  125,196   224  153,098   233  169,472   212  160,042
Hawaiian     44   56,670    35   43,641    21   26,869*  *21    4,340
British      22   21,108    16   22,912    33   52,866    30   58,317
German        5    3,337     9    7,070     9    9,005     5    5,978
Japanese     ..  .......   ...  .......     5    8,239     3    4,701
All others    9   12,268     9    9,980    10    8,401    11    8,201
            ===  =======   ===  =======   ===  =======   ===  =======
    Total   269  218,579   293  236,701   311  274,852   722  242,579


Bonded Debt, Etc., Hawaiian Islands, June 30, 1897.

                            Per Cent.
Under Loan Act of 1876            7        $    1,500.00
  "     "     "   1882            6            67,400.00
  "     "     "   1886            6         2,000,000.00
  "     "     "   1888            6           190,000.00
  "     "     "   1890      5 and 6           124,100.00
  "     "     "   1892      5 and 6            82.100.00
  "     "     "   1893            6           650,000.00
  "     "     "   1890            5           222,000.00
                                           =============
                                            3,337,100.00
Due Postal Savings Bank Depositors            782,074.25
                                           =============
                                           $4,119,174.25


Number and Nationality of Sugar Plantation Laborers.

(Compiled from latest Report of Secretary Bureau of Immigration,
December 31, 1897.)


         Hawaii- Portu-  Japan-              S. S.     All
Islands.   ans.  guese.    ese.  Chinese.  Isl'ders.  Others.   Total.
Hawaii     594    980    6,245    2,511       24       232     10,586
Mauai      580    526    2,010    1,114       45       110      4,385
Oahu       197    211    1,331      973       16        55      2,783
Kauai      244    551    3,307    1,691       30       203      6,026
         =====  =====   ======    =====      ===       ===     ======
Tot.1896 1,615  2,268   12,893    6,289      115       600     23,780
Tot.1895 1,584  2,497   11,584    3,847      133       473     20,120
         =====  =====   ======    =====      ===       ===     ======
Inc.1896    31  .....    1,309    2,442      ...       127      3,660
Dec.1899 .....    231   ......    .....       18       ...     ......


The number of day laborers, 11,917, or a little over one-half of
the total force engaged. The Japanese and South Sea Islanders are
about evenly divided in their numbers as to term and day service,
while Hawaiians and Portuguese show each but a small proportion of
their numbers under contract. Minors are reducing in number. Women
laborers, numbering 1,024 in all, show a gain of 89 over 1875. Only
thirty Hawaiian females are engaged among all the plantations, and
confined to one plantation each in Oahu, Kauai and Maui.

The Hawaiian Annual of 1898 makes this annotation:

During the year various changes have occurred in the labor population
of the country; and under the working of the present law, requiring
a proportion of other than Asiatic of all immigrant labor introduced,
there has already arrived one company of Germans, comprising 115 men,
25 women and 47 children, all of whom found ready engagements with
various plantations.

Chinese arrivals in 1897 to take the place of Japanese whose terms
were expiring, will alter the proportions of these nationalities of
plantation labor, and by the new law Asiatic laborers must return to
their country at the expiration of their term of service, or re-engage;
they cannot drift around the country, nor engage in competition with
artizans or merchants.

The islands comprising the Hawaiian territory are Hawaii, Mauai,
Oaha, Kauai, Molokai, Lauai, Niihau, Kahaalawe, Lehua and Molokini,
"The Leper Prison," and, in addition, Nihoa, or Bird Island, was
taken possession of in 1822; an expedition for that purpose having
been fitted out by direction of Kaahumanu, and sent thither under
the charge of Captain William Sumner.

Laysan Island became Hawaiian territory May 1st, 1857, and on the
10th of the same month Lysiansky Island was added to Kamehameha's
realm by Captain John Paty.

Palmyra Island was taken possession of by Captain Zenas Bent,
April 15th, 1862, and proclaimed Hawaiian territory in the reign
of Kamehameha IV., as per "By Authority" notice in the "Polynesian"
of June 21st, 1862.

Ocean Island was acquired September 20th, 1886, as per proclamation
of Colonel J.M. Boyd, empowered for such service during the reign
of Kalakaua.

Neeker Island was taken possession of May 27th, 1894, by Captain
James A. King, on behalf of the Hawaiian Government.

French Frigate Shoal was the latest acquisition, also by Captain King,
and proclaimed Hawaiian territory July 13th, 1895.

Gardener Island, Mara or Moro Reef, Pearl and Hermes Reef,
Gambia Bank, and Johnston or Cornwallis Island are also claimed as
Hawaiian possessions, but there is some obscurity as to the dates
of acquisition, and it is of record in the Foreign Office articles
of convention between Hen. Charles St. Julien, the Commissioner and
Political and Commercial Agent of His Majesty the King of the Hawaiian
Islands, and John Webster, Esq., the Sovereign Chief and Proprietor
of the group of islands known as Stewart's Islands (situated near the
Solomon Group), whereby is ceded to the Hawaiian Government--subject
to ratification by the King--the islands of Ihikaiana, Te Parena,
Taore, Matua Awi and Matua Ivoto, comprising said group of Stewart's
Islands. But the formalities do not seem to have been perfected,
so that we are not certain that the Stewart's Islands are our
possessions. The latest thorough census of the Hawaiian Islands was
taken in September, 1896, but the population was closely estimated
July 1st, 1897.


                                                 Japan-    Portu-   All Other
                          Natives.  Chinese.     ese.      guese.   Foreigners. Total
Population as per Census,
  September, 1896           39,504    21,616     24,407    15,191   8,302       109,020
  Passengers-Arrivals-
Excess over departures,
  4th quarter, 1896         ......     1,377      1,673    ......     339         3,389
Excess over departures,
  6 mos. to July 1, 1897.   ......     2,908        396        58     207         3,569
                            ======    ======     ======    ======  ======        ======
Total                       39,504    25,901     26,476    15,249   8,848       115,978


The following denominations of Hawaiian silver were coined during
the reign of Kalakaua, at the San Francisco mint, and imported for
the circulating medium of the islands in 1883 and 1884. They are of
the same intrinsic value as the United States silver coins and were
first introduced into circulation January 14th, at the opening of
the bank of Clans Spreckles & Co. in Honolulu. The amount coined was
$1,000,000, divided as follows:


    Hawaiian Dollars...................................$   500,000
        "    Half Dollars..............................    350,000
        "    Quarter Dollars...........................    125,000
        "    Dimes.....................................     25,000

    Total..............................................$ 1,000,000


Schools, Teachers and Pupils for the Year 1896.


                            ==Teachers.==             ==Pupils.==
            Schools.  Male.    Female.     Total.   Male.     Female.
Government    132      111         169      280     5,754      4,435
Independent    63       72         130      202     1,994      1,840
             ====     ====        ====     ====     ======     ======
              195      183         299      482     7,748      6,275


Nationality of Pupils Attending Schools for the Year 1896.


        Nationality.         Male.       Female.
        Hawaiian             3,048         2,432
        Part-Hawaiian        1,152         1,296
        American               219           198
        British                105           151
        German                 152           136
        Portuguese           2,066         1,534
        Scandinavian            51            47
        Japanese               242           155
        Chinese                641           280
        South Sea Islanders     15            13
        Other foreigners        57            33
                            =====          =====
                            7,748          6,275


Of the Japanese, 8.5 per cent. were born on the islands; of the
Chinese, percentage born here, 10.3. Of a total of 41,711 Japanese
and Chinese, 36,121 are males and 5,590 females. The figures show
that the Asiatics are not at home.

The sugar industry in our new possessions has had great prominence
agriculturally. The sugar interest of these islands has had a
formidable influence in the United States. Recent events and the
ascertained certainties of the future show that the people of
the United States will soon raise their sugar supply on their own
territory. The annexation of these sugar islands was antagonized
because there was involved the labor contract system. As a matter
of course, the United States will not change the labor laws of the
nation to suit the sugar planters of Hawaii, who have been obtaining
cheap labor through a system of Asiatic servitude. There is but one
solution--labor will be better compensated in Hawaii than it has been,
and yet white men will not be largely employed in the cultivation
of sugar cane in our tropical islands. The beet sugar industry is
another matter. There will be an end of the peculiar institution that
has had strength in our new possessions, that brings, under contract,
to Hawaii a mass of forty thousand Chinese and Japanese men, and turns
over the majority of them to the plantations, whose profits have
displayed an unwholesome aggrandizement. Once it was said cotton
could not be grown in the cotton belt of our country without slave
labor, but the latter trouble is, the cotton producers claim, there is
too much of their product raised. A ten-million bale crop depresses
the market. Already experiments have been tried successfully to pay
labor in the sugar fields by the tons of cane delivered at the mills
for grinding. This is an incident full of auspicious significance. A
general feeling is expressed in the current saying that coffee raising
is "the coming industry." The confidence that there is prosperity
in coffee amounts to enthusiasm. Here are some of the statistics of
coffee growers, showing number of trees and area, trees newly planted
and trees in bearing:


                                            No. of Trees or Area.
                                    Newly         1 to 3        Trees in
                                    Planted.      year old.     Bearing.
J. C. Lenhart, Kaupo                 2,000 trs.    4,000 trs.       ....
Mokulau Coffee Co., Kaupo            2,000 trs.   10,000 trs.      2 acres
E. E. Paxton, Kaupo                  5,000 trs.    7,000 trs.       ....
Native Patches throughout Kaupo        10 acres        ....         ....
Lahaina Coffee and Fruit Co., Ltd.,
    Lahaina                         10,000 trs.  100,000 trs.   30,000 trs.
H. P. Baldwin, Honokahua            35,947 trs.    4,669 trs.    2,641 trs.
Waianae Coffee Plantation Co.,
    Waianae                          7,500 trs.   23,000 trs.   36,000 trs.
C. A. Wideman, Waianae              10,000 trs.    8,500 trs        ....
Makaha Coffee Co., Ltd., Waianae      112 acres        ....         ....
Lanihau Plantation, Kailua          20,700 trs.   25,000 trs.   10,000 trs.
Kona Coffee Co., Ltd., Kailua            ....          ....       35 acres
Geo. McDougal & Sons, Kailua             ....       176 acres    105 acres
H. C. Achi, Holualoa                     ....          ....     10,000 trs.
E. W. Barnard, Laupahoehoe               ....          ....     30,000 trs.
J. M. Barnard, Laupahoehoe               ....      5,000 trs.       ....
John Gaspar, Napoopoo                    ....     33,000 trs.   16,000 trs.
Manuel Sebastian, Kealakekua             ....          ....      8,000 trs.
J. G. Henriques, Kealakekua              ....          ....      3,000 trs.
C. Hooper, Kauleoli                      ....         2 acres      12 acres
J. Keanu, Keei                         5 acres       10 acres      16 acres
A. S. Cleghorn                         3 acres         ....       100 acres
Mrs. E. C. Greenwell                     ....         8 acres      25 acres
J. M. Monsarrat, Kolo                    ....        38 acres      40 acres
Queen Emma Plantation                    ....          ....     25,000 trs.
L. M. Staples Plantation                 ....     25,000 trs.   12,000 trs.
Olaa Coffee Co., Ltd                  50 acres       90 acres        ....
Grossman Bros                        100 acres       30 acres        ....
B. H. Brown                         2,260 trs.     2,000 trs.    3,225 trs.
Herman Eldart                      40,000 trs.    20,000 trs.    7,000 trs.


The list of coffee growers is very long. That which is of greater
interest is the showing made of the immense number of new trees. The
coffee movement steadily gains force and the pace of progress is
accelerated.

Everybody has not been pleased with annexation. The Japanese are
not in a good humor about it. The minister of Japan got his orders
evidently to leave for Japan when the news arrived that the question
had been settled in Washington, and he left for Yokohama by the boat
that brought the intelligence. Japanese journals of importance raise
the question as to the propriety of our establishing a coal station
here. There is some dissatisfaction among the Hawaiians, who are
bewildered. They are children who believe stories in proportion as
they are queer. Many of them feel that they have a grievance. The
young princess who is the representative of the extinguished monarchy
is affable and respected. If the question as to giving her substantial
recognition were left to the Americans here, they would vote for her
by a large majority. It would not be bad policy for the government
to be generous toward her. She is not in the same boat with the
ex-Queen. The Americans who have been steadfast in upholding the
policy that at last has prevailed are happy, but not wildly so,
just happy. Now that they have gained their cause, their unity will
be shaken by discussions on public questions and personal preferments.

There should be no delay in understanding that in this Archipelago the
race questions forbid mankind suffrage, and that our new possessions
are not to become states at once, or hurriedly; that it will take
generations of assimilation to prepare the Hawaiian Islands for
statehood.

The objection to the climate of the marvelous islands of which we
have become possessed is its almost changeless character. There is no
serious variation in the temperature. There is a little more rain in
"winter" than in "summer." There is neither spring nor fall. The trade
winds afford a slight variety, and this seems to be manipulated by
the mountains, that break up the otherwise unsparing monotony of
serene loveliness. The elevations of the craters, and the jagged
peaks are from one thousand to thirteen thousand feet. If you want
a change of climate, climb for cold, and escape the mosquitos,
the pests of this paradise. There are a score of kinds of palms;
the royal, the date, the cocoanut, are of them. The bread fruit and
banana are in competition. The vegetation is voluptuous and the scenery
stupendous. There is a constellation of islands, and they differ like
the stars in their glories and like human beings in their difficulties.



CHAPTER XXI

Early History of the Sandwich Islands.

Captain James Cook's Great Discoveries and His Martyrdom--Character
and Traditions of the Hawaiian Islands--Charges Against the Famous
Navigator, and effort to Array the Christian World Against Him--The
True Story of His Life and Death--How Charges Against Cook Came
to Be Made--Testimony of Vancouver, King and Dixon, and Last
Words of Cook's Journal--Light Turned on History That Has Become
Obscure--Savagery of the Natives--Their Written Language Took Up
Their High Colored Traditions, and Preserved Phantoms--Scenes in
Aboriginal Theatricals--Problem of Government in an Archipelago Where
Race Questions Are Predominant--Now Americans Should Remember Captain
Cook as an Illustrious Pioneer.

Regarding the islands in the Pacific that we have for a long time
largely occupied and recently wholly possessed, the Hawaiian cluster
that are the stepping stone, the resting place and the coal station
for the golden group more than a thousand leagues beyond, we should
remember Captain Cook as one of our own Western pioneers, rejoice
to read his true story, and in doing so to form a correct estimate
of the people who have drifted into the area of our Protection, or
territory that is inalienably our own, to be thoroughly Americanized,
that they may some day be worthy to become our fellow-citizens.

Sunday, January 18th, 1778, Captain Cook, after seeing birds every
day, and turtles, saw two islands, and the next day a third one, and
canoes put off from the shore of the second island, the people speaking
the language of Otaheite. As the Englishmen proceeded, other canoes
appeared, bringing with them roasted pigs and very fine potatoes. The
Captain says: "Several small pigs were purchased for a six-penny nail,
so that we again found ourselves in a land of plenty. The natives
were gentle and polite, asking whether they might sit down, whether
they might spit on the deck, and the like. An order restricting the
men going ashore was issued that I might do everything in my power
to prevent the importation of a fatal disease into the island,
which I knew some of our men now labored under." Female visitors
were ordered to be excluded from the ships. Captain Cook's journal
is very explicit, and he states the particulars of the failure of
his precautions. This is a subject that has been much discussed,
and there is still animosity in the controversy. The discovery of
the islands that he called the Sandwich, after his patron the Earl
of Sandwich, happened in the midst of our Revolutionary war. After
Cook's explorations for the time, he sailed in search of the supposed
Northwest passage, and that enterprise appearing hopeless, returned to
the summer islands, and met his fate in the following December. Captain
George Vancouver, a friend and follower of Cook, says, in his "Voyage
of Discovery and Around the World." from 1790 to 1795:

"It should seem that the reign of George the Third had been
reserved by the Great Disposer of all things for the glorious task
of establishing the grand keystone to that expansive arch over which
the arts and sciences should pass to the furthermost corners of the
earth, for the instruction and happiness of the most lowly children of
nature. Advantages so highly beneficial to the untutored parts of the
human race, and so extremely important to that large proportion of the
subjects of this empire who are brought up to the sea service deserve
to be justly appreciated; and it becomes of very little importance to
the bulk of our society, whose enlightened humanity teaches them to
entertain a lively regard for the welfare and interest of those who
engage in such adventurous undertakings for the advancement of science,
or for the extension of commerce, what may be the animadversions or
sarcasms of those few unenlightened minds that may peevishly demand,
"what beneficial consequences, if any, have followed, or are likely
to follow to the discoverers, or to the discovered, to the common
interests of humanity, or to the increase of useful knowledge, from
all our boasted attempts to explore the distant recesses of the
globe?" The learned editor (Dr. Douglas, now Bishop of Salisbury)
who has so justly anticipated this injudicious remark, has, in his
very comprehensive introduction to Captain Cook's last voyage, from
whence the above quotation is extracted, given to the public not
only a complete and satisfactory answer to that question, but has
treated every other part of the subject of discovery so ably as to
render any further observations on former voyages of this description
wholly unnecessary, for the purpose of bringing the reader acquainted
with what had been accomplished, previously to my being honored with
His Majesty's commands to follow up the labors of that illustrious
navigator Captain James Cook; to whose steady, uniform, indefatigable
and undiverted attention to the several objects on which the success
of his enterprises ultimately depended, the world is indebted for
such eminent and important benefits."

Captain George Vancouver pays, in the introduction of his report,
a remarkable tribute to Captain Cook, that should become familiar
to the American people, for it is one of the features of prevalent
Hawaiian literature that the great navigator is much disparaged,
and denounced. One of the favorite theories of the missionaries has
been that Cook's death at the hands of the savages was substantially
the punishment inflicted by God, because the Captain allowed himself
to be celebrated and worshipped as a god by the heathen, consenting
to their idolatry when he should have preached to them, as was done
with so much efficiency nearly half a century later. The fact is the
natives had a great deal of "religion" of their own, and defended
their superstitions with skill and persistence before yielding to
the great simplicities of the Christian faith. Captain Cook, it must
be admitted, did not attempt to preach the gospel. The gentleness of
the natives turned out to contain a great deal that was most horrible.

The closing years of the last century were those of rapid progress
in the art of navigation, and Captain Vancouver gives this striking
summary of testimony:

"By the introduction of nautical astronomy into marine education,
we are taught to sail on the hypothenuse, instead of traversing
two sides of a triangle, which was the usage in earlier times; by
this means the circuitous course of all voyages from place to place
is considerably shortened; and it is now become evident that sea
officers of the most common rate abilities who will take the trouble
of making themselves acquainted with the principles of this science,
will, on all suitable occasions, with proper and correct instruments,
be enabled to acquire a knowledge of their situation in the Atlantic,
Indian or Pacific Oceans, with a degree of accuracy sufficient to
steer on a meridianal or diagonal line, to any known spot, provided
it be sufficiently conspicuous to be visible at any distance from
five to ten leagues.

"This great improvement, by which the most remote parts of the
terrestrial globe are brought so sasily within our reach, would
nevertheless have been of comparatively little utility had not those
happy means been discovered for preserving the lives and health of the
officers and seamen engaged in such distant and perilous undertakings;
which were so peacefully practiced by Captain Cook, the first great
discoverer of this salutary system, in all his latter voyages around
the globe. But in none have the effect of his wise regulations,
regimen and discipline been more manifest than in the course of the
expedition of which the following pages are designed to treat. To an
unremitting attention, not only to food, cleanliness, ventilation,
and an early administration of antiseptic provisions and medicines,
but also to prevent as much as possible the chance of indisposition,
by prohibiting individuals from carelessly exposing themselves to the
influence of climate, or unhealthy indulgences in times of relaxation,
and by relieving them from fatigue and the inclemency of the weather
the moment the nature of their duty would permit them to retire, is
to be ascribed the preservation of the health and lives of sea-faring
people on long voyages."

"Those benefits did not long remain unnoticed by the commercial
part of the British nation. Remote and distant voyages being now no
longer objects of terror, enterprises were projected and carried into
execution, for the purpose of establishing new and lucrative branches
of commerce between Northwest America and China; and parts of the
coast of the former that had not been minutely examined by Captain
Cook became now the general resort of the persons thus engaged."

The special zeal and consistency with which Cook is defended by
the English navigators who knew him and were competent to judge of
the scope of his achievements is due in part to the venom of his
assailants. The historian of the Sandwich Islands, Sheldon Dibble,
says: "An impression of wonder and dread having been made, Captain Cook
and his men found little difficulty in having such intercourse with the
people as they chose. In regard to that intercourse, it was marked,
as the world would say, with kindness and humanity. But it cannot be
concealed that here and there at this time, in the form of loathsome
disease, was dug the grave of the Hawaiian nation; and from so deep an
odium it is to be regretted that faithful history cannot exempt even
the fair name of Captain Cook himself, since it was evident that he
gave countenance to the evil. The native female first presented to
him was a person of some rank; her name was Lelemahoalani. Sin and
death were the first commodities imported to the Sandwich Islands."

We have already quoted Captain Cook's first words on this subject. He
had much more to say giving in detail difficulties rather too searching
to be fully stated. As for the charge that Cook personally engaged
in debauchery, it rests upon the tradition of savages, who had no
more idea than wild animals of the restraint of human passion. It was
debated among the islanders whether the white men should be assailed
by the warriors, and it was on the advice of a native queen that the
women were sent to make friends with the strangers; and this was the
policy pursued. As for the decline of the natives in numbers, and the
"digging the grave of the nation." the horror of the islands was the
destruction of female infants, and also the habit of putting aged
and helpless men and women to death. The general indictment against
Captain Cook is that this amiable race was just about prepared
for Christianity when he thrust himself forward as a god, and with
his despotic licentiousness destroyed immediate possibilities of
progress. In Sandwich Island notes by "a Haole" (that is to say,
a white person) we see what may be said on the other side of the
picture: "It becomes an interesting duty to examine their social,
political and religious condition. The first feature that calls the
attention to the past is their social condition, and a darker picture
can hardly be presented to the contemplation of man. They had their
frequent boxing matches on a public arena, and it was nothing uncommon
to see thirty or forty left dead on the field of contest.

"As gamblers they were inveterate. The game was indulged in by
every person, from the king of each island to the meanest of his
subjects. The wager accompanied every scene of public amusement. They
gambled away their property to the last vestige of all they
possessed. They staked every article, of food, their growing crops,
the dollies they wore, their lands, wives, daughters, and even the
very bones of their arms and legs--to be made into fishhooks after they
were dead. These steps led to the most absolute and crushing poverty.

"They had their dances, which were of such a character as not to be
conceived by a civilized mind, and were accompanied by scenes which
would have disgraced even Nero's revels. Nearly every night, with
the gathering darkness, crowds would retire to some favorite spot,
where, amid every species of sensual indulgence they would revel
until the morning twilight. At such times the chiefs would lay aside
their authority, and mingle with the lowest courtesan in every degree
of debauchery.

"Thefts, robberies, murders, infanticide, licentiousness of the most
debased and debasing character, burying their infirm and aged parents
alive, desertion of the sick, revolting cruelties to the unfortunate
maniac, cannibalism and drunkenness, form a list of some of the traits
in social life among the Hawaiians in past days.

"Their drunkenness was intense. They could prepare a drink, deadly
intoxicating in its nature, from a mountain plant called the awa
(Piper methysticum). A bowl of this disgusting liquid was always
prepared and served out just as a party of chiefs were sitting down to
their meals. It would sometimes send the victim into a slumber from
which he never awoke. The confirmed awa drinker could be immediately
recognized by his leprous appearance.

"By far the darkest feature in their social condition was seen
in the family relation. Society, however, is only a word of mere
accommodation, designed to express domestic relations as they then
existed. 'Society' was, indeed, such a sea of pollution as cannot be
well described. Marriage was unknown, and all the sacred feelings which
are suggested to our minds on mention of the various social relations,
such as husband and wife, parent and child, brother and sister,
were to them, indeed, as though they had no existence. There was,
indeed, in this respect, a dreary blank--a dark chasm from which the
soul instinctively recoils. There were, perhaps, some customs which
imposed some little restraint upon the intercourse of the sexes,
but those customs were easily dispensed with, and had nothing of the
force of established rules. It was common for a husband to have many
wives, and for a wife also to have many husbands. The nearest ties
of consanguinity were but little regarded, and among the chiefs,
especially, the connection of brother with sister, and parent with
child, were very common. For husbands to interchange wives, and
for wives to interchange husbands, was a common act of friendship,
and persons who would not do this were not considered on good terms
of sociability. For a man or woman to refuse a solicitation was
considered an act of meanness; and this sentiment was thoroughly
wrought into their minds, that, they seemed not to rid themselves of
the feeling of meanness in a refusal, to feel, notwithstanding their
better knowledge, that to comply was generous, liberal, and social,
and to refuse reproachful and niggardly. It would be impossible to
enumerate or specify the crimes which emanated from this state of
affairs. Their political condition was the very genius of despotism,
systematically and deliberately conducted. Kings and chiefs were
extremely jealous of their succession, and the more noble their blood,
the more they were venerated by the common people."

Mr. Sheldon Dibble is a historian whose work was published in 1843. He
complains most bitterly that the natives bothered the missionaries
by trying to give them the benefit of native thought. They wanted
to do some of the talking, and said very childish things, and were
so intent on their own thoughts that they would not listen to the
preachers. But it ought not to have been held to be an offense for
a procession of heathen to march to a missionary's house and tell
him their thoughts. That was an honest manifestation of profound
interest--the slow ripening of a harvest field. Mr. Dibble's book
is printed by the Mission Seminary, and Mr. Dibble says, page 21:
"We know that all the inhabitants of the earth descended from Noah,"
therefore, the Hawaiians "must once have known the great Jehova
and the principles of true religion." But the historian says on the
next page that the Hawaiians were heathen from time immemorial, for,
"Go back to the very first reputed progenitor of the Hawaiian race,
and you find that the ingredients of their character are lust, anger,
strife, malice, sensuality, revenge and the worship of idols." This
is the elevation upon which Mr. Dibble places himself to fire upon
the memory of the English navigator Captain James Cook. The first
paragraph of the assault on Cook is this:

"How unbounded the influence of foreign visitors upon the ignorant
inhabitants of the Pacific! If the thousands of our countrymen
who visit this ocean were actuated by the pure principles of the
religion of Jesus, how immense the good they might accomplish! But,
alas! how few visitors to the Western hemisphere are actuated by
such principles."

This is preparatory to the condemnation of Cook in these terms:
"Captain Cook allowed himself to be worshipped as a god. The people
of Kealakeakua declined trading with him, and loaded his ship freely
with the best productions of the island. The priests approached him
in a crouching attitude, uttering prayers, and exhibiting all the
formalities of worship. After approaching him with prostration the
priests cast their red kapas over his shoulders and then receding a
little, they presented hogs and a variety of other offerings, with
long addresses rapidly enunciated, which were a repetition of their
prayers and religious homage.

"When he went on shore most of the people fled for fear of him, and
others bowed down before him, with solemn reverence. He was conducted
to the house of the gods, and into the sacred enclosure, and received
there the highest homage. In view of this fact, and of the death of
Captain Cook, which speedily ensued, who can fail being admonished
to give to God at all times, and even among barbarous tribes, the
glory which is his due? Captain Cook might have directed the rude and
ignorant natives to the great Jehovah, instead of receiving divine
homage himself.

"Kalaniopuu, the king, arrived from Maui on the 24th of January,
and immediately laid a tabu on the canoes, which prevented the women
from visiting the ship, and consequently the men came on shore in
great numbers, gratifying their infamous purposes in exchange for
pieces of iron and small looking-glasses. Some of the women washed
the coating from the back of the glasses much to their regret, when
they found that the reflecting property was thus destroyed.

"The king, on his arrival, as well as the people, treated Captain
Cook with much kindness, gave him feather cloaks and fly brushes and
paid him divine honors. This adoration, it is painful to relate,
was received without remonstrance. I shall speak here somewhat
minutely of the death of Captain Cook, as it develops some traits
of the heathen character, and the influence under which the heathen
suffer from foreign intercourse."

After setting forth the horrible character of the natives, Captain
Cook is condemned and denounced because he did not refuse the homage
of the ferocious savages, paid him as a superior creature. One of
Cook's troubles was the frantic passion the islanders had to steal
iron. The common people were the property of the chiefs, and they had
no other sense of possession. They gave away what they had, but took
what they wanted.

Mr. Dibble shows his animus when he charges that Cook did not give
the natives the real value of their hogs and fruit, and also that he
had no right to stop pilferers in canoes by declaring and enforcing a
blockade. This is a trifling technicality much insisted upon. Dibble's
account of the death of Cook is this:

"A canoe came from an adjoining district, bound within the bay. In the
canoe were two chiefs of some rank, Kekuhaupio and Kalimu. The canoe
was fired upon from one of the boats and Kalimu was killed. Kekuhaupio
made the greatest speed till he reached the place of the king, where
Captain Cook also was, and communicated the intelligence of the death
of the chief. The attendants of the king were enraged and showed
signs of hostility, but were restrained by the thought that Captain
Cook was a god. At that instant a warrior, with a spear in his hand,
approached Captain Cook and was heard to say that the boats in the
harbor had killed his brother, and he would he revenged. Captain Cook,
from his enraged appearance and that of the multitude, was suspicious
of him, and fired upon him with his pistol. Then followed a scene
of confusion, and in the midst Captain Cook being hit with a stone,
and perceiving the man who threw it, shot him dead. He also struck a
certain chief with his sword, whose name was Kalaimanokahoowaha. The
chief instantly seized Captain Cook with a strong hand, designing
merely to hold him and not to take his life; for he supposed him
to be a god and that he could not die. Captain Cook struggled to
free himself from the grasp, and as he was about to fall uttered a
groan. The people immediately exclaimed, "He groans--he is not a god,"
and instantly slew him. Such was the melancholy death of Captain Cook.

"Immediately the men in the boat commenced a deliberate fire upon the
crowd. They had refrained in a measure before, for fear of killing
their Captain. Many of the natives were killed."

"Historian Dibble does not notice the evidence that Cook lost his life
by turning to his men in the boats, ordering them not to fire. It
was at that moment he was stabbed in the back. Dibble represents
the facts as if to justify the massacre of the great navigator,
because he allowed the heathen to think he was one of their gang of
gods. But this presumption ought not to have been allowed to excuse
prevarication about testimony. The importance of Dibble's history is
that it is representative. He concludes with this eloquent passage:
"From one heathen nation we may learn in a measure the wants of
all. And we ought not to restrict our view, but, look at the wide
world. To do then for all nations what I have urged in behalf of the
Sandwich Islands, how great and extensive a work! How vast the number
of men and how immense the amount of means which seem necessary to
elevate all nations, and gain over the whole earth to the permanent
dominion of the Lord Jesus Christ! Can 300,000,000 of pagan children
and youth be trained and instructed by a few hands? Can the means
of instructing them be furnished by the mere farthings and pence of
the church? Will it not be some time yet before ministers and church
members will need to be idle a moment for the want of work? Is there
any danger of our being cut off from the blessed privilege either
of giving or of going? There is a great work yet to be done--a noble
work--a various and a difficult work--a work worthy of God's power,
God's resources, and God's wisdom. What Christendom has as yet done
is scarcely worthy of being called a commencement. When God shall
bring such energies into action as shall be commensurate with the
greatness of the work--when he shall cause every redeemed sinner,
by the abundant influence of His Holy Spirit, to lay himself out
wholly in the great enterprise, then there will be a sight of moral
sublimity that shall rivet the gaze of angels."

We quote this writer as to what became of the remains of Cook: "The
body of Captain Cook was carried into the interior of the island,
the bones secured according to their custom, and the flesh burned in
the fire. The heart, liver, etc., of Captain Cook, were stolen and
eaten by some hungry children, who mistook them in the night for the
inwards of a dog. The names of the children were Kupa, Mohoole and
Kaiwikokoole. These men are now all dead. The last of the number
died two years since at the station of Lahaina. Some of the bones
of Captain Cook were sent on board his ship, in compliance with the
urgent demands of the officers; and some were kept by the priests as
objects of worship." The "heart, liver, etc.," were of course given
to the children to eat! The bones are still hidden, and presumably not
much worshiped. The first of the remains of Captain Cook given up was a
mass of his bloody flesh, cut as if from a slaughtered ox. After some
time there were other fragments, including one of his hands which had
a well known scar, and perfectly identified it. Along with this came
the story of burning flesh, and denials of cannibalism. Mr. Dibble
speaks of Cook's "consummate folly and outrageous tyranny of placing
a blockade upon a heathen bay, which the natives could not possibly
be supposed either to understand or appreciate." That blockade,
like others, was understood when enforced. The historian labors to
work out a case to justify the murder of Cook because he received
worship. As to the acknowledgment of Cook as the incarnation of Lono,
in the Hawaiian Pantheon, Captain King says:

"Before I proceed to relate the adoration that was paid to Captain
Cook, and the peculiar ceremonies with which he was received on this
fatal island, it will be necessary to describe the Morai, situated,
as I have already mentioned, at the south side of the beach at
Kakooa (Kealakeakua). It was a square solid pile of stones, about
forty yards long, twenty broad, and fourteen in height. The top was
flat and well paved, and surrounded by a wooden rail, on which were
fixed the skulls of the captives sacrificed on the death of their
chiefs. In the center of the area stood a ruinous old building of
wood, connected with the rail on each side by a stone wall, which
next divided the whole space into two parts. On the side next the
country were five poles, upward of twenty feet high, supporting an
irregular kind of scaffold; on the opposite side toward the sea,
stood two small houses with a covered communication.

"We were conducted by Koah to the top of this pile by an easy ascent
leading from the beach to the northwest corner of the area. At the
entrance we saw two large wooden images, with features violently
distorted, and a long piece of carved wood of a conical form inverted,
rising from the top of their heads; the rest was without form and
wrapped round with red cloth. We were here met by a tall young man
with a long beard, who presented Captain Cook to the images, and
after chanting a kind of hymn, in which he was joined by Koah, they
led us to that end of the Morai where the five poles were fixed. At
the foot of them were twelve images ranged in a semicircular form,
and before the middle figure stood a high stand or table, exactly
resembling the Whatta of Othaheiti, on which lay a putrid hog, and
under it pieces of sugar cane, cocoanuts, bread fruit, plantains
and sweet potatoes. Koah having placed the Captain under the stand,
took down the hog and held it toward him; and after having a second
time addressed him in a long speech, pronounced with much vehemence
and rapidity, he let it fall on the ground and led him to the
scaffolding, which they began to climb together, not without great
risk of falling. At this time we saw coming in solemn procession,
at the entrance of the top of the Morai, ten men carrying a live
hog and a large piece of red cloth. Being advanced a few paces, they
stopped and prostrated themselves; and Kaireekeea, the young man above
mentioned, went to them, and receiving the cloth carried it to Koah,
who wrapped it around the Captain, and afterwards offered him the hog,
which was brought by Kaireekeea with the same ceremony.

"Whilst Captain Cook was aloft in this awkward situation, swathed
round with red cloth, and with difficulty keeping his hold amongst
the pieces of rotten scaffolding, Kaireekeea and Koah began their
office, chanting sometimes in concert and sometimes alternately. This
lasted a considerable time; at length Koah let the hog drop, when he
and the Captain descended together. He then led him to the images
before mentioned, and, having said something to each in a sneering
tone, snapping his fingers at them as he passed, he brought him to
that in the center, which, from its being covered with red cloth,
appeared to be in greater estimation than the rest. Before this
figure he prostrated himself and kissed it, desiring Captain Cook to
do the same, who suffered himself to be directed by Koah throughout
the whole of this ceremony.

"We were now led back to the other division of the Morai, where there
was a space ten or twelve feet square, sunk about three feet below
the level of the area. Into this we descended, and Captain Cook was
seated between two wooden idols, Koah supporting one of his arms,
whilst I was desired to support the other. At this time arrived a
second procession of natives, carrying a baked hog and a pudding,
some bread fruit, cocoanuts and other vegetables. When they approached
us Kaireekeea put himself at their head, and presenting the pig to
Captain Cook in the usual manner, began the same kind of chant as
before, his companions making regular responses. We observed that
after every response their parts became gradually shorter, till,
toward the close, Kaireekeea's consisted of only two or three words,
while the rest answered by the word Orono.

"When this offering was concluded, which lasted a quarter of an hour,
the natives sat down fronting us, and began to cut up the baked hog,
to peel the vegetables and break the cocoanuts; whilst others employed
themselves in brewing the awa, which is done by chewing it in the
same manner as at the Friendly Islands. Kaireekeea then took part of
the kernel of a cocoanut, which he chewed, and wrapping it in a piece
of cloth, rubbed with it the Captain's face, head, hands, arms and
shoulders. The awa was then handed around, and after we had tasted it
Koah and Pareea began to pull the flesh of the hog in pieces and put
it into our mouths. I had no great objection to being fed by Pareea,
who was very cleanly in his person, but Captain Cook, who was served
by Koah, recollecting the putrid hog, could not swallow a morsel;
and his reluctance, as may be supposed, was not diminished when the
old man, according to his own mode of civility had chewed it for him.

"When this ceremony was finished, which Captain Cook put an end to
as soon as he decently could, we quitted the Moral."

Evidently the whole purpose of Captain Cook in permitting this
performance, was to flatter and gratify the natives and make himself
strong to command them. The Captain himself was sickened, and got away
as quickly as he could without giving offense. This was not the only
case in which the native priests presented the navigator as a superior
being. Perhaps the view the old sailor took of the style of ceremony
was as there were so many gods, one more or less did not matter. Cook
never attached importance to the freaks of superstition, except so
far as it might be made useful in keeping the bloody and beastly
savages in check. Bearing upon this point we quote W.D. Alexander's
"Brief History of the Hawaiian People," pages 33-34:

"Infanticide was fearfully prevalent, and there were few of the older
women at the date of the abolition of idolatry who had not been guilty
of it. It was the opinion of those best informed that two-thirds of
all the children born were destroyed in infancy by their parents. They
were generally buried alive, in many cases in the very houses occupied
by their unnatural parents. On all the islands the number of males was
much greater than that of females, in consequence of the girls being
more frequently destroyed than the boys. The principal reason given
for it was laziness--unwillingness to take the trouble of rearing
children. It was a very common practice for parents to give away
their children to any persons who were willing to adopt them.

"No regular parental discipline was maintained, and the children
were too often left to follow their own inclinations and to become
familiar with the lowest vices.

"Neglect of the helpless. Among the common people old age was
despised. The sick and those who had become helpless from age were
sometimes abandoned to die or put to death. Insane people were also
sometimes stoned to death."

Again we quote Alexander's History, page 49:

"Several kinds of food were forbidden to the women on pain of death,
viz., pork, bananas, cocoanuts, turtles, and certain kinds of fish,
as the ulua, the humu, the shark, the hihimanu or sting-ray, etc. The
men of the poorer class often formed a sort of eating club apart
from their wives. These laws were rigorously enforced. At Honannau,
Hawaii, two young girls of the highest rank, Kapiolani and Keoua,
having been detected in the act of eating a banana, their kahu, or
tutor, was held responsible, and put to death by drowning. Shortly
before the abolition of the tabus, a little child had one of her eyes
scooped out for the same offense. About the same time a woman was
put to death for entering the eating house of her husband, although
though she was tipsy at the time."

Captain Cook seems to have committed the unpardonable sin in not
beginning the stated work of preaching the gospel a long generation
before the missionaries arrived, and the only sound reason for this
is found in Dibble's History, in his statement that the islanders
steadily degenerated until the missions were organized.

Writers of good repute, A. Fornander, chief of them, are severe with
Captain Cook on account of his alleged greed, not paying enough for
the red feathers woven into fanciful forms. Perhaps that is a common
fault in the transactions of civilized men with barbarians. William
Penn is the only man with a great reputation for dealing fairly with
American Red Men, and he was not impoverished by it. Cook gave nails
for hogs, and that is mentioned in phrases that are malicious. Iron
was to the islanders the precious metal, and they were not cheated. A
long drawn out effort has been made to impress the world that Cook
thought himself almost a god, and was a monster. The natives gave to
the wonderful people who came to them in ships, liberally of their
plenty, and received in return presents that pleased them, articles
of utility. Beads came along at a later day. The natives believed
Cook one of the heroes of the imagination that they called gods. He
sought to propitiate them and paid for fruit and meat in iron and showy
trifles. His policy of progress was to introduce domestic animals.

Note the temper of Mr. Abraham Fornander, a man who has meant honesty
of statement, but whose information was perverted:

"And how did Captain Cook requite this boundless hospitality, that
never once made default during his long stay of seventeen days in
Kealakeakua, these magnificent presents of immense value, this delicate
and spontaneous attention to every want, this friendship of the chiefs
and priests, this friendliness of the common people? By imposing on
their good nature to the utmost limit of its ability to respond to
the greedy and constant calls of their new friends; by shooting at one
of the king's officers for endeavoring to enforce a law of the land,
an edict of his sovereign that happened to be unpalatable to the new
comers, and caused them some temporary inconvenience, after a week's
profusion and unbridled license; by a liberal exhibition of his force
and the meanest display of his bounty; by giving the king a linen
shirt and a cutlass in return for feather cloaks and helmets, which,
irrespective of their value as insignia of the highest nobility in the
land, were worth, singly at least from five to ten thousand dollars, at
present price of the feathers, not counting the cost of manufacturing;
by a reckless disregard of the proprieties of ordinary intercourse,
even between civilized and savage man, and a wanton insult to what he
reasonably may have supposed to have been the religious sentiments of
his hosts." This is up to the mark of a criminal lawyer retained to
prove by native testimony that Captain James Cook was not murdered, but
executed for cause. The great crime of Cook is up to this point that of
playing that he was one of the Polynesian gods. Fornander says: "When
the sailors carried off, not only the railing of the temple, but also
the idols of the gods within it, even the large-hearted patience of
Kaoo gave up, and he meekly requested that the central idol at least,
might be restored. Captain King failed to perceive that the concession
of the priests was that of a devotee to his saint. The priests would
not sell their religious emblems and belongings for "thirty pieces
of silver," or any remuneration, but they were willing to offer up
the entire Heiau, and themselves on the top of it, as a holocaust to
Lono, if he had requested it. So long as Cook was regarded as a god
in their eyes they could not refuse him. And though they exhibited no
resentment at the request, the want of delicacy and consideration on
the part of Captain Cook is none the less glaring. After his death,
and when the illusion of godship had subsided, his spoliation of the
very Heiau in which he had been deified was not one of the least of
the grievances which native annalists laid up against him."

Contrast this flagrancy in advocacy of the cause of the barbarous
natives with the last words Cook wrote in his journal. We quote from
"A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean," by Captain James Cook, F.R.S.,
(Vol. II., pages 251-252):

"As it was of the last importance to procure a supply of provisions
at these islands; and experience having taught me that I could have
no chance to succeed in this, if a free trade with the natives were
to be allowed; that is, if it were left to every man's discretion to
trade for what he pleased, and in what manner he pleased; for this
substantial reason, I now published an order prohibiting all persons
from trading, except such as should be appointed by me and Captain
Clarke; and even these were enjoined to trade only for provisions and
refreshments. Women were also forbidden to be admitted into the ships,
except under certain restrictions. But the evil I intended to prevent,
by this regulation, I soon found had already got amongst them.

"I stood in again the next morning till within three or four miles
of the land, where we were met with a number of canoes laden with
provisions. We brought to, and continued trading with the people in
them till four in the afternoon, when, having got a pretty good supply,
we made sail and stretched off to the northward.

"I had never met with a behavior so free from reserve and suspicion
in my intercourse with any tribe of savages as we experienced in the
people of this island. It was very common for them to send up into
the ship the several articles they brought for barter; afterward, they
would come in themselves and make their bargains on the quarter-deck.

"We spent the night as usual, standing off and on. It happened that
four men and ten women who had come on board the preceding day still
remained with us. As I did not like the company of the latter, I
stood in shore toward noon, principally with a view to get them out
of the ship; and, some canoes coming off, I took that opportunity of
sending away our guests.

"In the evening Mr. Bligh returned and reported that he had found
a bay in which was good anchorage, and fresh water in a situation
tolerably easy to be come at. Into this bay I resolved to carry the
ships, there to refit and supply ourselves with every refreshment
that the place could afford. As night approached the greater part
of our visitors retired to the shore, but numbers of them requested
our permission to sleep on board. Curiosity was not the only motive,
at least with some, for the next morning several things were missing,
which determined me not to entertain so many another night.

"At eleven o'clock in the forenoon we anchored in the bay, which is
called by the natives Karakaooa, (Kealakeakua), in thirteen fathoms
water, over a sandy bottom, and about a quarter of a mile from the
northeast shore. In this situation the south point of the bay bore
south by west, and the north point west half north. We moored with
the stream-anchor and cable, to the northward, unbent the sails and
struck yards and topmasts. The ships continued to be much crowded
with natives, and were surrounded by a multitude of canoes. I had
nowhere, in the course of my voyages, seen so numerous a body of people
assembled in one place. For, besides those who had come off to us in
canoes, all the shore of the bay was covered with spectators, and many
hundreds were swimming around the ships like shoals of fish. We could
not but be struck with the singularity of this scene, and perhaps there
were few on board who lamented our having failed in our endeavors to
find a northern passage homeward last summer. To this disappointment
we owed our having it in our power to revisit the Sandwich Islands,
and to enrich our voyage with a discovery which, though the last,
seemed in many respects to be the most important that had hitherto
been made by Europeans, throughout the extent of the Pacific Ocean."

This is the end of Cook's writing. His murder followed immediately. He
fell by the hands of people for whom his good will was shown in
his last words. The concluding pages of the journal answer all the
scandals his enemies have so busily circulated.

There is a gleam of humor that shows like a thread of gold in the
midst of the somber tragedies of the Sandwich Islands, and we must not
omit to extract it from "The Voyage of Discovery Around the World" by
Captain George Vancouver, when he spent some time in Hawaii, and gives
two bright pictures--one of a theatrical performance, and the other
the happy settlement of the disordered domestic relations of a monarch.

_A Gifted Native Actress and Some Royal Dramatists._

"There was a performance by a single young woman of the name of
Puckoo, whose person and manners were both very agreeable. Her dress,
notwithstanding the heat of the weather, consisted of an immense
quantity of cloth, which was wreaths of black, red and yellow feathers;
but, excepting these, she wore no dress a manner as to give a pretty
effect to the variegated pattern of the cloth; and was otherways
disposed with great taste. Her head and neck were decorated with
wreaths of black, red and yellow feathers; but, excepting these,
she wore no dress from the waist upwards. Her ankles, and nearly half
way up her legs, were decorated with several folds of cloth, widening
upwards, so that the upper parts extended from the leg at least four
inches all round; this was encompassed by a piece of net work, wrought
very close, from the meshes of which were hung the small teeth of
dogs, giving this part of her dress the appearance of an ornamented
funnel. On her wrists she wore bracelets made of the tusks of the
largest hogs. These were highly polished and fixed close together in
a ring, the concave sides of the tusks being outwards; and their ends
reduced to a uniform length, curving naturally away from the center,
were by no means destitute of ornamental effect. Thus equipped, her
appearance on the stage, before she uttered a single word, excited
considerable applause.

"These amusements had hitherto been confined to such limited
performances; but this afternoon was to be dedicated to one of a more
splendid nature, in which some ladies of consequence, attendants on the
court of Tamaahmaah, were to perform the principal parts. Great pains
had been taken, and they had gone through many private rehearsals, in
order that the exhibition this evening might be worthy of the public
attention; on the conclusion of which, I purposed by a display of
fireworks, to make a return for the entertainment they had afforded us.

"About four o'clock we were informed it was time to attend the royal
dames; their theatre, or rather place of exhibition, was about a
mile to the southward of our tents, in a small square, surrounded
by houses, and sheltered by trees, a situation as well chosen for
the performance, as for the accommodations of the spectators; who,
on a moderate computation, could not be estimated at less than four
thousand, of all ranks and descriptions of persons.

"The dress of the actresses was something like that worn by Puckoo,
though made of superior materials, and disposed with more taste and
elegance. A very considerable quantity of their finest cloth was
prepared for the occasion; of this their lower garment was formed,
which extended from their waist half down their legs, and was so
plaited as to appear very much like a hoop petticoat. This seemed
the most difficult part of their dress to adjust, for Tamaahmaah,
who was considered to be a profound critic, was frequently appealed
to by the women, and his directions were implicitly followed in many
little alterations. Instead of the ornaments of cloth and net-work,
decorated with dogs' teeth, these ladies had each a green wreath made
of a kind of bind weed, twisted together in different parts like a
rope, which was wound round from the ankle, nearly to the lower part
of the petticoat. On their wrists they wore no bracelets nor other
ornaments, but across their necks and shoulders were green sashes,
very nicely made, with the broad leaves of the tee, a plant that
produces a very luscious sweet root, the size of a yam. This part of
their dress was put on the last by each of the actresses; and the party
being now fully attired, the king and queen, who had been present the
whole time of their dressing, were obliged to withdraw, greatly to
the mortification of the latter, who would gladly have taken her part
as a performer, in which she was reputed to excel very highly. But
the royal pair were compelled to retire, even from the exhibition, as
they are prohibited by law from attending such amusements, excepting
on the festival of the new year. Indeed, the performance of this
day was contrary to the established rules of the island, but being
intended as a compliment to us, the innovation was permitted.

"As their majesties withdrew, the ladies of rank and the principal
chiefs began to make their appearance. The reception of the former by
the multitude was marked by a degree of respect that I had not before
seen amongst any inhabitants of the countries in the Pacific Ocean. The
audience assembled at this time were standing in rows, from fifteen
to twenty feet deep, so close as to touch each other; but these ladies
no sooner approached in their rear, in any accidental direction, than
a passage was instantly made for them and their attendants to pass
through in the most commodious manner to their respective stations,
where they seated themselves on the ground, which was covered with
mats, in the most advantageous situation for seeing and hearing the
performers. Most of these ladies were of a corpulent form, which,
assisted by their stately gait, the dignity with which they moved,
and the number of their pages, who followed with fans to court the
refreshing breeze, or with fly-flaps to disperse the offending insects,
announced their consequence as the wives, daughters, sisters, or other
near relations of the principal chiefs, who, however, experienced no
such marks of respect or attention themselves; being obliged to make
their way through the spectators in the best manner they were able.

"The time devoted to the decoration of the actresses extended
beyond the limits of the quiet patience of the audience, who
exclaimed two or three times, from all quarters, "Hoorah, hoorah,
poaliealee," signifying that it would be dark and black night before
the performance would begin. But the audience here, like similar ones
in other countries, attending with a pre-disposition to be pleased,
was in good humor, and was easily appeased, by the address of our
faithful and devoted friend Trywhookee, who was the conductor of the
ceremonies, and sole manager on this occasion. He came forward and
apologized by a speech that produced a general laugh, and, causing
the music to begin, we heard no further murmurs.

"The band consisted of five men, all standing up, each with a highly
polished wooden spear in the left, and a small piece of the same
material, equally well finished, in the right hand; with this they
beat on the spear, as an accompaniment to their own voices in songs,
that varied both as to time and measure, especially the latter;
yet their voices, and the sounds produced from the rude instruments,
which differed according to the place on which the tapering spear was
struck, appeared to accord very well. Having engaged us a short time
in this vocal performance, the court ladies made their appearance,
and were received with shouts of the greatest applause. The musicians
retired a few paces, and the actresses took their station before them.

"The heroine of the piece, which consisted of four or five acts, had
once shared the affections and embraces of Tamaahmaah, but was now
married to an inferior chief, whose occupation in the household was
that of the charge of the king's apparel. This lady was distinguished
by a green wreath round the crown of the head; next to her was the
captive daughter of Titeeree; the third a younger sister to the queen,
the wife of Crymamahoo, who, being of the most exalted rank, stood in
the middle. On each side of these were two of inferior quality, making
in all seven actresses. They drew themselves up in a line fronting
that side of the square that was occupied by ladies of quality and
the chiefs. These were completely detached from the populace, not
by any partition, but, as it were, by the respectful consent of the
lower orders of the assembly; not one of which trespassed or produced
the least inaccommodation.

"This representation, like that before attempted to be described, was
a compound of speaking and singing; the subject of which was enforced
by gestures and actions. The piece was in honor of a captive princess,
whose name was Crycowculleneaow; and on her name being pronounced,
every one present, men as well as women, who wore any ornaments above
their waists, were obliged to take them off, though the captive lady
was at least sixty miles distant. This mark of respect was unobserved
by the actresses whilst engaged in the performance; but the instant
any one sat down, or at the close of the act, they were also obliged
to comply with this mysterious ceremony.

"The variety of attitudes into which these women threw themselves,
with the rapidity of their action, resembled no amusement in any
other part of the world within my knowledge, by a comparison with
which I might be enabled to convey some idea of the stage effect
thus produced, particularly in the three first parts, in which there
appeared much correspondence and harmony between the tone of their
voices and the display of their limbs. One or two of the performers
being not quite so perfect as the rest, afforded us an opportunity
of exercising our judgment by comparison; and it must be confessed,
that the ladies who most excelled, exhibited a degree of graceful
action, for the attainment of which it is difficult to account.

"In each of these first parts the songs, attitudes and actions appeared
to me of greater variety than I had before noticed amongst the people
of the great South Sea nation on any former occasion. The whole, though
I am unequal to its description, was supported with a wonderful degree
of spirit and vivacity; so much indeed that some of their exertions
were made with such a degree of agitating violence as seemed to carry
the performers beyond what their strength was able to sustain; and had
the performance finished with the third act, we should have retired
from their theatre with a much higher idea of the moral tendency of
their drama, than was conveyed by the offensive, libidinous scene,
exhibited by the ladies in the concluding part. The language of the
song, no doubt, corresponded with the obscenity of their actions;
which were carried to a degree of extravagance that were calculated
to produce nothing but disgust, even to the most licentious."

From "A Voyage of Discovery," by Captain George Vancouver:

_The Reconciliation by Strategy of a King With One of His Queens._

"Tahowmotoo was amongst the most constant of our guests; but his
daughter, the disgraced queen, seldom visited our side of the bay. I
was not, however, ignorant of her anxious desire for a reconciliation
with Tamaahmaah; nor was the same wish to be misunderstood in the
conduct and behavior of the king, in whose good opinion and confidence
I had now acquired such a predominancy that I became acquainted with
his most secret inclinations and apprehensions.

"His unshaken attachment and unaltered affection for Tahowmannoo was
confessed with a sort of internal self conviction of her innocence. He
acknowledged with great candor that his own conduct had not been
exactly such as warranted his having insisted upon a separation from
his queen; that although it could not authorize, it in some measure
pleaded in excuse for her infidelity; and for his own, he alleged,
that his high rank and supreme authority was a sort of license for
such indulgences.

"An accommodation which I considered to be mutually wished by both
parties was urged in the strongest terms by the queen's relations. To
effect this desirable purpose, my interference was frequently solicited
by them; and as it concurred with my own inclination, I resolved on
embracing the first favorable opportunity to use my best endeavors for
bringing a reconciliation about. For although, on our former visit,
Tahowmannoo had been regarded with the most favorable impressions,
yet, whether from her distresses, or because she had really improved
in her personal accomplishments, I will not take upon me to determine,
but certain it is that one or both of these circumstances united had so
far prepossessed us all in her favor, and no one more so than myself,
that it had long been the general wish to see her exalted again to her
former dignities. This desire was probably not a little heightened by
the regard we entertained for the happiness and repose of our noble and
generous friend Tamaahmaah, who was likely to be materially affected
not only in his domestic comforts, but in his political situation,
by receiving again and reinstating his consort in her former rank
and consequence.

"I was convinced beyond all doubt that there were two or three of
the most considerable chiefs of the island whose ambitious views were
inimical to the interests and authority of Tamaahmaah; and it was much
to be apprehended that if the earnest solicitations of the queen's
father (whose condition and importance was next in consequence to that
of the king) should continue to be rejected, that there could be little
doubt of his adding great strength and influence to the discontented
and turbulent chiefs, which would operate highly to the prejudice,
if not totally to the destruction, of Tamaahmaah's regal power;
especially as the adverse party seemed to form a constant opposition,
consisting of a minority by no means to be despised by the executive
power, and which appeared to be a principal constituent part of the
Owhyean politics.

"For these substantial reasons, whenever he was disposed to listen to
such discourse, I did not cease to urge the importance and necessity
of his adopting measures so highly essential to his happiness as a
man, and to his power, interest and authority as the supreme chief of
the island. All this he candidly acknowledged, but his pride threw
impediments in the way of a reconciliation, which were hard to be
removed. He would not himself become the immediate agent; and although
he considered it important that the negotiation should be conducted
by some one of the principal chiefs in his fullest confidence with
disdain, was equally hard to reconcile to his feelings. I stood
nearly in the same situation with his favorite friends; but being
thoroughly convinced of the sincerity of his wishes, I spared him
the mortification of soliciting the offices he had rejected, by again
proffering my services. To this he instantly consented, and observed
that no proposal could have met his mind so completely; since, by
effecting a reconciliation through my friendship, no umbrage could
be taken at his having declined the several offers of his countrymen
by any of the individuals; whereas, had this object been accomplished
by any one of the chiefs, it would probably have occasioned jealousy
and discontent in the minds of the others.

"All, however, was not yet complete; the apprehension that some
concession might be suggested, or expected, on his part, preponderated
against every other consideration; and he would on no account consent,
that it should appear that he had been privy to the business, or that
it had been by his desire that a negotiation had been undertaken for
this happy purpose, but that the whole should have the appearance of
being purely the result of accident.

"To this end it was determined that I should invite the queen, with
several of her relations and friends, on board the Discovery, for the
purpose of presenting them with some trivial matters, as tokens of my
friendship and regard; and that, whilst thus employed, our conversation
should be directed to ascertain whether an accommodation was still an
object to be desired. That on this appearing to be the general wish,
Tamaahmaah would instantly repair on board in a hasty manner, as if
he had something extraordinary to communicate; that I should appear
to rejoice at this accidental meeting, and by instantly uniting their
hands, bring the reconciliation to pass without the least discussion
or explanation on either side. But from his extreme solicitude lest
he should in any degree be suspected of being concerned in this
previous arrangement, a difficulty arose how to make him acquainted
with the result of the proposed conversation on board, which could not
be permitted by a verbal message; at length, after some thought, he
took up two pieces of paper, and of his own accord made certain marks
with a pencil on each of them, and then delivered them to me. The
difference of these marks he could well recollect; the one was to
indicate that the result of my inquiries was agreeable to his wishes,
and the other that it was contrary. In the event of my making use of
the former, he proposed that it should not be sent on shore secretly,
but in an open and declared manner, and by way of a joke, as a present
to his Owhyhean majesty. The natural gaiety of disposition which
generally prevails among these islanders, would render this supposed
disappointment of the king a subject for mirth, would in some degree
prepare the company for his visit, and completely do away with every
idea of its being the effect of a preconcerted measure.

"This plan was accordingly carried into execution on the following
Monday. Whilst the queen and her party, totally ignorant of the
contrivance, were receiving the compliments I had intended them,
their good humor and pleasantry were infinitely heightened by the jest
I proposed to pass upon the king, in sending him a piece of paper
only, carefully wrapped up in some cloth of their own manufacture,
accompanied by a message; importing, that as I was then in the act of
distributing favors to my Owhyhean friends, I had not been unmindful
of his majesty.

"Tamaahmaah no sooner received the summons, than he hastened on board,
and, with his usual vivacity, exclaimed before he made his appearance
that he was come to thank me for the present I had sent him, and for
my goodness in not having forgotten him on this occasion. This was
heard by everyone in the cabin before he entered; and all seemed to
enjoy the joke except the poor queen, who appeared to be much agitated
at the idea of being again in his presence. The instant that he saw
her his countenance expressed great surprise, he became immediately
silent, and attempted to retire; but, having posted myself for the
especial purpose of preventing his departure, I caught his hand and,
joining it with the queen's, their reconciliation was instantly
completed. This was fully demonstrated, not only by the tears that
involuntarily stole down the cheeks of both as they embraced each
other and mutually expressed the satisfaction they experienced; but
by the behavior of every individual present, whose feelings on the
occasion were not to be repressed; whilst their sensibility testified
the happiness which this apparently fortuitous event had produced.

"A short pause, produced by an event so unexpected, was succeeded by
the sort of good humor that such a happy circumstance would naturally
inspire; the conversation soon became general, cheerful and lively,
in which the artifice imagined to have been imposed upon the king
bore no small share. A little refreshment from a few glasses of wine
concluded the scene of this successful meeting.

"After the queen had acknowledged in the most grateful terms the
weighty obligations which she felt for my services on this occasion,
I was surprised by her saying, as we were all preparing to go on shore,
that she had still a very great favor to request; which was, that I
should obtain from Tamaahmaah a solemn promise that on her return to
his habitation he would not beat her. The great cordiality with which
the reconciliation had taken place, and the happiness that each of
them had continued to express in consequence of it, led me at first
to consider this entreaty of the queen as a jest only; but in this I
was mistaken, for, notwithstanding that Tamaahmaah readily complied
with my solicitation, and assured me nothing of the kind should take
place, yet Tahowmannoo would not be satisfied without my accompanying
them home to the royal residence, where I had the pleasure of seeing
her restored to all her former honors and privileges, highly to the
satisfaction of all the king's friends, but to the utter mortification
of those who by their scandalous reports and misrepresentations had
been the cause of the unfortunate separtion.

"The domestic affairs of Tamaahmaah having thus taken so happy a turn,
his mind was more at liberty for political considerations; and the
cession of Owhyhee to his Britannic Majesty now became an object of
his serious concern."





Captain Cook makes a strong plea in his journal that he was the
very original discoverer of the Sandwich Islands. Referring to the
wonderful extent of the surface of the earth in which the land is
occupied by the Polynesial race, he exclaims:

"How shall we account for this nation's having spread itself,
in so many detached islands, so widely disjoined from each other,
in every quarter of the Pacific Ocean! We find it, from New Zealand
in the South, as far as the Sandwich Islands, to the North! And, in
another direction, from Easter Islands to the Hebrides! That is, over
an extent of sixty degrees of latitude, or twelve hundred leagues,
North and South! And eighty-three degrees of longitude, or sixteen
hundred and sixty leagues, East and West! How much farther, in either
direction, its colonies reach, is not known; but what we know already,
in consequence of this and our former voyage, warrants our pronouncing
it to be, though perhaps not the most numerous, certainly, by far,
the most extensive, nation upon earth.

"Had the Sandwich Islands been discovered at an early period by
the Spaniards, there is little doubt that they would have taken
advantage of so excellent a situation, and have made use of Atooi,
or some other of the islands, as a refreshing place to the ships,
that sail annually from Acapulco for Manilla. They lie almost midway
between the first place and Guam, one of the Ladrones, which is at
present their only port in traversing this vast ocean; and it would not
have been a week's sail out of their common route to have touched at
them; which could have been done without running the least hazard of
losing the passage, as they are sufficiently within the verge of the
easterly trade wind. An acquaintance with the Sandwich Islands would
have been equally favorable to our Buccaneers, who used sometimes to
pass from the coast of America to the Ladrones, with a stock of food
and water scarcely sufficient to preserve life. Here they might always
have found plenty, and have been within a month's sure sail of the
very part of California which the Manilla ship is obliged to make,
or else have returned to the coast of America, thoroughly refitted,
after an absence of two months. How happy would Lord Anson have been,
and what hardships he would have avoided, if he had known that there
was a group of islands half way between America and Tinian, where
all his wants could have been effectually supplied; and in describing
which the elegant historian of that voyage would have presented his
reader with a more agreeable picture than I have been able to draw
in this chapter."

And yet there seems to be reason for believing that there was a
Spanish ship cast away on one of the Hawaiian group, and that their
descendants are distinctly marked men yet: There was also a white man
and woman saved from the sea at some unknown period, of course since
Noah, and they multiplied and replenished, and the islanders picked
up somewhere a knack for doing things in construction of boats and
the weaving of mats that hint at a crude civilization surviving in
a mass of barbarianism.

Captain George Dixon names the islands discovered by Captain Cook on
his last voyage:

"Owhyhee (Hawaii), the principal, is the first to the southward and
eastward, the rest run in a direction nearly northwest. The names of
the principals are Mowee (Maui), Morotoy (Molokai), Ranai (Lanai),
Whahoo (Oahu), Attooi (Kauai), and Oneehow (Niihau)."

This account Dixon gives of two curious and rather valuable words:
"The moment a chief concludes a bargain, he repeats the word Coocoo
thrice, with quickness, and is immediately answered by all the people
in his canoe with the word Whoah, pronounced in a tone of exclamation,
but with greater or less energy, in proportion as the bargain he has
made is approved."

The great and celebrated Kamehameha, who consolidated the government
of the islands, did it by an act of treachery and murder, thus told
in Alexander's history:

"The Assassination of Keoua.--Toward the end of the year 1791 two of
Kamehameha's chief counsellors, Kamanawa and Keaweaheulu, were sent
on an embassy to Keoua at Kahuku in Kau. Keoua's chief warrior urged
him to put them to death, which he indignantly refused to do.

"By smooth speeches and fair promises they persuaded him to go to
Kawaihae, and have an interview with Kamehameha, in order to put an end
to the war, which had lasted nine years. Accordingly he set out with
his most intimate friends and twenty-four rowers in his own double
canoe, accompanied by Keaweaheulu in another canoe, and followed by
friends and retainers in other canoes.

"As they approached the landing at Kawaihae, Keeaumoku surrounded
Keoua's canoe with a number of armed men. As Kamakau relates: 'Seeing
Kamehameha on the beach, Keoua called out to him, "Here I am," to which
he replied, "Rise up and come here, that we may know each other."'

"As Keoua was in the act of leaping ashore, Keeaumoku killed him
with a spear. All the men in Keoua's canoe and in the canoes of
his immediate company were slaughtered but one. But when the second
division approached, Kamehameha gave orders to stop the massacre. The
bodies of the slain were then laid upon the altar of Puukohola as an
offering to the blood-thirsty divinity Kukailimoku. That of Keoua had
been previously baked in an oven at the foot of the hill as a last
indignity. This treacherous murder made Kamehameha master of the whole
island of Hawaii, and was the first step toward the consolidation of
the group under one government."

This is one of those gentle proceedings of an amiable race, whose
massacre of Captain Cook has been so elaborately vindicated by alleged
exponents of civilization.

There is found the keynote of the grevious native government in
an incident of the date of 1841 by which "the foreign relations
of the government became involved with the schemes of a private
firm. The firm of Ladd & Co. had taken the lead in developing the
agricultural resources of the islands by their sugar plantation
at Koloa and in other ways, and had gained the entire confidence
of the king and chiefs. On the 24th of November, 1841, a contract
was secretly drawn up at Lahaina by Mr. Brinsmade, a member of the
firm, and Mr. Richards, and duly signed by the king and premier,
which had serious after-consequences. It granted to Ladd & Co. the
privilege of "leasing any now unoccupied and unimproved localities"
in the islands for one hundred years, at a low rental, each millsite
to include fifteen acres, and the adjoining land for cultivation in
each locality not to exceed two hundred acres, with privileges of
wood, pasture, etc. These sites were to be selected within one year,
which term was afterwards extended to four years from date."

Of course there are many safeguards, particularly in this case,
but the points of the possession of land conceded, the time for the
people to recover their rights never comes.

One of the difficulties in the clearing up of the foggy chapters of
the history of the Hawaiian islands is that within the lifetime of men
who were young at the close of the last century, the Hawaiian tongue
became a written language, and made the traditions of savages highly
colored stories, in various degrees according to ignorance, prejudice
and sympathy, accepted as historical. The marvels accomplished by
the missionaries influenced them to deal gently with those whose
conversion was a recognized triumph of Christendom, and there was
an effort to condemn Captain Cook, who had affected to nod as a God,
as a warning to blasphemers. Still, the truth of history is precious
as the foundations of faith to men of all races and traditions, and
the Englishman who surpassed the French, Spaniards and Portuguese
in discoveries of islands in the vast spaces of the Pacific Ocean,
should have justice at the hands of Americans who have organized
states and built cities by that sea, and possess the islands that
have been named its paradise because endowed surpassingly with the
ample treasures of volcanic soil and tropical climate. There the trade
winds bestow the freshness of the calm and mighty waters, and there
is added to the bounty of boundless wealth the charms of luxuriant
beauty. All Americans should find it timely to be just to Captain Cook,
and claim him as one of the pioneers of our conquering civilization.



CHAPTER XXII

The Start for the Land of Corn Stalks.

Spain Clings to the Ghost of Her Colonies--The Scene of War Interest
Shifts from Manila--The Typhoon Season--General Merritt on the Way
to Paris--German Target Practice by Permission of Dewey--Poultney
Bigelow with Canoe, Typewriter and Kodak--Hongkong as a Bigger and
Brighter Gibraltar.

When Spain gave up the ghosts of her American colonies, and the war
situation was unfolded to signify that the fate of the Philippines was
referred to a conference, and Aguinaldo announced the removal of his
seat of government to Molones, one hour and a half from Manila, the
scene of greatest interest was certainly not in the city and immediate
surroundings. Then it was plain the American army must remain for
some time, and would have only guard duty to perform. The Spaniards
had succumbed and were submissive, having laid down their arms and
surrendered all places and phases of authority. The insurgents'
removal of their headquarters declared that they had abandoned all
claim to sharing in the occupation of the conquered city, and their
opposition to the United States, if continued in theory, was not to be
that in a practical way. Between the American, Spanish and Philippine
forces there was no probability of disputed facts or forms that could
be productive of contention of a serious nature. There was but one
question left in this quarter of the world that concerned the people
of the United States, and that whether they would hold their grip,
snatched by Dewey with his fleet, and confirmed by his government in
sending an army, making our country possessors of the physical force
to sustain our policy, whatever it might be, on the land as well as
on the sea. Whether we should stay or go was not even to be argued in
Manila, except in general and fruitless conversation. Then came the
intelligence that General Merritt had been called to Paris and General
Greene to Washington, and there was a deepened impression that the
war was over. It was true that the army was in an attitude and having
experiences that were such as travelers appreciate as enjoyable,
and that no other body of soldiers had surroundings so curious and
fascinating. The most agreeable time of the year was coming on, and the
sanitary conditions of the city, under the American administration,
would surely improve constantly, and so would! the fare of the men,
for the machinery in all departments was working smoothly. The boys
were feeling pretty well, because they found their half dollars
dollars--the Mexican fifty-cent piece, bigger and with more silver
in it than the American standard dollar, was a bird. A dollar goes
further if it is gold in Manila than in an American city, and if our
soldiers are not paid in actual gold they get its equivalent, and the
only money question unsettled is whether the Mexican silver dollar
is worth in American money fifty cents or less. One of the sources of
anxieties and disappointment and depression of the American soldiers
in Manila has been the irregularity and infrequency with which they get
letters. If one got a letter or newspaper from home of a date not more
than six weeks old he had reason to be congratulated. The transports
trusted with the mails were slow, and communications through the old
lines between Hongkong and San Francisco, Yokohama and Vancouver,
were not reliably organized. There were painful cases of masses of
mail on matter precious beyond all valuation waiting at Hongkong for
a boat, and an issue whether the shorter road home was not by way of
Europe. This is all in course of rapid reformation. There will be no
more mystery as to routes or failures to connect. The soldiers, some of
whom are ten thousand miles from home, should have shiploads of letters
and papers. They need reading matter almost as much as they do tobacco,
and the charming enthusiasm of the ladies who entertained the soldier
boys when they were going away with feasting and flattery, praise and
glorification, should take up the good work of sending them letters,
papers, magazines and books. There is no reason why soldiers should be
more subject to homesickness than sailors, except that they are not so
well or ill accustomed to absence. The fact that the soldiers are fond
of their homes and long for them can have ways of expression other
than going home. A few days after the news of peace reached Manila,
the transports were inspected for closing up the contracts with them
under which they were detained, and soon they began to move. When
the China was ordered to San Francisco, I improved the opportunity to
return to the great republic. There was no chance to explore the many
islands of the group of which Manila is the Spanish Capital. General
Merritt changed the course of this fine ship and added to the variety
of the voyage by taking her to Hongkong to sail thence by way of the
China Sea, the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Gulf, the Red Sea, the Suez
Canal and the Mediterranean, to Paris. Our route to San Francisco,
by way of Hongkong, Nagasaki, Sunanaski, Kobe and the Yokohama light,
was 6,905 knots, about seven thousand seven hundred statute miles,
and gave us glimpses of the Asia shore, the west coast of Formosa
and the great ports of Hongkong and Nagasaki. The first thing on
the Sea of China, in the month of September, is whether we shall
find ourselves in the wild embrace of a typhoon. It was the season
for those terrible tempests and when we left Manila the information
that one was about due was not spared us. We heard later on that the
transport ahead of us four days, the Zealandia, was twenty-eight hours
in a cyclone and much damaged--wrung and hammered and shocked until
she had to put into Nagasaki for extensive repairs. The rainfall was
so heavy during the storm that one could not see a hundred yards from
the ship, and she was wrung in so furious a style in a giddy waltz,
that the Captain was for a time in grave doubt whether she would not
founder. The rule is when one is in the grasp of the oriental whirl
to run through it, judging from the way of the wind, the shortest
way out. There is a comparatively quiet spot in the center, and if
the beset navigator can find the correct line of flight, no matter
which way as relates to the line of his journey, he does well to take
it. Often in this sea, as in this case, there were uncertainties as to
directions. The rain narrowed observation like a dense fog, and there
was danger of running upon some of the islands and snags of rocks. The
battered vessel pulled through a cripple, with her boats shattered,
her deck cracked across by a roller, and her crew were happy to find
a quiet place to be put in order. "To be or not to be" an American
instead of a Spanish or Asiatic city was the parting thought as the
China left Manila Bay, and the dark rocks of Corrigedor faded behind
us, and the rugged rocks that confront the stormy sea loomed on our
right, and the violet peaks of volcanic mountains bounded our eastern
horizon. The last view we had of the historic bay, a big German warship
was close to the sentinel rock, that the Spaniards thought they had
fortified, until Dewey came and saw and conquered, swifter than Caesar,
and the Germans, venturing some target practice, by permission of
Dewey, who relaxes no vigilance of authority. Hongkong is 628 miles
from Manila, and the waters so often stirred in monstrous wrath,
welcomed us with a spread of dazzling silk. The clumsy junks that
appeared to have come down from the days of Confucius, were languid
on the gentle ripples. The outstanding Asian islands, small and grim,
are singularly desolate, barren as if splintered by fire, gaunt and
forbidding. Hongkong is an island that prospers under the paws of
the British lion, and it is a city displayed on a mountain side,
that by day is not much more imposing than the town of Gibraltar,
which it resembles, but at night the lights glitter in a sweeping
circle, the steep ascent of the streets revealed by many lamps, and
here and there the illumination climbs to the tops of the mountains
that are revealed with magical efforts of color and form. The harbor
is entered by an ample, but crooked channel, and is land-locked,
fenced with gigantic bumps that sketch the horizon, and with their
heads and shoulders are familiar with the sky. Here General Merritt,
with his personal staff, left us, and between those bound from this
port east and west, we circumnavigated the earth.

Mr. Poultney Bigelow, of Harper's Weekly, who dropped in by the way
just to make a few calls at Manila, and has a commission to explore
the rivers and lagoons of China with his canoe, left us, in that
surprising craft, plying his paddle in the fashion of the Esquimaux,
pulling right and left, hand over hand, balancing to a nicety on the
waves and going ashore dry and unruffled, with his fieldglass and
portfolio, his haversack and typewriter machine that he folds in a
small box as if it was a pocket comb, and his kodak, with which he
is an expert. He has not only ransacked with his canoe the rivers of
America, but has descended the Danube and the Volga. He puts out in
his canoe and crosses arms of the sea, as a pastime, makes a tent of
his boat if it rains, fighting the desperadoes of all climes with the
superstition, for which he is indebted to their imagination for his
safety in running phenomenal hazards, that he is a magician. Marco Polo
was not so great a traveler or so rare an adventurer as Bigelow, and,
having left Florida under a thunder cloud of the scowl of an angry
army for untimely criticisms, he has invaded the celestial empire
in his quaint canoe, and he can beat the Chinese boatmen on their
own rivers, and sleep like a sea bird on the swells of green water,
floating like a feather, and safe in his slumbers as a solon goose
with his head under his wing. However, he has not a winged boat, a
bird afloat sailing round the purple peaks remote, as Buchanan Reed
put it in his "Drifting" picture of the Vesuvian bay, for Bigelow
uses a paddle. There has been a good deal of curiosity as well as
indignation about his papers on the handling of our Cuban expedition
before it sailed, and it is possible he was guilty of the common fault
of firing into the wrong people. He was in Washington in June, and
he and I meeting on the Bridge of Spain over the Pesang in Manila in
August, we had, between us, put a girdle about the earth. Some say such
experiences are good to show how small the earth is, but I am more than
ever persuaded that it is big enough to find mankind in occupation and
subsistence until time shall be no more. In the dock at Hongkong was
Admiral Dewey's flagship Olympia, and while she had the grass scratched
from her bottom, the gallant crew were having a holiday with the zest
that rewards those who for four months were steadily on shipboard
with arduous cares and labors. H.B.M.S. Powerful, of 12,000 tons
displacement, with four huge flues and two immense military masts,
presided at Hongkong under orders to visit Manila. The mingling
of the English and Chinese in Hongkong is a lively object lesson,
showing the extent of the British capacity to utilize Asiatic labor,
and get the profit of European capital and discipline, an accumulation
that requires an established sense of safety--a justified confidence
in permanency.

The contrast between the city of Hongkong and that of Manila is one
that Americans should study now, to be instructed in the respective
colonial systems of England and Spain. Hongkong is clean and solid,
with business blocks of the best style of construction, the pavements
excellent in material and keeping, shops full of goods, all the
appliances of modern times--a city up to date. There are English
enough to manage and Chinese enough to toil. There are two British
regiments, one of them from India, the rank and file recruited from
the fighting tribes of northern mountaineers. There are dark, tall
men, with turbans, embodiment of mystery, and Parsees who have a
strange spirituality of their own, and in material matters maintain
a lofty code of honor, while their pastime is that of striving while
they march to push their heads into the clouds. There are no horses in
Hongkong, the coolies carrying chairs on bamboo poles, or trotting with
two-wheelers, an untiring substitute for quadrupeds, and locomotion
on the streets or in the boats is swift and sure. I had an address to
find in the city, on a tip at Manila of the presence, of a literary
treasure, and my chairmen carried me, in a few minutes, to a tall
house on a tall terrace, and the works of a martyr to liberty in the
Philippines were located. The penalty for the possession of these books
in Manila was that of the author executed by shooting in the back in
the presence of a crowd of spectators. The cost of the carriers was
thirty cents in silver--fifteen cents in United States money--and the
men were as keen-eyed as they were sure-footed, and the strength of
their tawny limbs called for admiration. They were not burdened with
clothes, and the play of the muscles of their legs was like a mechanism
of steel, oiled, precise, easy and ample in force. The China took on a
few hundred tons of coal, which was delivered aboard from heavy boats
by the basketful, the men forming a line, and so expert were they at
each delivery, the baskets were passed, each containing about half a
bushel--perhaps there were sixty baskets to the ton--at the rate of
thirty-five baskets in a minute. Make due allowances and one gang
would deliver twenty tons of coal an hour. The China was anchored
three-quarters of a mile from the landing, and a boat ride was ten
cents, or fifteen if you were a tipster. The boats are, as a rule,
managed by a man and his wife; and, as it is their own, they keep the
children at home. The average families on the boats--and I made several
counts--were nine, the seven children varying from one to twelve years
of age. The vitality of the Chinese is not exhausted, or even impaired.



CHAPTER XXIII

Kodak Snapped at Japan.

Glimpses of China and Japan on the Way Home from the
Philippines--Hongkong a Greater Gibraltar--Coaling the China--Gangs
of Women Coaling the China--How the Japanese Make Gardens of the
Mountains--Transition from the Tropics to the Northern Seas--A
Breeze from Siberia--A Thousand Miles Nothing on the Pacific--Talk
of Swimming Ashore.

Formosa was so far away eastward--a crinkled line drawn faintly with a
fine blue pencil, showing as an artistic scrawl on the canvass of the
low clouds--we could hardly claim when the sketch of the distant land
faded from view, that we had seen Japan. When Hongkong, of sparkling
memory, was lost to sight, the guardian walls that secluded her
harbor, closing their gates as we turned away, and the headlands of
the celestial empire grew dim, a rosy sunset promised that the next
day should be pleasant, our thoughts turned with the prow of the
China to Japan. We were bound for Nagasaki, to get a full supply of
coal to drive us across the Pacific, having but twelve hundred tons
aboard, and half of that wanted for ballast. It was at the mouth of
the harbor of Nagasaki that there was a settlement of Dutch Christians
for some hundreds of years. An indiscreet letter captured on the way
to Holland by a Portuguese adventurer and maliciously sent to Japan,
caused the tragic destruction of the Christian colony. The enmity of
Christian nations anxious to add to their properties in the islands
in remote seas was so strong that any one preferred that rather than
his neighbors might aggrandize the heathen should prevail. The first
as well as the last rocks of Japan to rise from and sink into the
prodigous waters, through which we pursued our homeward way, bathing
our eyes in the delicious glowing floods of eastern air, were scraggy
with sharp pinnacles, and sheer precipices, grim survivals of the
chaos that it was, before there was light. I have had but glimpses
of the extreme east of Asia, yet the conceit will abide with me that
this is in geology as in history the older world, as we classify our
continents, that a thousand centuries look upon us from the terrible
towers, lonesome save for the flutter of white wings, that witness the
rising of the constellations from the greater ocean of the globe. But
there are green hills as we approach Nagasaki, and on a hillside to the
left are the white walls of a Christian church with a square tower,
stained with traditions of triumphs and suffering and martyrdom long
ago. Nagasaki is like Hongkong in its land-locked harbor, in clinging
to a mountain side, in the circle of illumination at night and the
unceasing paddling of boats from ship to ship and between the ships and
landings. One is not long in discovering that here are a people more
alert, ingenious, self-confident and progressive than the Chinese. As
we approached the harbor there came to head us off, an official steam
launch, with men in uniform, who hailed and commanded us to stop. Two
officers with an intense expression of authority came aboard, and we
had to give a full and particular account of ourselves. Why were we
there? Coaling. Where were we from? Manila and Hongkong. Where were we
going? San Francisco. Had we any sickness on board? No. We must produce
the ship doctor, the list of passengers, and manifest of cargo. We had
no cargo. There were a dozen passengers. It was difficult to find fault
with us. No one was ill. We wanted coal. What was the matter? We had
no trouble at Hongkong. We could buy all the coal we wanted there,
but preferred this station. We had proposed to have our warships
cleaned up at Nagasaki, but there were objections raised. So the job
went to the docks at Hongkong, and good gold with it. Why was this? Oh
yes; Japan wanted, in the war between the United States and Spain,
to be not merely formally, but actually neutral! The fact is that the
Japanese Empire is not pleased with us. They had, in imperial circles,
a passion for Honolulu, and intimated their grief. Now they are annoyed
because that little indemnity for refusing the right to land Japanse
labor was paid by the Hawaiian Government before the absorption into
the United States. As the Hawaiian diplomatic correspondence about this
was conducted with more asperity than tact, if peace were the purpose,
it was a good sore place for the Japanese statesmen to rub, and they
resent in the newspapers the facile and cheap pacification resulting
from the influence of the United States. In addition the Japanese
inhabitants, though they have a larger meal than they can speedily
digest in Formosa, are not touched with unqualified pleasurable feeling
because we have the Philippines in our grasp. If Japan is to be the
great power of the Pacific, it is inconvenient to her for us to hold
the Hawaiian, the Aleutian and the Philippine groups of islands. The
Philippines have more natural resources than all the islands of Japan,
and our Aleutian Islands that are waiting for development would
probably be found, if thoroughly investigated, one of our great and
good bargains. The average American finds himself bothered to have to
treat the Japanese seriously, but we must, for they take themselves so,
and are rushing the work on new ships of war so that they will come out
equal with ourselves in sea power. They have ready for war one humdred
thousand men. If we did not hold any part of the Pacific Coast, this
might be a matter of indifference, but we have three Pacific States,
and there is no purpose to cede them to the Japanese. It would not
be statesmanship to give up the archipelagoes we possess, even if we
consider them as lands to hold for the hereafter. It is not deniable
that the Japanese have good reason to stand off for strict examination
the ships of other nations that call at their ports. The British and
Chinese have had an experience of the bubonic plague at Hongkong,
and the Japanese are using all the power of arms and the artifice
of science they possess to keep aloof from the disastrous disease,
which is most contagious. The China had called at Hongkong, and
hence the sharp attentions at a coaling station where there are about
seventy-five thousand inhabitants of the Japanese quarters, which are
an exhibit of Old Japan, and most interesting. Nagasaki has, indeed,
the true Japanese flavor. If there had been a sick man on our ship we
should have been quarantined. Further on we were halted in the night
off the city of Kobe, to the sound of the firing of a cannon, for we
had dropped there a passenger, Mr. Tilden, the Hongkong agent of the
Pacific Mail line, and if our ship had been infected with plague he
might have passed it on to Japan! I had gone to bed, and was called
up to confront the representative of the Imperial Government of the
Japanese, and make clear to his eyes that I had not returned on account
of the plague. Authorities of Japan treat people who are quarantined
in a way that removes the stress of disagreeableness. All are taken
ashore and to a hospital. There is furnished a robe of the country,
clean and tidy in all respects. The common clothing is removed and
fumigated. It is necessary for each quarantined person to submit to
this and also to a bath, which is a real luxury, and after it comes a
cup of tea and a light lunch. There was an actual case of plague on an
American ship at this city of Kobe not long ago, at least, it was so
reported with pretty strong corroborative evidence. The symptom in the
case on the ship was that of a fever, probably pneumonia. The man was
landed and examined. The plague fever resembles pneumonia at an early
stage. The Japanese physicians found signs of plague and the end came
soon. The sick man, taken ashore in the afternoon, at nine o'clock
was dead, transferred at once to the crematory, in two hours reduced
to ashes, and the officers of the ship informed that if they wanted
to carry the "remains" to America they would be sealed in a jar and
certified. The ship's officers did not want ashes, and the Japs hold
the jar. They are so "advanced" that cremation is becoming a fad with
them. It would not be surprising to find that the impending danger of
the Japanese is excessive imitative progress, which is not certain to
be exactly the right thing for them. They have reached a point where it
is worth while to examine the claim of new things with much care before
adopting them. We have very high authority to examine all things for
goodness sake, before committing ourselves to hold them fast. We had
to take aboard eighteen hundred tons of coal at Nagasaki. A fleet of
arks with thirty tons of Japanese coal approached and gathered around
the ship, which has sixteen places to throw coal into the bunkers. So
the coal business was carried on by from twelve to fifteen gangs, each
of about ten men and twenty women! The latter were sturdy creatures,
modestly attired in rough jackets and skirts. There were not far from
thirty bamboo baskets to the gang. One man stood at the porthole, and
each second emptied a coal basket, using both hands, and throwing it
back into the barge with one hand, the same swing of the arm used to
catch the next basket hurled to him with a quick, quiet fling. There
were three men of a gang next the ship, the third one standing in the
barge, served with baskets by two strings of women. At the end of the
string furthest from the ship the coal was shoveled into the baskets
by four men, and there were two who lifted and whirled them to the
women. The numbers and order of the laborers varied a little at times
from this relation, yet very little, but frequently a lump of coal was
passed without using a basket. The work of coaling was carried on all
night, and about thirty-six hours of labor put in for a day. There was
a great deal of talking among the laborers during the few moments of
taking places, and some of it in tones of high excitement, but once
the human machine started there was silence, and then the scratching
of the shovels in the coal, and the crash of the coal thrown far
into the ship were heard. It is, from the American contemplation,
shocking for women to do such work, but they did their share with
unflinching assiduity, and without visible distress. When the night
work was going on they were evidently fatigued, and at each change
that allowed a brief spell of waiting, they were stretched out on the
planks of the boats, the greater number still, but some of the younger
ones talking and laughing. There did not seem to be much flirtation,
nothing like as much as when both sexes of Europeans are engaged in
the same wheat or barley field harvesting. There were, it is needful
to remark, neither lights nor shadows to invite the blanishments of
courting. The coal handling women were from fifteen to fifty years
of age, and all so busy the inevitable babies must have been left
at home. I have never seen many American or European babies "good"
as weary mothers use the word, as the commonest Japanese kids. They
do not know how to cry, and a girl of ten years will relieve a mother
of personal care by carrying a baby, tied up in a scarf, just its
head sticking out (I wish they could be induced to use more soap and
water on the coppery heads, from which pairs of intent eyes stare out
with sharp inquiry, as wild animals on guard). The girl baby bearer,
having tied the child so that it appears to be a bag, slings it over
her shoulder, and it interferes but slightly with the movements of
the nurse; does not discernibly embarrass her movements. The men
colliers, it must be admitted, are a shade reckless in the scarcity
of their drapery when they are handling baskets in the presence
of ladies. They do usually wear shirts with short tails behind,
and very economical breechcloths, but their shirts are sleeveless,
and the buttons are missing on collar and bosom. The only clothing
beneath the knees consists of straw sandals. The precipitation of
perspiration takes care of itself. There are no pocket handkerchiefs.

Nagasaki has good hotels, a pleasant, airy European quarter, and shops
stored with the goods of the country, including magnificent vases and
other pottery that should meet the appreciation of housekeepers. There
is no city in Japan more typically Japanese, few in which the line
is so finely and firmly drawn between the old and the new, and that
to the advantage of both.

It is hardly possible for those who do not visit Japan to realize
what a bitter struggle the people have had with their native land,
or how brilliant the victory they have won. The passage of the China
through the inner sea and far along the coast gave opportunity to
see, as birds might, a great deal of the country. The inner sea
is a wonderfully attractive sheet of water, twice as long as Long
Island Sound, and studded with islands, a panorama of the picturesque
mountains everywhere, deep nooks, glittering shoals, fishing villages
by the sea, boats rigged like Americans, flocks of white sails by day,
and lights at night, that suggest strings of street lamps. The waters
teem with life. Evidently the sea very largely affords industry and
sustenance to the people, for there is no botlom or prairie land, as
we call the level or slightly rolling fields in America. There was not
a spot from first to last visible in Japan, as seen from the water,
or in an excursion on the land, where there is room to turn around a
horse and plow. The ground is necessarily turned up with spades and
mellowed with hoes and cakes, all, of course, by human hands. This is
easy compared with the labor in constructing terraces. The mountains
have been conquered to a considerable extent in this way, and it is
sensational to see how thousands of steep places have been cut and
walled into gigantic stairways, covering slopes that could hardly
answer for goat pasture, until the shelves with soil placed on them
for cultivation have been wrought, and the terraces are like wonderful
ladders bearing against the skies. So rugged is the ground, however,
that many mountains are unconquerable, and there are few traces
of the terraces, though here and there, viewed from a distance,
the evidences that land is cultivated as stairways leaning against
otherwise inaccessible declivities. I have never seen elsewhere
anything that spoke so unequivocably of the endless toil of men,
women and children to find footings upon which to sow the grain
and fruit that sustain life. It is not to be questioned that the
report, one-twelfth, only of the surface of Japan is under tillage,
is accurate. The country is more mountainous than the Alleghenies,
and some of it barren as the wildest of the Rockies on the borders of
the bad lands, and it is volcanic, remarkably so, even more subject
to earthquakes than the Philippines. The whole of Japan occupies
about as much space as the two Dakotas or the Philippines, and the
population is forty-two millions. With work as careful and extensive
as that of the agricultural mountaineers of Japan, the Dakotas would
support one hundred million persons. But they would have to present the
washing away of the soil and the waste through improvident ignorance
or careless profligacy of any fertilizer, or of any trickle of water
needed for irrigation. One of the features of the terraces is that
the rains are saved by the walls that sustain the soil, and the
gutters that guide the water conserve it, because paved with pebbles
and carried down by easy stages, irrigating one shelf after another
of rice or vegetables, whatever is grown, until the whole slope not
irreclaimable is made to blossom and the mountain torrents saved in
their descent, not tearing away the made ground, out of which the
means of living grows, but percolating through scores of narrow beds,
gardens suspended like extended ribbons of verdure on volcanic steeps,
refreshing the crops to be at last ripened by the sunshine. This is
a lesson for the American farmer--to be studied more closely than
imitated--to grow grass, especially clover, to stop devastation by
creeks, with shrubbery gifted with long roots to save the banks of
considerable streams, and, where there is stone, use it to save the
land now going by every freshwater rivulet and rivers to the seas, to
the irreparable loss of mankind. It is the duty of man who inherits
the earth that it does not escape from him, that his inheritance
is not swept away by freshets. We are growing rapidly, in America,
in the understanding of this subject, beginning to comprehend the
necessity of giving the land that bears crops the equivalent of that
which is taken from it, that the vital capital of future generations
may not be dissipated and the people grow ever poor and at last perish.

A ride in a jinrikisha, a two-wheeler, with a buggy top and poles
for the biped horse to trot between, from Nagasaki to a fishing
village over the mountains, five miles away, passing at the start
through the Japanese quarter, long streets of shops, populous and
busy, many diligent in light manufacturing work, and all scant in
clothing--the journey continuing in sharp climbs alongside steep places
and beside deep ravines, the slopes elaborately terraced, and again
skirting the swift curves of a rapid brook from the mountains, that
presently gathered and spread over pretty beds of gravel, providing
abundant fresh water bathing, in which a school of boys, leaving a
small guard for a light supply of clothing ashore--the ride ending
in a village of fishermen that, by the count of the inhabitants,
should be a town--permitted close observation of the Japanese in a
city and a village, on their sky-scraping gardens and in the road,
going to and coming from market, as well as in places of roadside
entertainment; and at last a seaside resort, in whose shade a party
of globetrotters were lunching, some of them, I hear, trying to eat
raw fish. There could hardly have been contrived a more instructive
exhibit of Japan and the Japanese. The road was obstructed in several
places by cows bearing bales of goods from the city to the country,
and produce from the hanging gardens to the streets, an occasional
horse mustered in, and also a few oxen. The beast of burden most
frequently overtaken or encountered was the cow, and a majority of
the laborers were women. There were even in teams of twos and fours,
carrying heavy luggage, men and women, old, middle-aged and young,
barefooted or shod with straw, not overloaded, as a rule, and some
walking as if they had performed their tasks and were going home. On
the road it was patent there was extraordinary freedom from care as
to clothing, and no feeling of prejudice or dismay if portions of it
esteemed absolutely essential in North America and Europe had been
left behind or was awaiting return to the possessor. This applies to
both sexes. The day was warm, even hot, and the sun shone fiercely on
the turnpike--for that is what we would call it--making walking, with
or without loads, a heating exercise. Even the bearing of baskets,
and the majority of the women carried them, was justification
under the customs of the country for baring the throat and chest
to give ample scope for breathing, and there is no restriction in
the maintenance of the drooping lines of demarkation, according to
the most liberal fashionable allowances, in dispensing with all the
misty suggestions of laces to the utmost extent artists could ask,
for the study of figures. Beauty had the advantage of the fine curves
of full inhalations of the air that circulated along the dusty paths
between the sea and the mountains. It is a puzzle that the artists of
Japan have not better improved the unparalleled privilege of field and
wall sketching, that they enjoy to a degree not equalled within the
permission of the conventional construction of that which is becoming
in the absence of the daylight habilaments of any great and polite
people. The art schools of Japan, out of doors, on the highway, even,
cannot fail to produce atmospheric influences of which the world will
have visions hereafter, and the Latin quarter of Paris will lose its
reputation that attracts and adjusts nature to inspiration.

When we had succeeded, at Kobe, in convincing the authorities that none
of the passengers on the China had picked up the plague at Hongkong,
we put out into the big sea, and shaped our course for the fairer
land so far away, not exactly a straight line, for the convexity of
the earth that includes the water, for the ocean--particularly the
Pacific--is rounded so that the straightest line over its surface is
a curved line, if astronomically mentioned. We struck out on the great
Northern circle, purposing to run as high as the forty-eighth parallel,
almost to our Alutian Islands, and pursued our course in full view,
the bald cliffs of Japan changing their color with the going down of
the sun. When morning came the purple bulk of the bestirring little
empire still reminded us of the lights and shadows of Asia and the
missionary labors of Sir Edwin Arnold, which have a flavor of the
classics and a remembrance of the Scriptures. "Yonder," said the
Captain, "is the famous mountain of Japan, Fugeyana. It is not very
clearly seen, for it is distant. Oh, you are looking too low down and
see only the foot-hills--that is it, away up in the sky!" It was there,
a peak so lofty that it is solitary. We were to have seen it better
later, but as the hours passed there was a dimness that the light of
declining day did not disperse, and the mountain stayed with us in
a ghostly way, and held its own in high communion.

As we were leaving Asian waters there came a demand for typhoons
that the Captain satisfied completely, saying he was not hunting
for them, but the worst one he ever caught was five hundred miles
east of Yokohama. The tourists were rather troubled. The young man
who had been in the wild waltz of the Zealandia did not care for
a typhoon. We had been blessed with weather so balmy and healing,
winds so soft and waves so low, that the ship had settled down steady
as a river steamboat. We pushed on, but the best the China could do
was fourteen knots and a half an hour, near 350 knots a day, with a
consumption of 135 tons of coal in twenty-four hours. So much for not
having been cleaned up so as to give the go of the fine lines. The
China had been in the habit of making sixty miles a day more than of
this trip, burning less than 100 tons of coal. As we climbed in the
ladder of the parallels of latitude, we began to notice a crispness
in the air, and it was lovely to the lungs. It was a pleasure, and
a stimulant surpassing wine, to breathe the north temperate ozone
again, and after a while to catch a frosty savor on the breeze. We
had forgotten, for a few days, that we were not in a reeking state of
perspiration. Ah! we were more than a thousand miles north of Manila,
and that is as far as the coast of Maine to Cuba. The wind followed
us, and at last gained a speed greater than our own; then it shifted
and came down from the northwest. It was the wind that swept from
Siberia, and Kamschatka's grim peninsula pointed us out. The smoke
from our funnels blew black and dense away southeast, and did not
change more than a point or two for a week. The Pacific began to look
like the North Atlantic. There came a "chill out of a cloud" as in
the poetic case of Annabel Lee. There had been, during our tropical
experience, some outcries for the favor of a few chills, but now they
were like the typhoons. When it was found that they might be had we
did not want them. After all, warm weather was not so bad, and the
chills that were in the wind that whistled from Siberia were rather
objectionable. It was singular to call for one, two, three blankets,
and then hunt up overcoats. White trousers disappeared two or three
days after the white coats. Straw hats were called for by the wind. One
white cap on an officer's head responded alone to the swarm of white
caps on the water. The roll of the waves impeded our great northern
circle. We could have made it, but we should have had to roll with
the waves. We got no higher than 45 degrees. We had our two Thursdays,
and thought of the fact that on the mystical meridian 180, where three
days get mixed up in one! The Pacific Ocean, from pole to pole, so free
on the line where the dispute as to the day it is, goes on forever,
that only one small island is subject to the witchery of mathematics,
and the proof in commonplace transactions unmixed with the skies that
whatever may be the matter with the sun--the earth do move, is round,
do roll over, and does not spill off the sea in doing so. At last came
shrill head winds, and as we added fifteen miles an hour to this speed,
the harp strings in the rigging were touched with weird music, and we
filled our lungs consciously and conscientiously with American air,
experiencing one of the old sensations, better than anything new.

It was figured out that we were within a thousand miles of the
continent, and were getting home. When one has been to the Philippines,
what's a thousand miles or two! "Hello, Captain Seabury! It is only
about a thousand miles right ahead to the land. You know what land
it is, don't you? Well, now, you may break the shaft or burst the
boilers, fling the ship to the sperm whales, like the one that was
the only living thing we saw since Japan entered into the American
clouds of the West. We are only a thousand miles away from the solid,
sugary sweet, redolent, ripe American soil, and if there is anything
the matter we do not mind, why we will just take a boat and pull
ashore." But we would have had a hard time if the Captain had taken
us up in the flush of the hilarity that laughed at a thousand miles,
when the breeze brought us the faint first hints that we were almost
home, after a voyage of five thousand leagues. The wind shifted to
the south and increased until it roared, and the waves were as iron
tipped with blue and silver, hurling their salty crests over our
towering ship; and we were in the grasp--


On the Pacific of the terrific
Storm King of the Equinox.


Mr. Longfellow mentioned the storm wind gigantic, that shook the
Atlantic at the time of the equinox--the one that urges the boiling
surges bearing seaweed from the rocks; and all those disappointed
because they had not bounded on the billows of the briny enough for
healthy exercises, were satisfied in the reception by the tremendous
Pacific when nigh the shore, which was once the western boundary,
but is so no more, of that blessed America, of which her sons grow
fonder the farther they roam. God's country, as the boys and girls
call it reverently, when they are sailing the seas, was veiled from
us in a fog that blanketed the deep. For five thousand miles our ship
had been in a remorseless solitude. No voice had come to us; no spark
of intelligence from the universe touched us, save from the stars and
the sun, but at the hour of the night, and the point of the compass,
our navigator had foretold, we should hear the deep-throated horn on
Reyes point--it came to us out of the gloomy abyss--and science had
not failed. Across the trackless waste we had been guided aright,
and there was music the angels might have envied in the hoarse notes
of the fog-horn that welcomed the wanderers home.


CHAPTER XXIV

Our Picture Gallery.

Annotations and Illustrations--Portraits of Heroes of the War in the
Army and Navy, and of the Highest Public Responsibilities--Admirals
and Generals, the President and Cabinet--Photographs of Scenes
and Incidents--The Characteristics of the Filipinos--Their Homes,
Dresses and Peculiarities in Sun Pictures--The Picturesque People of
Our New Possessions.

The portrait of President McKinley is from the photograph that seems to
his friends upon the whole the most striking of his likenesses. That of
the Secretary of State, the Honorable John Hay, is certainly from the
latest and best of his photos. The Postmaster General, the Honorable
Charles Emory Smith, and Secretary Bliss, are presented in excellent
form and the whole Cabinet with unusual faithfulness. Our naval and
military heroes in the war that has introduced the American nation
to the nations of the earth as a belligerent of the first class,
cannot become too familiar to the people, for they are of the stuff
that brightens with friction, and the more it is worn gives higher
proof that it is of both the precious metals in war, gold and steel.

Admiral Dewey, as we have set forth in this volume, is not thus
far fairly dealt with in the pictures that have been taken. He is a
surprise to those who meet him face to face--so far has photography
failed to adequately present him, but the portrait we give is the
best that has been made of him.

Major-General Merritt retains the keen, clear cut face, and the
figure and bearing of an ideal soldier that has characterized him
since, as a youth just from West Point, he entered the army and
won his way by his courage and courtesy, his brilliant conduct and
excellent intelligence, his dashing charges and superb leadership,
to a distinguished position and the affectionate regard of the army
and the people. In the Indian wars, after the bloody struggle of the
States was over, he outrode the Indians on the prairies and was at once
their conqueror and pacificator. He ranks in chivalry with the knights,
and his work at Manila was the perfection of campaigning that produced
conclusive results with a comparatively small shedding of blood.

The likeness of the Archbishop of Manila was presented me by His Grace
at the close of a personal interview, and represents him as he is. The
chapter devoted to him is meant to do him simple justice as a man and
priest. The fact that he bestowed upon me in the inscription with which
he greatly increased the value of his portrait a military dignity to
which I have no title is an expression only of his friendliness. He
frankly stated his pleasure in meeting an American who would convey
to the President of the United States the message he gave me about the
American army, to which he was indebted for security and peace of mind.

General Aguinaldo gave me his photograph, and the flag of the Filipinos
with him in the effort to establish an independent government,
republican in form. One is not always sure of that which happens
in the Philippines, even when one reads about it. I am prepared to
believe that there is much truth in the dispatch saying a majority
of the Congress of the insurgents at Molores favor annexation to the
United States. The whole truth probably is that they would gladly
have this country their Protector at large, supreme in the affairs
international, they to legislate in respect to local affairs. They
need to know, however, that their Congress must become a territorial
legislature, and that the higher law for them is to be the laws of
Congress. The Philippine flag is oriental in cut and color, having
red and blue bars--a white obtuse angle--the base to the staff, and a
yellow moon with fantastic decorations occupying the field. This flag
is one that Admiral Dewey salutes with respect. General Aguinaldo
is giving much of his strength to the production of proclamations,
and his literary labors should be encouraged.

On a September morning two years ago, Dr. Jose Rizal was shot by
a file of soldiers on the Manila Luneta, the favorite outing park,
bordering on the bay. The scene was photographed at the moment the
Doctor stood erect before the firing squad, and the signal from
the officer in command awaited for the discharge of the volley
killing the most intellectual man of his race. Dr. Rizal is known
as the Tagalo Martytr. The Tagalos are of the dominant tribe of
Malays. General Aguinaldo is of this blood, as are the great majority
of the insurgents. The Doctor is more than the martyr of a tribe. He
is the most talented and accomplished man his people and country
has produced. A history of Luzon from his pen is a hulky volume
full of facts. I was not able to procure all of his books. Anyone
in Manila found in possession of one of them during Spanish rule,
would have been taken to the ground selected for human butchery in
the appointed place of festivity, and shot as he was, making a holiday
for the rulers of the islands. He wrote two novels, "Touch Us Not" and
"The Filibusters," the latter a sequel of the former. These are books
using the weapons put into the hand of genius to smite oppressors in
command of the force of arms. The novels are said to be interesting
as novels,--rather sensational in their disregard of the personal
reputation of his foes, the friars, but all along between the lines
there was argument, appeals for the freedom of the Filipinos, for
freedom of speech, conscience and country. There are pamphlets printed
the size of an average playing card, from thirty to forty pages each,
one "Don Rodriguez," and another "The Telephone." These I obtained
in Hongkong from the hands of the niece--daughter of the sister of
the Doctor,--and she presented me also his poem written when in the
shadow of death, of which this volume gives a prose translation. The
poem is the farewell of the author to his friends, his country and the
world. It is given in prose because in that style the spirit of the
poet, indeed the poetry itself, can be rendered with better results,
than by striving to sustain the poetic form. The poem would be regarded
as happy and affecting in the thought that is in it, the images in
which the ideas gleam, the pathos of resignation, the ascendency of
hope, if there were nothing in the attendant circumstances that marked
it with the blood of historic tragedy. This poetry that it would have
been high treason to own in Manila, for it would not have been safe
in any drawer however secret, was treasured by the relatives of the
martyr at Hongkong. The niece spoke excellent English, and there was
at once surprise and gratification in the family that an American
should be interested in the Doctor who sacrificed himself to the
freedom of his pen, so much as to ascend the steep places of the city
to seek his writings for the sake of the people for whose redemption
he died. On the page showing the face of the Doctor and the scene of
his execution, there are two men in black, the victim standing firm
as a rock to be shot down, and the priest retiring after holding the
crucifix to the lips of the dying; and the portrait of the beautiful
woman to whom the poet was married a few hours before he was killed. It
is said that Rizal wanted to go to Cuba, but Captain-General Weyler
answered a request from him that he might live there, that he would
be shot on sight if he set foot on Cuban soil. Rizal, hunted hard,
attempted to escape in disguise on a Spanish troop ship carrying
discharged soldiers to Spain, but was detected while on the Red Sea,
returned to Manila and shot to death. I stood on the curbstone that
borders the Luneta along the principal pleasure drive, between the
whispering trees and the murmuring surf of the bay, just where the
martyred poet and patriot waited and looked over the waters his eyes
beheld, the last moment before the crash of the rifles that destroyed
him, and in the distance there was streaming in the sunshine the flag
of our country--the star spangled banner, and long, long may it wave,
over a land of the free and home of the brave!

The picture of the cathedral shows a tower that was shattered from
the foundation to the cross by the earthquake of 1863. Ambitious
architecture must conform to the conditions imposed by such disasters,
and the great edifice is greatly changed.

In our gallery we treat Admirals Sampson and Schley as the President
set the example. As there was glory for all at Santiago, there
was advancement for both. We present them together. The wholesome,
manly face of General Lee is in the gallery. His country knows him
and thinks of him well.

The bombarded church of Cavite shows that shells spare nothing sacred
in their flights and concussions. The Bridge of Spain is the one
most crossed in passing between the old walled city and the newer
town that was not walled, but was formidably intrenched where rice
swamps were close to the bay. The public buildings are commodious
and would be higher, but the earth is uncertain, and sky-scrapers
are forbidden by common prudence. Our picture of the principal gate
of the walled city is taken truly, but does not give the appearance
of extreme antiquity, of the reality. The wall looks old as one that
has stood in Europe a thousand years.

Naturally the gallery has many works of art representative of
Manila. The shipping in the harbor is an advertisement of a commerce
once extensive. Each picture that shows a woman, a man, or tree;
a wood-cutter, a fisherman, or a house, opens for the spectator a
vista that may be interpreted by the intelligent. A veritable picture
is a window that reveals a landscape. That which is most valuable in
a gallery like this is the perfect truth not everywhere found, for
the eyes that see a picture that is really representative, setting
forth the colors, the light, and the substance of things find that
which does not fade when the story is told.

There is one most hideous thing in our gallery--that of the head of
a Spaniard, bleeding, just severed from the body--the weapon used,
a naked dagger in a clenched hand--around the ghastly symbol a deep
black border. This is one of the ways of the Katapuna society--the
League of Blood--have of saying what they would have us understand
are their awful purposes. There are terrible stories about this Blood
League--that they bleed themselves in the course of their proceedings,
and each member signs his name with his own blood--that they establish
brotherhood by mingling their blood and tasting it. They are the
sworn enemies of the Spaniards, and particularly of the priests. I
inquired of Senor Agoncillo, the Philippine commissioner to Paris,
whether those bloody stories were true. He scoffed at the notion
that they might be so, and laughed and shouted "No, no!" as if he was
having much fun. But Agoncillo is a lawyer and a diplomat, and I had
heard so much, of this horrid society I did not feel positive it was
certain that its alleged blood rites were fictitious. Of one thing
I am sure--that the dreadful picture is no joke, and was not meant
for a burlesque, though it might possibly be expected to perform the
office of a scarecrow. It cannot be doubted that there are oath-bound
secret societies that are regarded by the Spaniards as fanatical,
superstitious, murderous and deserving death.

There is a good deal of feeble-minded credulity among the Filipinos,
that is exhibited in the stories told by Aguinaldo. He has many
followers who believe that he has a mighty magic, a charm, that
deflects bullets and is an antidote for poison. Intelligent people
believe this imbecility is one of the great elements of his power--that
his leadership would be lost if the supernaturalism attached to him
should go the way of all phantoms. Aguinaldo is said not to have
faith in the charm, for he takes very good care of himself.

We give several views of executions at Manila. As a rule, these
pictures are not fine productions of art. They are taken under
such conditions of light and background that they are somewhat
shadowy. This sinister addition to our gallery seems to be the first
time the photographs of executions have been reproduced. The photos
were not furtively taken. There is no secrecy about the process, no
attempts to hide it from the Spaniards. Executions in the Philippines
were in the nature of dramatic entertainments. There were often many
persons present, and ladies as conspicuous as at bull fights. There
is no more objections offered to photographing an execution than a
cock fight, which is the sport about which the Filipinos are crazily
absorbed. It is the festal character to the Spaniard of the rebel
shooting that permits the actualities to be reproduced, and hence
these strange contributions to our gallery.

Many of our pictures are self-explanatory. They were selected
to show things characteristic, and hence instructive, peasants'
customs--women riding buffaloes through palm groves--native houses,
quaint costumes. "The insurgent outlook" reveals a native house--a
structure of grasses. This is a perfect picture. The southern
islanders, and the group of Moors, the dressing of the girls, work
in the fields, the wealth of vegetation, the dining room of the
Governor-General prepared for company, General Merritt's palatial
headquarters before he had taken the public property into his care
and suited it to his convenience; the Spanish dude officer, showing
a young man contented in his uniform, and a pony pretty in his harness.

We reproduce the war department map of the Philippine islands. It will
be closely studied for each island has become a subject of American
interest. The imprint of the war department is an assurance of the
closest attainable accuracy. The map of the Hawaiian islands clearly
gives them in their relative positions and proportions as they are
scattered broadcast in the Pacific. The Philippine and Hawaiian groups
as they thus appear will be found more extensive than the general
fancy has painted them. The Philippine Archipelago has been held to
resemble a fan, with Luzon for the handle. The shape is something
fantastic. It is worth while to note that the distance between the
north coast of Luzon and the Sulu Archipelago is equal to that from
England to Southern Italy.

There are pictures in our gallery that could only be found at the end
of a journey of ten thousand miles, and they go far to show the life
of the people of a country that is in such relations with ourselves
the whole world is interested. There is truthtelling that should be
prized in photography, and our picture gallery is one of the most
remarkable that has been assembled.



CHAPTER XXV

Cuba and Porto Rico.

Conditions In and Around Havana--Fortifications and Water Supply of the
Capital City--Other Sections of the Pearl of the Antilles--Porto Rico,
Our New Possession, Described--Size and Population--Natural Resources
and Products--Climatic Conditions--Towns and Cities--Railroads and
Other Improvements--Future Possibilities.

There was the fortune of good judgment in attacking the Spaniards in
Cuba at Santiago and Porto Rico, the points of Spanish possession in
the West Indies farthest south and east, instead of striking at the
west, landing at Pinar del Rio, the western province, and moving upon
the fortifications of Havana, where the difficulties and dangers that
proved so formidable at Santiago would have been quadrupled, and our
losses in the field and hospital excessive. The unpreparedness of this
country for war has not even up to this time been appreciated except
by military experts and the most intelligent and intent students of
current history. The military notes prepared in the War Department
of the United States at the beginning of the war with Spain, contain
the following of Santiago de Cuba:

This city was founded in 1514, and the famous Hernando was its first
mayor. It is the most southern place of any note on the island,
being on the twentieth degree of latitude, while Havana, the most
northern point of note, is 23 degrees 9 minutes 26 seconds north
latitude. The surrounding country is very mountainous, and the city
is built upon a steep slope; the public square, or Campo de Marte, is
140 to 160 feet above the sea, and some of the houses are located 200
feet high. The character of the soil is reported to be more volcanic
than calcareous; it has suffered repeatedly from earthquakes. It is
the second city in the island with regard to population, slightly
exceeding that of Matanzas and Puerto Principe. So far as American
commerce is concerned, it ranks only ninth among the fifteen Cuban
ports of entry. It is located on the extreme northern bank of the
harbor of Santiago de Cuba, a harbor of the first class and one of the
smallest; hence, as is believed, the great liability of its shipping
to infection. According to the chart of the Madrid hydrographic
bureau, 1863, this harbor is, from its sea entrance to its extreme
northern limit, 5 miles long, the city being located 4 miles from
its entrance, on the northeastern side of the harbor. The entrance
is for some little distance very narrow--not more than 220 yards
wide--and may be considered about 2 miles long, with a width varying
from one-eighth to five-eighths of a mile. For the remaining 3 miles
the harbor gradually widens, until at its northern extremity it is
about 2 miles wide. The city is so situated in a cove of the harbor
that the opposite shore is only about one-half mile distant. At the
wharves from 10 to 15 feet of water is found, and within 300 to 500
yards of the shore from 20 to 30 feet. This, therefore, is probably
the anchorage ground. Three or more so-called rivers, besides other
streams, empty into this harbor, and one of these, the Caney River,
empties into the harbor at the northern limit of the city, so that
its water flows from one island extremity through the whole harbor
into the sea. The difference here, as elsewhere in Cuba, between
low and high tide is about 2 feet. Population in 1877 was 40,835,
and 5,100 houses. This city is one of the most noted yellow-fever
districts in the island. The population in 1896 was 42,000.

The following has been reported:

Preparations for mounting new and heavy ordnance is now going on at
the entrance of the bay (March 5, 1898).

New and heavier guns are also ordered for Punta Blanca, on the right
of the bay near Santiago City.

Plans have been made for constructing two batteries in the city of
Santiago, one about 25 yards in front of the American consulate and
the other about two blocks in rear.

Cayo Rolones, or Rat Island, located near the middle of the bay, is
the Government depository for powder, dynamite, and other explosives.

The elevation on the right of the entrance, where stands Castle
Morro, is 40 yards above the sea level, while the hill on the left
is 20 yards.

"La Bateria Nueva de la Estrella" is mounted with four revolving
cannons.

The fortifications of Havana were carefully covered in the military
notes, and thus enumerated:

There are fifteen fortifications in and about the city of Havana,
more or less armed and garrisoned, besides a work partly constructed
and not armed, called Las Animas, and the old bastions along the sea
wall of the harbor. These works are as follows:

Nos. 1 and 2 are earthen redans on the sea coast, east of Havana.

Velazo Battery, just east of, and a part of, El Morro.

El Morro, a sea coast fort, with flanking barbette batteries, east
of harbor entrance.

The Twelve Apostles, a water battery lying at the foot of Morro,
with a field of fire across the harbor's mouth. It is a part of Morro.

La Cabana, a stone-bastioned work with both land and water front,
in rear of El Morro, and directly opposite the city of Havana.

San Diego, a stone-bastioned work with only land fronts, east of
Cabana.

Atares, a stone-bastioned work on hill at southwestern extremity of
Havana Bay, near the old shipyard called the arsenal.

San Salvador de la Punta, a stone-bastioned work west of harbor
entrance, with small advanced and detached work, built on a rock near
harbor mouth.

La Reina, a stone work, in shape the segment of a circle, placed on the
seacoast, at western limits of city, on an inlet called San Lazardo.

Santa Clara, a small but powerful seacoast battery of stone and earth,
placed about 1 1/2 miles west of harbor.

El Principe, a stone-bastioned redoubt west of Havana.

Nos. 3 A, 3 B, and 4 are earthen redans on the seacoast west of Havana.

There are, in addition, several works built for defense, but now used
for other purposes or abandoned. These are:

The Torreon de Vigia, a martello tower placed on the inlet of San
Lazaro opposite La Reina.

The old fort called La Fuerza, built three hundred and fifty years
ago, near the present Plaza de Armas, and now used for barracks and
public offices.

The work called San Nazario, situated north of El Principe, but now
used in connection with the present cartridge factory, abandoned for
defensive purposes.

The partially constructed fort called Las Animas, southeast of
Principe, lying on a low hill, partly built but useless and unarmed.

The old sea wall extending from near La Punta to the Plaza de Armas,
unarmed, and useless except as a parapet for musketry.

The old arsenal, on the west of the inner bay, now used as repair
works for ships, useless for defense.

The old artillery and engineer storehouses near La Punta, probably
once used as strongholds, now mere storehouses for munitions of war.

There are, besides, in the vicinity of Havana, three old and now
useless stone works--one at Chorrera, the mouth of the Almendarez
River, about 4 miles from Havana harbor; another at Cojimar, on the
coast, about 3 miles eastward of Cabana, and the third at the inlet
called La Playa de Mariano, about 7 miles west of Havana.

Batteries Nos. 1 and 2 were equipped with, No. 1, four Hontoria
6-inch guns; two Nordenfeldt 6-pounders; No. 2, two Krupp 12-inch
guns; four Hontoria 3-inch mortars. The 12-inch Krupps were to stand
off battleships attempting to force the harbor, or to bombard the
Morro. The Valago battery, a part of the Morro, an out-work on the
edge of the cliff, mounting four 11-inch Krupp guns separated by
earth traverses.

The Morro, commenced in 1589 and finished in 1597, is important for
historical associations. It is a most picturesque structure, and is
useful as a lighthouse and prison, and is mounted with twelve old
10-inch, eight old 8-inch, and fourteen old 4-inch guns.

Cabana, finished in 1774 at a cost of $14,000,000, lies some 500
yards southeast of El Morro, on the east side of Havana Bay. Toward
the city it exposes a vertical stone wall of irregular trace, with
salients at intervals. Toward the Morro is a bastioned face protected
by a deep ditch, sally port, and drawbridge. Eastward and southward a
beautifully constructed land front incloses the work. This front is
protected by ditches 40 or more feet deep, well constructed glacis,
stone scarp, and counterscarp. Cabana is a magnificent example of the
permanent fortifications constructed a century ago. Probably 10,000
men could be quartered in it.

The entrance to Cabana is by the sally port that opens upon the bridge
across the moat lying between Cabana and El Morro. Upon entering, the
enormous extent of the work begins to be perceived, parapet within
parapet, galleries, casemates, and terrepleins almost innumerable,
all of stone and useless. There are no earth covers or traverses,
and no protection against modern artillery.

Cabana is the prison for offenders against the State, and the scene
of innumerable executions. From an exterior or salient corner of the
secretary's office of the headquarters there leads a subterranean
passage 326 meters long, 2.5 meters wide, and 1.86 high, excavated in
the rock. It conducts to the sea, debouching at the mouth of a sewer,
87 meters from the Morro wharf. At exactly 132 meters along the
road rising from the Morro pier or wharf to the Cabana, there will
be found by excavating the rock on the left of the road, at a depth
of 3 meters, a grating, on opening which passage will be made into
a road 107 meters long, 1.6 high, and 1.42 wide, leading to the same
exit as the Cabana secret way. These passages are most secret, as all
believe that the grating of the sewer, seen from the sea, is a drain.

The battery of Santa Clara is the most interesting of the
fortifications of Havana, and one of the most important. It lies about
100 yards from the shore of the gulf, at a point where the line of
hills to the westward runs back (either naturally or artificially)
into quarries, thus occupying a low salient backed by a hill. Here
are three new Krupp 11-inch guns, designed to protect El Principe,
the land side of Havana. It is 187 feet above sea level and completely
dominates Havana, the bay, Morro, Cabana, the coast northward, Atares,
and from east around to south, the approaches of the Marianao Road,
Cristina, and the Western Railroad for about 3 kilometers, i.e.,
between Cristina and a cut at that distance from the station. Principe
gives fire upon Tulipan, the Cerro, the Hill of the Jesuits, and the
valley through which passes the Havana Railroad, sweeping completely
with its guns the railroad as far as the cut at Cienaga, 2-1/2 to
3 miles away. It dominates also the hills southward and westward
toward Puentes Grandes and the Almendarez River, and country extending
toward Marianao, also the Calzada leading to the cemetery and toward
Chorrera; thence the entire sea line (the railroad to Chorrera is
partly sheltered by the slope leading to Principe. This is by all
means the strongest position about Havana which is occupied. Lying
between it and the hill of the Cerro is the hill of the Catalan Club,
right under the guns of the work and about one-half mile away. The
Marianao Road is more sheltered than the Havana, as it runs near the
trees and hill near the Cerro. The only points which dominate the
hill of the Principe lie to the south and southeast in the direction
of Jesus del Monte and beyond Regla. On its southern, southeastern,
and southwestern faces the hill of Principe is a steep descent to the
calzada and streets below. The slope is gradual westward and around
by the north. From this hill is one of the best views of Havana and
the valley south. El Principe lies about one-half mile from the north
coast, from which hills rise in gradual slopes toward the work. It is
Havana gossip that El Principe is always held by the Spanish regiment
in which the Captain-General has most confidence. The military notes
pronounce El Principe undoubtedly the strongest natural position about
Havana now occupied by defensive works. Its guns sweep the heights
of the Almendares, extending from the north coast southward by the
hills of Puentes Grandes to the valley of Cienaga, thence eastward
across the Hill of the Jesuits and the long line of trees and houses
leading to the Cerro. The country beyond the Cerro is partly sheltered
by trees and hills, but eastward El Principe commands in places the
country and the bay shore, and gives fire across Havana seaward.

The most vulnerable spot in the defenses of Havana is the aqueduct
of Isabella II, or the Vento. The water is from the Vento Springs,
pure and inexhaustable, nine miles out of Havana.

All three of the water supplies to Havana, the Zanja and the
two aqueducts of Ferdinand VII and of the Vento, proceed from the
Almendares and run their course near to each other, the farthest to
the west being the Zanja and to the east the Vento.

At Vento Springs is constructed a large stone basin, open at the
bottom, through which springs bubble. From this reservoir the new
aqueduct leads. It is an elliptical tunnel of brick, placed under
ground, and marked by turrets of brick and stone placed along its
course.

From the Vento Reservoir the new aqueduct crosses the low valley
south of Havana, following generally the Calzada de Vento, which
becomes, near the Cerro, the Calzada de Palatino, to a point on the
Western Railway marked 5 kilometers (about); hence the calzada and
the aqueduct closely follow the railway for about a mile, terminating
at a new reservoir.

The Vento water is the best thing Havana has, and indispensable. The
old sources of supply are intolerable. The main water supply is the
Zanja. Throughout the most of its course this river flows through
unprotected mud banks; the fluids of many houses, especially in the
Cerro ward which it skirts, drain into them; men, horses, and dogs
bathe in it; dead bodies have been seen floating in it, and in the
rainy season the water becomes very muddy. In fine, the Zanja in its
course receives all which a little brook traversing a village and
having houses and back yards on its banks would receive. The water can
not be pure, and to those who know the facts the idea of drinking it is
repulsive. This supply had long been insufficient to the growing city,
and in 1835 the well-protected and excellent aqueduct of Ferdinand
VII was completed. It taps the Almendares River a few hundred yards
above filters mentioned, hence carried by arches to the east El Cerro,
and for some distance nearly parallel to the Calzada del Cerro, but
finally intersecting this. These works are succeeded by the Famous
Vento. When Havana is fought for hereafter the fight will be at the
Vento Springs. This remark is not made in the military notes, but the
military men know it well. When General Miles expected to attack Havana
he procured all the accessible surveys and detail of information,
official and through special observation and personal knowledge
obtainable of the water works. Life could not be sustained many days
in the city of Havana without the water of the adorable Vento.

A special interest attaches to Havana, as it is to be a city under
the control of the United States. The surface soil consists for the
most part of a thin layer of red, yellow, or black earths. At varying
depths beneath this, often not exceeding 1 or 2 feet, lie the solid
rocks. These foundation rocks are, especially in the northern and more
modern parts of the city toward the coast of the sea and not of the
harbor, Quarternary, and especially Tertiary, formations, so permeable
that liquids emptied into excavations are absorbed and disappear.

In other parts of the city the rocks are not permeable, and pools are
formed. In proportion as the towns of Cuba are old, the streets are
narrow. In Havana this peculiarity is so positive that pedestrians
cannot pass on the sidewalks, nor vehicles on the streets. Less than
one-third of the population live on paved streets, and these are as
well paved and kept as clean, it is believed cleaner, than is usual
in the United States. The remainder live on unpaved streets, which,
for the most part, are very filthy. Many of these, even in old and
densely populated parts of the city, are no better than rough country
roads, full of rocks, crevices, mud holes, and other irregularities,
so that vehicles traverse them with difficulty at all times, and in
the rainy season they are sometimes impassible for two months. Rough,
muddy, or both, these streets serve admirably as permanent receptacles
for much decomposing animal and vegetable matter. Finally, not less,
probably more, than one-half the population of Havana live on streets
which are constantly in an extremely insanitary condition, but these
streets, though so numerous, are not in the beaten track of the
pleasure tourist.

In the old intramural city, in which live about 40,000 people, the
streets vary in width, but generally they are 6.8 meters (about 22
feet) wide, of which the sidewalks occupy about 7.5 feet. In many
streets the sidewalk at each side is not even 18 inches wide. In the
new, extramural town, the streets are generally 10 meters (32.8 feet)
wide, with 3 meters (nearly 10 feet) for the sidewalks, and 7 meters
(23 feet) for the wagonway. There are few sidewalks in any except in
the first four of the nine city districts.

More than two-thirds of the population live in densely inhabited
portions of the city, where the houses are crowded in contact with
each other. The average house lot does not exceed 27 by 112 feet
in size. There are 17,259 houses, of which 15,494 are one-story,
1,552 are two stories, 186 are three stories, and only 27 are four
stories, with none higher. At least 12 in every 13 inhabitants live
in one-story houses; and as the total civil, military, and transient
population exceeds 200,000 there are more than 12 inhabitants to every
house. Tenement houses may have many small rooms, but each room is
occupied by a family. Generally the one-story houses have four or
five rooms; but house rent, as also food and clothing, is rendered
so expensive by taxation, by export as well as import duties, that it
is rare for workmen, even when paid $50 to $100 a month, to enjoy the
exclusive use of one of these mean little houses; reserving one or two
rooms for his family, he rents the balance. This condition of affairs
is readily understood when it is known that so great a necessity as
flour cost in Havana $15.50 when its price in the United States was
$6.50 per barrel.

In the densely populated portions of the city the houses generally
have no back yard, properly so called, but a flagged court, or narrow
vacant space into which sleeping rooms open at the side, and in close
proximity with these, at the rear of this contracted court are located
the kitchen, the privy, and often a stall for animals. In the houses of
the poor, that is, of the vast majority of the population, there are
no storerooms, pantries, closets, or other conveniences for household
supplies. These are furnished from day to day, even from meal to meal,
by the corner groceries; and it is rare, in large sections of Havana,
to find any one of the four corners of a square without a grocery.

The walls of most of the houses in Havana are built of "mamposteria"
or rubble masonry, a porous material which freely absorbs atmospheric
as well as ground moisture. The mark of this can often be seen high on
the walls, which varies from 2 to 7 feet in the houses generally. The
roofs are excellent, usually flat, and constructed of brick tiles. The
windows are, like the doors, unusually high, nearly reaching the
ceiling, which, in the best houses only, is also unusually high. The
windows are never glazed, but protected by strong iron bars on the
outside and on the inside by solid wooden shutters, which are secured,
like the doors, with heavy bars or bolts, and in inclement weather
greatly interfere with proper ventilation. Fireplaces with chimneys
are extremely rare, so that ventilation depends entirely on the doors
and windows, which, it should be stated, are by no means unusually
large in most of the sleeping rooms of the poor. Generally in Havana,
less generally in other cities, the entrances and courtyards are
flagged with stone, while the rooms are usually floored with tile
or marble. With rare exceptions the lowest floor is in contact with
the earth. Ventilation between the earth and floor is rarely seen in
Cuba. In Havana the average height of the ground floor is from 7 to
11 inches above the pavement, but in Havana, and more frequently in
other Cuban towns, one often encounters houses which are entered by
stepping down from the sidewalk, and some floors are even below the
level of the street. In Havana some of the floors, in Matanzas more,
in Cardenas and Cienfuegos many are of the bare earth itself, or of
planks raised only a few inches above the damp ground.

The narrow entrance about 400 yards in width and 1,200 in length,
opens into the irregular harbor, which has three chief coves or
indentations, termed "ensenadas." The extreme length of the harbor
from its sea entrance to the limit of the most distant ensenada is 3
miles, and its extreme breadth 1-1/2 miles; but within the entrance
the average length is only about 1, and the average breadth about
two-thirds of a mile. However, because of the irregularly projecting
points of land which form the ensenadas, there is no locality in the
harbor where a vessel can possibly anchor farther than 500 yards from
the shore. Its greatest depth is about 40 feet, but the anchorage
ground for vessels drawing 18 feet of water is very contracted, not
exceeding one-half the size of the harbor. The rise and fall of the
tide does not exceed 2 feet.

The Cuban city next in celebrity to Havana is Matanzas, and it is
one likely to become a favorite of Americans, as the country in
the vicinity is distinguished by beauty as well as remarkable for
fertility. Matanzas was first regularly settled in 1693. It is in the
province of Matanzas, 54 miles west of Havana, by the most direct
of the two railroads which unite these two cities, and is situated
on the western inland extremity of the bay of Matanzas, a harbor of
the first class. Matanzas is divided into three districts, viz, the
central district of Matanzas, which, about half a mile in width across
the center of population, lies between the two little rivers, San Juan
to the south, and the Yumuri to the north; the Pueblo Nuevo district,
south of the San Juan, and around the inland extremity of the harbor;
and the district of Versalles, north of the Yumuri, nearest to the
open sea, as also to the anchorage ground, and, sanitarily, the best
situated district in the city. About two-thirds of the population are
in the district of Matanzas, and the Pueblo Nuevo district has about
double the population of Versalles. Pueblo Nuevo stands on ground
originally a swamp, and is low, flat, and only 3 or 4 feet above the
sea. The Matanzas district has many houses on equally low ground,
on the harbor front, and on the banks of the two rivers which inclose
this district; but from the front and between these rivers the ground
ascends, so that its houses are from 2 to even 100 feet above the sea;
however, the center of population, the public square, is only about
20 feet above sea level. Versalles is on a bluff of the harbor, and
its houses are situated, for the most part, from 15 to 40 feet above
the sea. The district of Matanzas has ill constructed and useless
sewers in only two streets, and no houses connected therewith. So
much of this district and of Versalles as is built on the hill slope
is naturally well drained, but the Pueblo Nuevo district, and those
parts of Matanzas built in immediate proximity to the banks of the
river, are very ill drained.

Since 1872 Matanzas has had an aqueduct from the Bello spring, 7 miles
distant. The supply is alleged to be both abundant and excellent. But
of the 4,710 houses in the city 840 stand on the hills outside
the zone supplied by the waterworks, while of the remaining 3,870
houses within this zone only about 2,000 get their water from the
waterworks company. Hence more than half of the houses of Matanzas
(2,710) do for the most part get their supply in kegs by purchase in
the streets. There are a few public fountains, as also some dangerous
wells. The streets are 30 feet wide, with 24 feet wagon way. Few of
them are paved, some are very poor roads, but, for the most part,
these roads are in good condition. In the Matanzas district some
of the streets are of solid stone, and natural foundation rock of
the place, for the superficial soil is so thin that the foundation
rocks often crop out. Of this very porous rock most of the houses
are built. The houses have wider fronts, larger air spaces in rear,
are not so crowded, and are better ventilated than the houses of
Havana. As is usual in Cuba, the ground floors are generally on a
level with the sidewalk, and some are even below the level of the
streets. A heavy rain floods many of the streets of Matanzas, the
water running back into and beneath the houses. The porous limestone
of which the houses are built greatly favors absorption.

The population of Matanzas and suburbs was about 50,000 at the
beginning of the war.

Porto Rico is not quite as large as Connecticut, but larger than
the States of Delaware and Rhode Island. The climate of the island
is delightful, and its soil exceedingly rich. In natural resources
it is of surpassing opulence. The length of the island is about one
hundred miles, and its breadth thirty-five, the general figure of it
being like the head of a sperm whale. The range of mountains is from
east to west, and nearly central. The prevalent winds are from the
northwest, and the rainfall is much heavier on the northern shores and
mountain slopes than on the southern. The height of the ridge is on
the average close to 1,500 feet, one bold peak, the Anvil being 3,600
feet high. The rainy north and the droughty south, with the lift of the
land from the low shores to the central slopes and rugged elevations,
under the tropical sun, with the influence of the great oceans east,
south and north, and the multitude of western and southern islands,
give unusual and charming variety in temperature. Porto Rico is, by
the American people, even more than the Spaniards, associated with
Cuba. But it is less than a tenth of Cuban proportions. Porto Rico
has 3,600 square miles to Cuba's 42,000, but a much greater proportion
of Porto Rico than of Cuba is cultivated. Less than one-sixteenth of
the area of Cuba has been improved, and while her population is but
1,600,000, according to the latest census, and is not so much now,
Porto Rico, with less than a tenth of the land of Cuba, has half the
number of inhabitants. Largely Porto Rico is peopled by a better class
than the mass of the Cubans. Cuba is wretchedly provided with roads,
one of the reasons why the Spaniards were incapable of putting down
insurrections. If they had expended a fair proportion of the revenues
derived from the flourishing plantations and the monopolies of Spanish
favoritisms that built up Barcelona and enriched Captain-Generals, and
in less degree other public servants, the rebellions would have been
put down. The Spanish armies in Cuba, however, were rather managed
for official speculation and peculation, were more promenaders than
in military enterprise and the stern business of war. With Weyler for
an opponent, Gomez, as a guerilla, could have dragged on a series of
skirmishes indefinitely. The story of the alleged war in Cuba between
the Spaniards and the Cubans was on both sides falsified, and the
American people deceived. Porto Rico does not seem to have appealed so
strongly to the cupidity of the Spaniards as Cuba did, and to have been
governed with less brutality. The consequence is there has not been a
serious insurrection in the smaller island for seventy years, and it
falls into our possession without the impoverishment and demoralization
of the devastation of war--one of the fairest gems of the ocean.

It was October 18th that the American flag was raised over San
Juan. The following dispatch is the official record:

"San Juan, Porto Rico, Oct. 18.--Secretary of War, Washington, D.C.:
Flags have been raised on public buildings and forts in this city
and saluted with national salutes. The occupation of the island is
now complete.

"_Brooke_, Chairman."

On the morning of the 18th, the 11th regular infantry with two
batteries of the 5th artillery landed. The latter proceeded to the
forts, while the infantry lined up on the docks. It was a holiday
for San Juan and there were many people in the streets. Rear-Admiral
Schley and General Gordon, accompanied by their staffs, proceeded to
the palace in carriages. The 11th infantry regiment and band with
Troop H, of the 6th United States cavalry then marched through the
streets and formed in the square opposite the palace.

At 11:40 a. m., General Brooke, Admiral Schley and General Gordon, the
United States evacuation commissioners, came out of the palace with
many naval officers and formed on the right side of the square. The
streets behind the soldiers were thronged with townspeople, who stood
waiting in dead silence.

At last the city clock struck 12, and the crowds, almost breathless
and with eyes fixed upon the flagpole, watched for developments. At
the sound of the first gun from Fort Morro, Major Dean and Lieutenant
Castle, of General Brooke's staff, hoisted the stars and stripes,
while the band played "The Star Spangled Banner." All heads were bared
and the crowds cheered. Fort Morro, Fort San Cristobal and the United
States revenue cutter Manning, lying in the harbor, fired twenty-one
guns each.

Senor Munoz Rivera, who was president of the recent autonomist council
of secretaries, and other officials of the late insular government
were present at the proceedings. Many American flags were displayed.

Acknowledgment has been made of the better condition of Porto Rico than
of Cuba, but the trail of the serpent of colonial Spanish government
appears. Mr. Alfred Somamon writes in the Independent:

"The internal administration of the island disposes of a budget of
about $3,300,000, and is a woeful example of corrupt officialism. Of
this sum only about $650,000 is expended in the island, the
remainder being applied to payment of interest on public debt,
salaries of Spanish officials, army, navy, and other extra-insular
expenditures. But the whole of the revenue is collected in the island."

An article of great value by Eugene Deland, appeared in the Chatauquan
of September, on the characteristics of Porto Rico, and we present
an extract, showing its admirable distinction of accurate information
well set forth:

"The mountain slopes are covered with valuable timbers, cabinet
and dye-woods, including mahogany, walnut, lignum vitae, ebony, and
logwood, and various medicinal plants. Here, too, is the favorite
zone of the coffee tree, which thrives best one thousand feet above
sea level. The valleys and plains produce rich harvests of sugar-cane
and tobacco. The amount of sugar yielded by a given area is said to
be greater than in any other West Indian island. Rice, of the mountain
variety and grown without flooding, nourishes almost any place and is
a staple food of the laboring classes. In addition to these products
cotton and maize are commonly cultivated, and yams, plantains, oranges,
bananas, cocoanuts, pineapples, and almost every other tropical fruit
are grown in abundance. Among indigenous plants are several noted for
their beautiful blossoms. Among these are the coccoloba, which grows
mainly along the coasts and is distinguished by its large, yard-long
purple spikes, and a talauma, with magnificent, ororous, white flowers.

"Of wild animal life Porto Rico has little. No poisonous serpents
are found, but pestiferous insects, such as tarantulas, centipedes,
scorpions, ticks, fleas, and mosquitos, supply this deficiency in a
measure. All sorts of domestic animals are raised, and the excellent
pasture-lands support large herds of cattle for export and home
consumption, and ponies, whose superiority is recognized throughout
the West Indies.

"The mineral wealth of the island is undeveloped, but traces of
gold, copper, iron, lead, and coal are found. Salt is procured in
considerable quantities from the lakes.

"Porto Rico carries on an extensive commerce, chiefly with Spain,
the United States, Cuba, Germany, Great Britain, and France. In
1895 the volume of its trade was one-half greater than that of the
larger British colony--Jamaica. The United States ranks second in
amount of trade with the island. During the four years from 1893-96
Spain's trade with the colony averaged $11,402,888 annually, and the
United States, $5,028,544. The total value of Porto Rican exports for
1896 was $18,341,430, and of imports, $18,282,690, making a total of
$36,624,120, which was an excess over any previous year. The exports
consist almost entirely of agricultural products. In 1895 coffee
comprised about sixty per cent, and sugar about twenty-eight per cent,
of their value; leaf tobacco, molasses, and honey came next. Maize,
hides, fruits, nuts, and distilled spirits are also sent out in
considerable quantities. Over one-half of the coffee exported goes to
Spain and Cuba, as does most of the tobacco, which is said to be used
in making the finest Havana cigars; the sugar and molasses are, for
the most part, sent to the United States. Among imports, manufactured
articles do not greatly exceed agricultural. Rice, fish, meat and lard,
flour, and manufactured tobacco are the principal ones. Customs duties
furnish about two-thirds of the Porto Rican revenue, which has for
several years yielded greater returns to Spain than that of Cuba.

"The climate of Porto Rico is considered the healthiest in the
Antilles. The heat is considerably less than at Santiago de Cuba, a
degree and a half farther north. The thermometer seldom goes above 90
degrees. Pure water is readily obtained in most of the island. Yellow
fever seldom occurs, and never away from the coast. The rainy season
begins the first of June and ends the last of December, but the heavy
downpours do not come on until about August 1st.

"In density of population also this island ranks first among the
West Indies, having half as many inhabitants as Cuba, more than
eleven times as large. Of its 807,000 people, 326,000 are colored
and many of the others of mixed blood. They differ little from other
Spanish-Americans, being fond of ease, courteous, and hospitable,
and, as in other Spanish countries, the common people are illiterate,
public education having been grievously neglected. The natives are the
agriculturists of the country, and are a majority in the interior,
while the Spaniards, who control business and commerce, are found
mainly in the towns and cities.

"The numerous good harbors have naturally dotted the seaboard with
cities and towns of greater or less commercial importance. San Juan,
Ponce, Mayaguez, Aguadilla, Arecibo and Fajardo all carry on extensive
trade. Intercourse between coast towns is readily had by water, but is
to be facilitated by a railroad around the island, of which 137 miles
have been built and 170 miles more projected. The public highways of
the island are in better condition than one might expect. According to
a recent report of United States Consul Stewart, of San Juan, there
are about one hundred and fifty miles of good road. The best of this
is the military highway connecting Ponce on the southern coast with
San Juan on the northern. This is a macadamized road, so excellently
built and so well kept up that a recent traveler in the island says a
bicycle corps could go over it without dismounting. Whether it is solid
enough to stand the transportation of artillery and heavy army trains
we shall soon know. Of telegraph lines Porto Rico has four hundred
and seventy miles, and two cables connect it with the outside world,
one running from Ponce and the other from San Juan."

Mr. Alfred Solomon, already quoted as an instructive contributor to
the Independent, writes:

"The population of Porto Rico, some 800,000, is essentially
agricultural. A varied climate, sultry in the lowlands, refreshing and
invigorating in the mountain ranges, makes possible the cultivation of
almost every variety of known crop--sugar, tobacco, coffee, annatto,
maze, cotton and ginger are extensively grown; but there are still
thousands of acres of virgin lands awaiting the capitalist. Tropical
fruits flourish in abundance, and the sugar-pine is well known
in our market, where it brings a higher price than any other pine
imported. Hardwood and fancy cabinet wood trees fill the forests, and
await the woodman's ax. Among these are some specimens of unexampled
beauty, notably a tree, the wood of which, when polished, resembles
veined marble, and another, rivaling in beauty the feathers in a
peacock's tail. Precious metals abound, although systematic effort
has never been directed to the locating of paying veins. Rivers and
rivulets are plenty, and water-power is abundant; and the regime
should see the installation of power plants and electric lighting
all over the island, within a short time after occupation. On the
lowlands, large tracts of pasturage under guinea grass and malojilla
feed thousands of sleek cattle, but, as an article of food, mutton
is almost unknown. The native pony, small, wiry and untirable,
has a world-wide reputation, and for long journeys is unequaled,
possessing a gait, as they say in the island, like an arm-chair.

"Perhaps a third of the population of the island is of African
descent; but, strangely enough, the colored people are only to be
found on the coast, and are the fishermen, boatmen and laborers of
the seaports. The cultivation of the crops is entirely in the hands
of the jibaro, or peasant, who is seldom of direct Spanish descent,
while the financiering and exportation is conducted almost entirely by
peninsulares, or Spanish-born colonists, who monopolize every branch
of commerce to the exclusion of the colonian-born subject.

"Coffee planting is largely engaged in, returning from ten to fifteen
per cent. on capital. Improved transportation facilities, abolition of
export dues and the consolidation of small estates would, doubtless,
help toward better results. This crop is marketed in Europe--London,
Havre and Barcelona--where better prices are obtainable than in New
York. With the exception of a few plantations in strong hands, most
of this property could be purchased at a fair valuation, and would
prove to be a very profitable investment.

"Cocoa grows wild on the lowlands, but has not been cultivated to
any appreciable extent. Small consignments sent to Europe have been
pronounced superior to the Caracas bean. The tree takes a longer
period than coffee to come to maturity and bear fruit; but once in
bearing the current expenses are less and the yield far greater. The
same remarks apply to the cultivation of rubber, which, although a
most profitable staple with an ever-increasing market, has received
no attention whatever.

"Corn is raised in quantities insufficient for home consumption. Of
this cereal three crops can be obtained in two years; sometimes two
a year. The demand is constant, and the price always remunerative.

"In Porto Rico, as in most other West Indian islands, sugar is
king. In the treatment of this product the lack of capital has been
sadly felt. Planters possess only the most primitive machinery, and in
the extraction of the juice from the cane the proportion of saccharine
matter has been exceedingly small. Great outlay is necessary for the
installation of a complete modern crushing and centrifugal plant."


A flattering picture of our new possessions is drawn in McClure's
Magazine, by Mr. George B. Waldron.

"Here, then, are Cuba and Porto Rico in the Atlantic, and the
Hawaiian and Philippine groups in the Pacific, whose destiny has
become intertwined with our own. Their combined area is 168,000
square miles, equaling New England, New York, Pennsylvania, and New
Jersey. Their population is about 10,000,000, or perhaps one-half of
that of these nine home States. The Philippines, with three-quarters
of the entire population, and Porto Rico, with 800,000 people, alone
approach our own Eastern States in density. Cuba, prior to the war,
was about as well populated as Virginia, and the Hawaiian group is
as well peopled as Kansas. What, then, can these islands do for us?

"Americans use more sugar in proportion to population than any other
nation of the world. The total consumption last year was not less than
2,500,000 tons. This is enough to make a pyramid that would overtop the
tallest pyramid of Egyptian fame. Of this total, 2,200,000 tons came
from foreign countries, the Spanish possessions and Hawaii sending
about twenty-five per cent. Five years earlier, when our imports
were less by half a million tons, these islands supplied double
this quantity, or nearly two-thirds of the nation's entire sugar
import. But that was before Cuba had been devastated by war and when
she was exporting 1,100,000 tons of sugar to other countries. Restore
Cuba to her former fertility, and the total sugar crop of these islands
will reach 1,500,000 tons, or two-thirds our present foreign demand."

There is much more in Mr. Waldron's summary of the vast addition that
has been made to our resources, by the occupation and possession of the
islands that have recently been gathered under our wings by the force
of our arms. It is enough to know that with the tropical islands we
have gained, we have in our hands the potentialities, the luxuries,
the boundless resources including, as we may, and must, Alaska, of
all the zones of the great globe that we inhabit in such ample measure.

The following notes were compiled for the information of the army,
and embody all reliable information available.

The notes were intended to supplement the military map of Porto
Rico. The following books and works were consulted and matter from them
freely used in the preparation of the notes: Guia Geografico Militar
de Espana y Provincias Ultramarinas, 1879; Espana, sus Monumentos
y Artes, su Naturaleza e Historia, 1887; Compendio de Geografia
Militar de Espana y Portugal, 1882; Anuario de Comercio de Espana,
1896; Anuario Militar de Espana, 1898; Reclus, Nouvelle Geographic
Universelle, 1891; Advance Sheets American Consular Reports, 1898;
An Account of the Present State of the Island of Porto Rico, 1834;
The Statesman's Year Book, 1898.

Situation.--Porto Rico is situated in the Torrid Zone, in the
easternmost part of the Antilles, between latitude 17 deg. 54 min. and
18 deg. 30 min. 40 sec. N. and longitude 61 deg. 54 min. 26 sec. and
63 deg. 32 min. 32 sec. W. of Madrid. It is bounded on the north
by the Atlantic, on the east and south by the sea of the Antilles,
and on the west by the Mona Channel.

Size.--The island of Porto Rico, the fourth in size of the Antilles,
has, according to a recent report of the British consul (1897),
an extent of about 3,668 square miles--35 miles broad and 95 miles
long. It is of an oblong form., extending from east to west.

Population.--Porto Rico is the first among the Antilles in density of
population and in prosperity. The Statesman's Year Book, 1898, gives
the population (1887) at 813,937, of which over 300,000 are negroes,
this being one of the few countries of tropical America where the
number of whites exceeds that of other races. The whites and colored,
however, are all striving in the same movement of civilization, and
are gradually becoming more alike in ideas and manners. Among the
white population the number of males exceeds the number of females,
which is the contrary of all European countries. This is partly
explained by the fact that the immigrants are mostly males. On an
average the births exceed the deaths by double. The eastern portion
of the island is less populous than the western.

Soil.--The ground is very fertile, being suitable for the cultivation
of cane, coffee, rice, and other products raised in Cuba, which island
Porto Rico resembles in richness and fertility.

Climate.--The climate is hot and moist, the medium temperature reaching
104 degs. F. Constant rains and winds from the east cool the heavy
atmosphere of the low regions. On the heights of the Central Cordillera
the temperature is healthy and agreeable.

Iron rusts and becomes consumed, so that nothing can be constructed
of this metal. Even bronze artillery has to be covered with a strong
varnish to protect it from the damp winds.

Although one would suppose that all the large islands in the Tropics
enjoyed the same climate, yet from the greater mortality observed in
Jamaica, St. Domingo, and Cuba, as compared with Porto Rico, one is
inclined to believe that this latter island is much more congenial
than any of the former to the health of Europeans. The heat, the
rains, and the seasons are, with very trifling variations, the same
in all. But the number of mountains and running streams, which are
everywhere in view in Porto Rico, and the general cultivation of the
land, may powerfully contribute to purify the atmosphere and render it
salubrious to man. The only difference of temperature to be observed
throughout the island is due to altitude, a change which is common
to every country under the influence of the Tropics.

In the mountains the inhabitants enjoy the coolness of spring, while
the valleys would be uninhabitable were it not for the daily breeze
which blows generally from the northeast and east. For example, in
Ponce the noonday sun is felt in all its rigor, while at the village
of Adjuntas, 4 leagues distant in the interior of the mountains, the
traveler feels invigorated by the refreshing breezes of a temperate
clime. At one place the thermometers is as high as 90 deg., while in
another it is sometimes under 60 deg. Although the seasons are not so
distinctly marked in this climate as they are in Europe (the trees
being always green), yet there is a distinction to be made between
them. The division into wet and dry seasons (winter and summer)
does not give a proper idea of the seasons in this island; for on
the north coast it sometimes rains almost the whole year, while
sometimes for twelve or fourteen months not a drop of rain falls on
the south coast. However, in the mountains at the south there are
daily showers. Last year, for example, in the months of November,
December, and January the north winds blew with violence, accompanied
by heavy showers of rain, while this year (1832) in the same months,
it has scarcely blown a whole day from that point of the compass, nor
has it rained for a whole month. Therefore, the climate of the north
and south coasts of this island, although under the same tropical
influence, are essentially different.

As in all tropical countries, the year is divided into two seasons--the
dry and the rainy. In general, the rainy season commences in August
and ends the last of December, southerly and westerly winds prevailing
during this period. The rainfall is excessive, often inundating fields
and forming extensive lagoons. The exhalations from these lagoons
give rise to a number of diseases, but, nevertheless, Porto Rico is
one of the healthiest islands of the archipelago.

In the month of May the rains commence, not with the fury of a deluge,
as in the months of August and September, but heavier than any rain
experienced in Europe. Peals of thunder reverberating through the
mountains give a warning of their approach, and the sun breaking
through the clouds promotes the prolific vegetation of the fields with
its vivifying heat. The heat at this season is equal to the summer of
Europe, and the nights are cool and pleasant; but the dews are heavy
and pernicious to health. The following meteorological observations,
carefully made by Don Jose Ma. Vertez, a Captain of the Spanish navy,
will exhibit the average range of temperature:

Ds of heat observed in the capital of Porto Rico, taking a medium of
five years.

Degrees of Heat Observed in the Capital of Porto Rico, Taking a Medium
of Five Years.


Hours of the Day.    Jan. Feb.   Mar. Apr. May. June. July. Aug. Sept.   Oct.  Nov. Dec.
Seven in the morning  72  72 1/2 74   78   78    82    85   86    80 1/2  77    75   75
Noon                  82  81     82   83   85    86    90   92    88      85    84   80
Five in the evening   78  74     78   80   81    84    87   90    83      82    80   79


The weather, after a fifteen or twenty days' rain, clears up and the
sun, whose heat has been hitherto moderated by partial clouds and
showers of rain, seems, as it were, set in a cloudless sky. The cattle
in the pastures look for the shade of the trees, and a perfect calm
pervades the whole face of nature from sunrise till between 10 and 11
o'clock in the morning, when the sea breeze sets in. The leaves of the
trees seem as if afraid to move, and the sea, without a wave or ruffle
on its vast expanse, appears like an immense mirror. Man partakes in
the general languor as well as the vegetable and brute creation.

The nights, although warm, are delightfully clear and serene at
this season. Objects may be clearly distinguished at the distance of
several hundred yards, so that one may even shoot by moonlight. The
months of June and July offer very little variation in the weather or
temperature. In August a suffocating heat reigns throughout the day,
and at night it is useless to seek for coolness; a faint zephyr is
succeeded by a calm of several hours. The atmosphere is heavy and
oppressive, and the body, weakened by perspiration, becomes languid;
the appetite fails, and the mosquitos, buzzing about the ears by day
and night, perplex and annoy by their stings, while the fevers of the
tropics attack Europeans with sudden and irresistible violence. This
is the most sickly season for the European. The thermometer frequently
exceeds 90 deg. The clouds exhibit a menacing appearance, portending
the approach of the heavy autumnal rains, which pour down like
a deluge. About the middle of September it appears as if all the
vapors of the ocean had accumulated in one point of the heavens. The
rain comes down like an immense quantity of water poured through a
sieve; it excludes from the view every surrounding object, and in
half an hour the whole surface of the earth becomes an immense sheet
of water. The rivers are swollen and overflow their banks, the low
lands are completely inundated, and the smallest brooks become deep
and rapid torrents.

In the month of October the weather becomes sensibly cooler than
during the preceding months, and in November the north and northeast
winds generally set in, diffusing an agreeable coolness through the
surrounding atmosphere. The body becomes braced and active, and the
convalescent feels its genial influence. The north wind is accompanied
(with few exceptions) by heavy showers of rain on the north coast;
and the sea rolls on that coast with tempestuous violence, while the
south coast remains perfectly calm.

When the fury of the north wind abates, it is succeeded by fine
weather and a clear sky. Nothing can exceed the climate of Porto
Rico at this season; one can only compare it to the month of May in
the delightful Province of Andalusia, where the cold of winter and
the burning heat of summer are tempered by the cool freshness of
spring. This is considered to be the healthiest season of the year,
when a European may visit the tropics without fear.

The small islands, destitute of wood and high mountains, which have a
powerful effect in attracting the clouds, suffer much from drought. It
sometimes happens that in Curacao, St. Bartholomews, and other islands
there are whole years without a drop of rain, and after exhausting
their cisterns the inhabitants are compelled to import water from
the rivers of other islands.

"The land breeze" is an advantage which the large islands derive
from the inequality of their surface; for as soon as the sea breeze
dies away, the hot air of the valleys being rarified, ascends toward
the tops of the mountains, and is there condensed by cold, which
makes it specifically heavier than it was before; it then descends
back to the valleys on both sides of the ridge. Hence a night wind
(blowing on all sides from the land toward the shore) is felt in all
the mountainous countries under the torrid zone. On the north shore
the wind comes from the south, and on the south shore from the north.

Storms.--The hurricanes which visit the island, and which obey the
general laws of tropical cyclones, are one of the worst scourges of the
country. For hours before the appearance of this terrible phenomenon
the sea appears calm; the waves come from a long distance very gently
until near the shore, when they suddenly rise as if impelled by a
superior force, dashing against the land with extraordinary violence
and fearful noise. Together with this sign, the air is noticed to be
disturbed, the sun red, and the stars obscured by vapor which seems
to magnify them. A strong odor is perceived in the sea, which is
sulphureous in the waters of rivers, and there are sudden changes in
the wind. These omens, together with the signs of uneasiness manifested
by various animals, foretell the proximity of a hurricane.

This is a sort of whirlwind, accompanied by rain, thunder and
lightning, sometimes by earthquake shocks, and always by the most
terrible and devastating circumstances that can possibly combine to
ruin a country in a few hours. A clear, serene day is followed by the
darkest night; the delightful view offered by woods and prairies is
diverted into the deary waste of a cruel winter; the tallest and most
robust cedar trees are uprooted, broken off bodily, and hurled into
a heap; roofs, balconies, and windows of houses are carried through
the air like dry leaves, and in all directions are seen houses and
estates laid waste and thrown into confusion.

The fierce roar of the water and of the trees being destroyed by the
winds, the cries and moans of persons, the bellowing of cattle and
neighing of horses, which are being carried from place to place by
the whirlwinds, the torrents of water inundating the fields, and a
deluge of fire being let loose in flashes and streaks of lightning,
seem to announce the last convulsions of the universe and the death
agonies of nature itself.

Sometimes these hurricanes are felt only on the north coast, at
others on the south coast, although generally their influence extends
throughout the island.

In 1825 a hurricane destroyed the towns of Patillas, Maunabo, Yabucoa,
Humacao, Gurabo, and Caguas, causing much damage in other towns in
the east, north, and center of the island. The island was also visited
by a terrible hurricane in 1772.

Earthquakes.--Earthquakes are somewhat frequent, but not violent or
of great consequence. The natives foretell them by noticing clouds
settle near the ground for some time in the open places among the
mountains. The water of the springs emits a sulphurous odor or leaves
a strange taste in the mouth; birds gather in large flocks and fly
about uttering shriller cries than usual; cattle bellow and horses
neigh, etc. A few hours beforehand the air becomes calm and dimmed by
vapors which arise from the ground, and a few moments before there is a
slight breeze, followed at intervals of two or three minutes by a deep
rumbling noise, accompanied by a sudden gust of wind, which are the
forerunners of the vibration, the latter following immediately. These
shocks are sometimes violent and are usually repeated, but owing to
the special construction of the houses, they cause no damage.

Tides.--For seven hours the tide runs rapidly in a northwest direction,
returning in the opposite direction with equal rapidity for five hours.

Orography.--The general relief of Porto Rico is much inferior in
altitude to that of the rest of the Great Antilles, and even some of
the Lesser Antilles have mountain summits which rival it.

A great chain of mountains divides the islands into two parts, northern
and southern, which are called by the natives Banda del Norte and
Banda del Sur. This chain sends out long ramifications toward the
coasts, the interstices of which form beautiful and fertile valleys,
composed in the high parts of white and red earths, on the spurs of
black and weaker earths, and near the coasts of sand.

To the northwest and following a direction almost parallel with the
northern coast, the Sierra of Lares extends from Aguadilla to the
town of Lares, where it divides into two branches, one going north
nearly to the coast, near Arecibo harbor, and the other extending
to the spurs of the Sierra Grande de Banos; this latter starting
from Point Guaniquilla, crosses the island in its entire length,
its last third forming the Sierra of Cayey.

The whole island may be said to form a continuous network of sierras,
hills, and heights. Of these the Sierra del Loquillo is distinguished
for its great altitude (the highest peak being Yunque, in the northeast
corner of the island and visible from the sea, a distance of 120
kilometers), as is also Laivonito Mountain, near the south coast.

The following are the four highest mountains, with their heights above
the sea level: Yunque, in Luquillo, 1,290 yards; Guilarte, in Adjuntas,
1,180 yards; La Somanta, in Aybonito, 1,077 yards; Las Teras de Cerro
Gordo, in San German, 860 yards. All are easily ascended on foot or
horseback, and there are coffee plantations near all of them.

Approximate Height of Towns Above the Sea Level.--Aybonito, with its
acclimatization station, 970 yards; Adjuntas, an almost exclusively
Spanish town, 810 yards; Cayey, with a very agreeable climate,
750 yards; Lares, with a very agreeable climate, 510 yards; Utuado,
with a very agreeable climate, 480 yards; Muricao, an exclusively
Spanish town, 480 yards. To ascend to all these towns there are very
good wagon roads. There are no fortifications of any kind in them,
but they are surrounded on all sides by mountains.

Hydrography.--Few countries of the extent of Porto Rico are watered by
so many streams. Seventeen rivers, taking their rise in the mountains,
cross the valleys of the north coast and empty into the sea. Some of
these are navigable 2 or 3 leagues from their mouths for schooners and
small coasting vessels. Those of Manati, Loisa, Trabajo, and Arecibo
are very deep and broad, and it is difficult to imagine how such large
bodies of water can be collected in so short a course. Owing to the
heavy surf which continually breaks on the north coast, these rivers
have bars across their embouchures which do not allow large vessels
to enter. The rivers of Bayamo and Rio Piedras flow into the harbor
of the capital, and are also navigable for boats. At high water small
brigs may enter the river of Arecibo with perfect safety and discharge
their cargoes, notwithstanding the bar which crosses its mouth.

The rivers of the north coast have a decided advantage over those
of the south coast, where the climate is drier and the rains less
frequent. Nevertheless, the south, west, and east coasts are well
supplied with water; and, although in some seasons it does not rain
for ten, and sometimes twelve months on the south coast, the rivers
are never entirely dried up.

From the Cabeza de San Juan, which is the northeast extremity of
the island, to the cape of Mala Pascua, which lies to the southeast,
9 rivers fall into the sea.

From Cape Mala Pascua to Point Aguila, which forms the southwest angle
of the island, 16 rivers discharge their waters on the south coast.

On the west coast 3 rivers, 5 rivulets, and several fresh-water
lakes communicate with the sea. In the small extent of 330 leagues
of area there are 46 rivers, besides a countless number of rivulets
and branches of navigable water.

The rivers of the north coast are stocked with delicious fish, some
of them large enough to weigh two quintals.

From the river of Arecibo to that of Manati, a distance of 5 leagues,
a fresh-water lagoon, perfectly navigable for small vessels through
the whole of its extent, runs parallel to the sea at about a mile
from the shore.

In the fertile valley of Anasco, on the western coast, there is a
canal formed by nature, deep and navigable. None of the rivers are
of real military importance; for, though considering the shortness of
their course, they attain quite a volume, still it is not sufficient
for good-sized vessels.

The rivers emptying on the north coast are Loisa, Aguas Prietas,
Arecibo, Bayamon, Camuy, Cedros, Grande, Guajaraca de la Tuna,
Lesayas, Loquillo, Manati, Rio Piedras, Sabana, San Martin, Sibuco,
Toa, and Vega.

Those emptying on the east coast are Candelero, Dagua, Fajardo,
Guayanes, Majogua, and Maonabo.

On the south coast: Aquamanil, Caballon, Cana, Coamo, Descalabrado,
Guanica, Guayama, Guayanilla, Jacagua, Manglar, Penuela, Ponce
and Vigia.

On the west coast: Aguada, Boqueron, Cajas, Culebrina, Chico,
Guanajibo, Mayaguez, and Rincon.

The limits of the Loisa river are: On the east, the sierra of
Luquillo (situated near the northeast corner of the island); on the
south, the sierra of Cayey, and on the west, ramifications of the
latter. It rises in the northern slopes of the sierra of Cayey, and,
running in a northwest direction for the first half of its course
and turning to northeast in the second half, it arrives at Loisa,
a port on the northern coast, where it discharges its waters into the
Atlantic. During the first part of its course it is known by the name
of Cayagua.

The Sabana river has, to the east and south, the western and southern
limits of the preceding river, and on the west the Sierra Grande,
or De Barros, which is situated in the center of the general divide,
or watershed. It rises in the sierra of Cayey, and, with the name of
Pinones river, it flows northwest, passing through Aibonito, Toa Alta,
Toa Baja, and Dorado, where it discharges into the Atlantic to the
west of the preceding river.

The Manati river is bounded on the cast and south by the Sierra Grande
and on the west by the Siales ridge. It rises in the Sierra Grande,
and parallel with the preceding river, it flows through Siales and
Manati, to the north of which latter town it empties into the Atlantic.

The Arecibo river is bounded on the east by the Siales mountain
ridge, on the south by the western extremity of the Sierra Grande,
and on the west by the Lares ridge. It rises in the general divide,
near Adjuntas, and flows north through the town of Arecibo to the
Atlantic, shortly before emptying into which it receives the Tanama
river from the left, which proceeds from the Lares Mountains.

The Culebrina river is bounded on the south and east by the
Lares mountain ridge, and on the north by small hills of little
interest. From the Lares Mountains it flows from east to west and
empties on the west coast north of San Francisco de la Aguada, in
the center of the bay formed between Point Penas Blancas and Point
San Francisco.

The Anasco river is formed by the Lares mountain ridge. It rises in
the eastern extremity of the mountains called Tetas de Cerro Gordo,
flowing first northwest and then west, through the town of its name
and thence to the sea.

The Guanajivo river has to its north the ramifications of the Lares
ridge, to the east the Tetas de Cerro Gordo Mountains, and on the
south Torre Hill. In the interior of its basin is the mountain called
Cerro Montuoso, which separates its waters from those of its affluent
from the right, the Rosaria river. It rises in the general divide,
flowing from east to west to Nuestra Senora de Montserrat, where it
receives the affluent mentioned, the two together then emptying south
of Port Mayaguez.

The Coamo river is bounded on the west and north by the Sierra Grande,
and on the west by the Coamo ridge. It rises in the former of these
sierras, and flowing from north to south it empties east of Coamo
Point, after having watered the town of its name.

The Salinas river is bounded on the west by the Coamo ridge, on the
north by the general divide, and on the east by the Cayey ridge. It
rises in the southern slopes of the Sierra Grande and flowing from
north to south through Salinas de Coamo, empties into the sea.

Coasts, Harbors, Bays, and Coves.--The northern coast extends in an
almost straight line from east to west, and is high and rugged. The
only harbors it has are the following: San Juan de Porto Rico,
surrounded by mangrove swamps and protected by the Cabras and
the Cabritas islands and some very dangerous banks; the anchoring
ground of Arecibo, somewhat unprotected; and the coves of Cangrejos
and Condado. During the months of November, December, and January,
when the wind blows with violence from the east and northeast, the
anchorage is dangerous in all the bays and harbors of this coast,
except in the port of San Juan. Vessels are often obliged to put to
sea on the menacing aspect of the heavens at this season, to avoid
being driven on shore by the heavy squalls and the rolling waves
of a boisterous sea, which propel them to destruction. During the
remaining months the ports on this coast are safe and commodious,
unless when visited by a hurricane, against whose fury no port can
offer a shelter, nor any vessel be secure. The excellent port of San
Juan is perfectly sheltered from the effects of the north wind. The
hill, upon which the town of that name and the fortifications which
defend it are built, protects the vessels anchored in the harbor. The
entrance of this port is narrow, and requires a pilot; for the canal
which leads to the anchorage, although deep enough for vessels of any
dimensions, is very narrow, which exposes them to run aground. This
port is several miles in extent, and has the advantage of having deep
canals to the east, among a wood of mangrove trees, where vessels
are perfectly secure during the hurricane months. Vessels of 250 tons
can at present unload and take in their cargoes at the wharf. Harbor
improvements have been recently made here.

On the northwest and west are the coves of Aguadilla, the town of
this name being some 4 kilometers inland. There are the small coves
of Rincon, Anasco, and Mayaguez, the latter being protected and of
sufficient depth to anchor vessels of moderate draft; the harbor of
Real de Cabo Rojo, nearly round, and entered by a narrow channel;
and the cove of Boqueron. The spacious bay of Aguadilla is formed by
Cape Borrigua and Cape San Francisco. When the north-northwest and
southwest winds prevail it is not a safe anchorage for ships. A heavy
surf rolling on the shore obliges vessels to seek safety by putting
to sea on the appearance of a north wind. Mayaguez is also an open
roadstead formed by two projecting capes. It has good anchorage
for vessels of a large size and is well sheltered from the north
winds. The port of Cabo Rojo has also good anchorage. It is situated
S. one-fourth N. of the point of Guanajico, at a distance of 5 1/2
miles. Its shape is nearly circular, and it extends from east to west
3 to 4 miles. At the entrance it has 3 fathoms of water, and 16 feet
in the middle of the harbor. The entrance is a narrow canal.

The south coast abounds in bays and harbors, but is covered with
mangroves and reefs, the only harbor where vessels of regular draft can
enter being Guanica and Ponce. The former of these is the westernmost
harbor on the southern coast, being at the same time the best, though
the least visited, owing to the swamps and low tracts difficult to
cross leading from it to the interior. The nearest towns, San German,
Sabana Grande, and Yauco, carry on a small trade through this port.

In the port of Guanica, vessels drawing 21 feet of water may enter with
perfect safety. Its entrance is about 100 yards wide, and it forms a
spacious basin, completely landlocked. The vessels may anchor close to
the shore. It has, in the whole extent, from 6 1/2 to 3 fathoms, the
latter depth being formed in the exterior of the port. The entrance is
commanded by two small hills on either side, which if mounted with a
few pieces of artillery would defy a squadron to force it. This port
would be of immense advantage in time of war. The national vessels
and coasters would thus have a secure retreat from an enemy's cruiser
on the south coast. There are no wharves, but vessels could disembark
troops by running alongside the land and running out a plank. Coamo
Cove and Aguirre and Guayama are also harbors. The port of Jovos,
near Guayama, is a haven of considerable importance. It is a large
and healthy place, and the most Spanish of any city on the island
after San Juan. There are good roads to the capital. Vessels of the
largest kind may anchor and ride in safety from the winds, and the
whole British navy would find room in its spacious bosom. It has 4
fathoms of water in the shallowest part of the entrance. However,
it is difficult to enter this port from June to November, as the sea
breaks with violence at the entrance, on account of the southerly winds
which reign at that season. It has every convenience of situation and
locality for forming docks for the repair of shipping. The large bay
of Anasco, on the south coast, affords anchorage to vessels of all
sizes. It is also safe from the north winds. Although on the eastern
coast there are many places for vessels to anchor, yet none of them
are exempt from danger during the north winds except Fajardo, where a
safe anchorage is to be found to leeward of two little islands close
to the bay, where vessels are completely sheltered.

The island of Vieques has also several commodious ports and harbors,
where vessels of the largest size may ride at anchor.

On the east coast is Cape Cabeza de San Juan, Points Lima, Candeleros,
and Naranjo, and Cape Mala Pascua; on the south coast, Point Viento,
Tigueras, Corchones, Arenas, Fama or Maria, Cucharas, Guayanilla,
Guanica, and Morillos de Cabo Rojo; on the west coast, points San
Francisco, Cadena, Guanijito, Guaniquilla, and Palo Seco.

Highways.--There are few roads or ways of communication which
are worthy of mention, with the exception of the broad pike which
starts from the capital and runs along the coast, passing through the
following towns: Aguadilla, Bayamon, Cabo Rojo, Ilumacao, Juana Diaz,
Mayaguez, Ponce, and San German. It has no bridges; is good in dry
weather, but in the rainy season is impassible for wagons and even
at times for horsemen.

For interior communication there are only a few local roads or
paths. They are usually 2 yards in width, made by the various owners,
and can not be well traveled in rainy weather. They are more properly
horse and mule trails, and oblige people to go in single file. In
late years much has been attempted to improve the highways connecting
the principal cities, and more has been accomplished than in Spanish
colonies. There is a good made road connecting Ponce on the southern
coast with San Juan the capital. Other good roads also extend for a
short distance along the north coast and along the south coast. The
road from Guayama is also said to be a passably good one.

There are in the island about 150 miles of excellent road, and this
is all that receives any attention, transportation being effected
elsewhere on horse back. In the construction of a road level foundation
is sought, and on this is put a heavy layer of crushed rock and brick,
which, after having been well packed and rounded, is covered with
a layer of earth. This is well packed also, and upon the whole is
spread a layer of ground limestone, which is pressed and rolled until
it forms almost a glossy surface. This makes an excellent road here
where the climate is such that it does not affect it, and when there
is no heavy traffic, hut these conditions being changed, the road,
it is thought, would not stand so well.

From Palo Seco, situated about a mile and a half from the capital,
on the opposite side of the bay, a carriage road, perfectly level,
has been constructed for a distance of 22 leagues to the town of
Aguadilla on the west coast, passing through the towns of Vegabaja,
Manati, Arecibo, Hatillo, Camuy, and Isabella. This road has been
carried for several leagues over swampy lands, which are intersected
by deep drains to carry off the water.

The road from Aguadilla to Mayaguez is in some parts very good,
in other parts only fair. From Aguadilla to Aguada, a distance of a
league, the road is excellent and level. From thence to Mayaguez,
through the village of Rincon and the town of Anasco, the road is
generally good, but on the seashore it is sometimes interrupted by
shelving rocks. Across the valley of Anasco the road is carried
through a boggy tract, with bridges over several deep creeks of
fresh water. From thence to the large commercial town of Mayaguez
the road is uneven and requires some improvement. But the roads from
Mayaguez and Ponce to their respective ports on the seashore can not
be surpassed by any in Europe. They are made in a most substantial
manner, and their convex form is well adapted to preserve them from
the destruction caused by the heavy rains of the climate. These
roads have been made over tracts of swampy ground to the seacoast,
but with little and timely repair they will last forever.

A road, which may be called a carriage road, has been made from Ponce
to the village of Adjuntas, situated 5 leagues in the interior of the
mountains. The road along the coast, from Ponce to Guayama, is fairly
good; from thence to Patillas there is an excellent carriage road for
a distance of 3 leagues; from the latter place to the coast is a high
road well constructed. From Patillas to Fajardo, on the eastern coast,
passing through the towns of Maimavo, Yubacao, Ilumacao, and Naguabo,
the roads are not calculated for wheel vehicles, in consequence of
being obliged to ascend and descend several steep hills. That which
crosses the mountain of Mala Pascua, dividing the north and east
coasts, is a good and solid road, upon which a person on horseback
may travel with great ease and safety. The road crossing the valley
of Yubacao, which consists of a soft and humid soil, requires more
attention than that crossing the mountain of Mala Pascua, which has
a fine, sandy soil.

From Fajardo to the capital, through the towns of Luquillo, Loisa, and
Rio Piedras, the road is tolerably good for persons on horseback as far
as Rio Piedras, and from thence to the city of San Juan, a distance of
2 leagues, is an excellent carriage road, made by the order and under
the inspection of the Captain-General, part of it through a mangrove
swamp. Over the river Loisa is a handsome wooden bridge, and on the
road near Rio Piedras is a handsome stone one over a deep rivulet.

One of the best roads in the island extends from the town of Papino,
situated in the mountains, to the town of Aguadilla on the coast,
distant 5 1/2 leagues, through the village of La Moca; in the distance
of 3 leagues from the latter place, it is crossed by 10 deep mountain
rivulets, formerly impassable, but over which solid bridges have now
been built, with side railings. In the mountainous district within
the circumference of a few leagues no less than 47 bridges have been
built to facilitate the communication between one place and the other.

The following are the roads of 6 meters width, 4 1/2 in center of
pounded stone. They have iron bridges and are in good shape for travel
all the year.

(1) San Juan to the Shore near Ponce.--From San Juan to Ponce the
central road is exactly 134 kilometers. Distances along the line are:
Rio Piedras, 11 Caguas, 25; to Cayei, 21; Aybonito, 20; Coamo, 18;
Juana Diaz, 20; to Ponce, 13; and to the shore, 3. Exact.

(2) San Juan to Bayamon.--By ferry fifteen minutes to Catano, and
from there by road to Bayamon 10 kilometers. This passes alongside
the railway.

(3) Rio Piedras to Mameyes, 36 kilometers; from Rio Piedras to
Carolina, 12; to Rio Grande, 19; to Mameyes, 5.

(4) Cayei to Arroyo, 35 kilometers; from Cayei to Guayama, 25; to
Arroyo, 8; from San Juan to Arroyo, via Cayei, is 95 kilometers.

(5 Ponce to Adjuntas, 32 kilometers.

(6) San German to Anasco, 33 kilometers; from San German to Mayaguez,
21 kilometers; Mayaguez to Anasco, 12; Mayaguez to Mormigueros, 11;
Mayaguez to Cabo Eojo, 18; Mayaguez to Las Marias, 23; Mayaguez to
Maricao, 35; Hor- migueras to San German, 14. Near Mayaguez the roads
are best. There are good roads in all directions.

(7) Aguadilla to San Sebastian, 18.

(8) Arecibo to Utuado, 33.

Highways of first class in the island, 335 kilometers.

Along these roads are, at a distance of 8 to 10 kilometers, a fort,
stone, and brick barracks, or large buildings, where the Spanish
troops stop and rest when on the march.

Railroads.--In 1878 a report was presented to the minister of the
colonies on a study made by the engineer and head of public works of
the island in view of constructing a railroad which should start from
the capital and, passing through all the chief towns and through the
whole island, return to the point of departure.

Of this railroad the following parts have been completed: San Juan,
along the coast through Rio Piedras, Bayamon, Dorado, Arecibo, and
Hatillo, to Camuy; Aguadilla, through Aguado, Rincon, Anasco, and
Mayaguez, to Hornigueros. A branch of this railroad from Anasco,
through San Sebastian, to Lares. Ponce, through Guayanilla, to
Yauco. This latter railroad follows the southern coast line and
is followed by a wagon road throughout its course. In one place
the railroad and road run within a few hundred yards of the coast
line. According to the Statesman's Year Book for 1898 there are
in operation 137 miles of railroad, besides over 170 miles under
construction.

All the railroads are single track, and the gauge is 1 meter 20
centimeters, or 3 feet 11 1/4 inches.

The following are the railways of 1-meter gauge:

(1) San Juan to Rio Piedras, 11 kilometers. (2) Catano to Bayamon,
10 kilometers. (3) Anasco to San Sebastian and Lares, 35 kilometers.

Total of three lines, 56 kilometers.

The lines are all in good shape; have plenty of engines and cars;
speed, 20 kilometers per hour; use coal for fuel imported from the
United States; supply usually large, may be small now; hard coal;
fine stations; plenty of water, and everything in shape for business.

Telegraphs.--The capital communicates with the principal towns of the
coast and interior by means of a well-connected telegraph system. There
are in all some 470 miles of telegraph.

Telephones.--The British Consular Report says that the telephone system
of San Juan, Ponce, and Mayaguez have recently been contracted for
by local syndicates. In Ponce a United States company obtained the
contract for the material. There are 100 stations already connected,
and it is expected that 200 more will be in operation shortly.

Administration.--From an administrative standpoint, Porto Rico is
not considered as a colony, but as a province of Spain, assimilated
to the remaining provinces. The Governor-General, representing the
monarchy, is at the same time Captain-General of the armed forces. In
each chief town resides a military commander, and each town has its
alcalde, or mayor, appointed by the central power. The provincial
deputation is elected by popular suffrage under the same conditions as
in Spain. The regular peace garrison is composed of about 3,000 men,
and the annual budget amounts to some 20,000,000 pesos.

Education.--In 1887 only one-seventh of the population could read and
write, but of late years progress in public instruction has been rapid.

Agriculture, Industry, and Commerce.--In 1878 there arrived in the
harbors of the island 1,591 vessels of different nationalities and
1,534 departed. The value of products imported was 14,787,551 pesos,
and that of articles exported was 13,070,020 pesos. The following
are the relative percentages of values:


            Flags.          Relation.
                            Per Cent.
            Spanish          49.91
            American         13.47
            English          21.43
            Various Nations  15.19
                            =======
            Total           100.00


Navigation is very active, but the part the inhabitants take in
the commercial fleet is small. The Porto Ricans are not seagoing
people. The eastern part of the island offers less advantage to
commerce than the western, being to the windward and affording less
shelter to vessels.

Porto Rico has more than seventy towns and cities, of which Ponce is
the most important. Ponce has 22,000 inhabitants, with a jurisdiction
numbering 47,000. It is situated on the south coast of the island,
on a plain, about 2 miles from the seaboard. It is the chief town of
the judicial district of its name, and is 70 miles from San Juan. It is
regularly built, the central part almost exclusively of brick houses,
and the suburbs of wood. It is the residence of the military commander,
and the seat of an official chamber of commerce. There is an appellate
criminal court, besides other courts; 2 churches, one Protestant,
said to be the only one in the Spanish West, Indies; 2 hospitals
besides the military hospital, a home of refuge for old and poor,
2 cemeteries, 3 asylums, several casinos, 3 theaters, a market, a
municipal public library, 3 first-class hotels, 3 barracks, a park,
gas works, a perfectly equipped fire department, a bank, thermal
and natural baths, etc. Commercially, Ponce is the second city of
importance on the island. A fine road leads to the port (Playa),
where all the import and export trade is transacted. Playa has about
5,000 inhabitants, and here are situated the custom house, the office
of the captain of the port, and all the consular offices. The port
is spacious and will hold vessels of 25 feet draft. The climate,
on account of the sea breezes during the day and land breezes at
night, is not oppressive, but very hot and dry; and, as water for
all purposes, including the fire department, is amply supplied by
an aqueduct 4,442 yards long, it is said that the city of Ponce is
perhaps the healthiest place in the whole island. There is a stage
coach to San Juan, Mayaguez, Guayama, etc. There is a railroad to
Yauco, a post office, and a telegraph station.

It is believed that Ponce was founded in 1600; it was given the title
of villa in 1848, and in 1877 that of city. Of its 34 streets the best
are Mayor, Salud, Villa, Vives, Marina, and Comercio. The best squares
are Principal and Las Delicias, which are separated by the church of
Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe. The church, as old as the town itself,
began to be reconstructed in 1838 and was finished in 1847. It is
86 yards long by 43 broad, and has two steeples, rich altars, and
fine ornaments.

The theater is called the Pearl, and it deserves this name, for it is
the finest on the island. It has a sculptured porch, on the Byzantine
order, with very graceful columns. It is mostly built of iron and
marble and cost over 70,000 pesos. It is 52 yards deep by 29 wide. The
inside is beautiful, the boxes and seats roomy and nicely decorated. It
may, by a mechanical arrangement, be converted into a dancing hall.

About 1 1/8 miles northeast of the town are the Quintana thermal
baths, in a building surrounded by pretty gardens. They are visited
by sufferers from rheumatism and various other diseases.

San Juan is a perfect specimen of a walled town, with portcullis, moat,
gates, and battlements. The wall surrounding this town is defended
by several batteries. Facing the harbor are those of San Fernando,
Santa Catalina, and Santa Toribio. Looking toward the land side is
Fort Abanico, and toward the ocean the batteries of San Antonio,
San Jose, and Santa Teresa, and Fort Princesa. The land part has two
ditches, or cuts, which are easy to inundate. The fort and bridge of
San Antonio that of San Geronimo, and the Escambron battery situated
on a tongue of land which enters the sea. Built over two hundred and
fifty years ago, the city is still in good condition and repair. The
walls are picturesque, and represent a stupendous work and cost in
themselves. Inside the walls the city is laid off in regular squares,
six parallel streets running in the direction of the length of the
island and seven at right angles.

The peninsula on which San Juan is situated is connected with the
mainland by three bridges. The oldest, that of San Antonio, carries the
highway across the shallow San Antonio Channel. It is a stone-arched
bridge about 350 yards long including the approaches. By the side
of this bridge is one for the railroad and one for the tramway which
follows the main military highway to Rio Piedras.

Among the buildings the following are notable: The palace of the
Captain-General, the palace of the intendencia, the town hall,
military hospital, jail, Ballaja barracks, theater, custom house,
cathedral, Episcopal palace, and seminary. There is no university
or provincial institute of second grade instruction, and only one
college, which is under the direction of Jesuit priests. The houses
are closely and compactly built of brick, usually of two stories,
stuccoed on the outside and painted in a variety of colors. The upper
floors are occupied by the more respectable people, while the ground
floors, almost without exception, are given up to the negroes and the
poorer class, who crowd one upon another in the most appalling manner.

The population within the walls is estimated at 20,000 and most of it
lives on the ground floor. In one small room, with a flimsy partition,
a whole family will reside. The ground floor of the whole town reeks
with filth, and conditions are most unsanitary. In a tropical country,
where disease readily prevails, the consequences of such herding may
be easily inferred. There is no running water in the town. The entire
population depend upon rain water, caught upon the flat roofs of the
buildings and conducted to the cistern, which occupies the greater part
of the inner court-yard that is an essential part of Spanish houses
the world over, but that here, on account of the crowded conditions,
is very small. There is no sewerage, except for surface water and
sinks, while vaults are in every house and occupy whatever remaining
space there may be in the patios not taken up by the cisterns. The
risk of contaminating the water is very great, and in dry seasons
the supply is entirely exhausted. Epidemics are frequent, and the
town is alive with vermin, fleas, cockroaches, mosquitoes, and dogs.

The streets are wider than in the older part of Havana, and will
admit two carriages abreast. The sidewalks are narrow, and in places
will accommodate but one person. The pavements are of a composition
manufactured in England from slag, pleasant and even, and durable
when no heavy strain is brought to bear upon them, but easily broken,
and unfit for heavy traffic. The streets are swept once a day by hand,
and, strange to say, are kept very clean.

From its topographical situation the town should be healthy, but it
is not. The soil under the city is clay mixed with lime, so hard as
to be almost like rock. It is consequently impervious to water and
furnishes a good natural drainage.

The trade wind blows strong and fresh, and through the harbor runs
a stream of sea water at a speed of not less than three miles an
hour. With these conditions no contagious diseases, if properly taken
care of, could exist; without them the place would be a veritable
plague spot.

Besides the town within the walls there are small portions just
outside, called the Marina and Puerta de Tierra, containing two or
three thousand inhabitants each. There are also two suburbs, one,
San Turce, approached by the only road leading out of the city, and
the other, Catano, across the bay, reached by ferry. The Marina and
the two suburbs are situated on sandy points or spits, and the latter
are surrounded by mangrove swamps.

The entire population of the city and suburbs, according to the census
of 1887, was 27,000. It is now (1896) estimated at 30,000. One-half
of the population consists of negroes and mixed races.

There is but little manufacturing, and it is of small importance. The
Standard Oil Company has a small refinery across the bay, in which
crude petroleum brought from the United States is refined. Matches are
made, some brooms, a little soap, and a cheap class of trunks. There
are also ice, gas, and electric light works.


CHAPTER XXVI

The Ladrones.

The Island of Guam a Coaling Station of the United States--Discovery,
Size and Products of the Islands.

When the Philippine expedition on its way to Manila incidentally ran
up the Stars and Stripes over the Island of Guam, there was perhaps no
thought of the island becoming a permanent part of our domain. However,
the fortunes of war are such that the island is likely to become ours
permanently as a coaling station in the Pacific.

Magellan named these islands the Ladrones from the Latin word
"latro," meaning a robber, because of the thievish propensities of
the natives. According to Magellan's reports, the native people of
these islands had reduced stealing to a science of such exactness that
the utmost vigilance could not prevail against their operations. The
group was named the Mariana Islands by the Jesuits, who settled in
them in 1667.

The Ladrone group consists of twenty islands, of which five are
inhabited. The group extends forty-five miles from north to south,
and is located between 13 deg. and 21 deg. north latitude, and between
144 deg. and 146 deg. east longitude. The principal islands are Guam,
Rota and Linian. They were discovered by Magellan in 1521, and have
belonged to Spain ever since. Their population is 11,000. The soil
is fertile and densely wooded. The climate is temperate.

Guam, the southernly and principal island, is 100 miles in
circumference, and has a population of 8,100, of which 1,400 are
Europeans. Its central part is mountainous, and it has a small
volcano. The products are guacas, bananas, cocoa, oranges and
limes. The natives are noted as builders of the most rapidly sailing
canoes in the world.

With Guam as a part of the territory of the United States, we have a
direct line of possessions across the Pacific, in the order of Hawaii,
Guam and the Philippines; while in a northwesterly direction from
our Pacific coast we have the islands forming a part of Alaska. By
holding all these islands we will be prepared to control practically
the commerce of the Pacific, the future great commercial highway of
the world.



CHAPTER XXVII

The Official Title to Our New Possessions in the Indies.

Full Text of the Treaty of Peace with Spain Handed the President of
the United States as a Christmas Gift for the People, at the White
House, 1898--The Gathered Fruit of a Glorious and Wonderful Victory.

On an August midnight the good ship Peru, Major-General Otis with
his staff and General Hughes, and a thousand regular cavalry and "the
historian of the Philippines" aboard, approached within a few miles,
an immense mass of darkness. About where the mouth of Manila Bay
should be there was, deep in the east and at a considerable elevation,
a spark of white, and in a few seconds a red light, keener than stars,
and in half a minute there were the sharp flashes again, and we knew
that there were friends watching and waiting--that "our flag was still
there," that Admiral Dewey and General Merritt of the Navy and Army
of the United States had upheld the symbol of the sovereignty of the
Great Republic of North America, that the lights glowed down from the
massive rock of Corregidor, that through the shadows that fell on these
darksome waters the American squadron had entered into immortality
less than four months before, and that with the morning light we
should look upon the famous scene of triumphant Americanism. We had
been fifteen days out of the world, for there were only the southern
constellations to tell us, the southern cross so high and the north
star so low, and the dazzling scorpion with diamond claws touching the
central blue dome, to say how far down into the tropics we were, while
the clouds of flame rested on the serenities of the matchless sea; and
what had the great deep in its mysterious resplendence been whispering
along the enchanting shores of the islands of Asia--the true Indies,
Oriental or Occidental as might be--what had the wild waves that beat
against the volcanic coasts made known in the boats wafted by the
welcoming winds? We knew of the bloody days on the hills of Santiago,
and the fate of the fleet of Admiral Cervera, and there must be news of
other victories! Our ship turned away from the looming rock that sent
forth flashes as if to say all is well, in the universe that we in our
vast adventure had almost abandoned. And when the day dawned and the
green hills and blue mountains and the silvery waters were revealed
we turned to the left, where Dewey led his squadron to the right, and
there was the bay hundred and twenty knots in circumference. Yonder
were the white walls of Cavite, and further along domes and steeples,
masts and heavy lines of buildings, a wide spread city crouching on
a plain rising a few feet above the tides. It was Manila. Presently
a boat swept near, and what was that, a dozen words repeated here
and there--Merritt in possession of the city--of course, that was
what he was there for,--but who said "there was a declaration of
peace?" The strange statement was made. What--could it be that
Spain had surrendered? Surely the President would not stop pushing
things until he had gathered the fruits of victory? No, there was a
protocol, and that was a treaty in fact! France had been the medium of
negotiation. Spain had sued for peace, and terms were granted. Cuba
was surrendered. Porto Rico was ceded to us. The Spaniards claimed
that they had given up Manila after peace was settled, and they
must repossess it. But Merritt was ashore was he not, and going to
stay? Dewey had not given up anything, had he? Surely not! But there
was to be a conference, a meeting of joint commissioners held at Paris
to provide a treaty, that was to say the details--all the important
points were fixed irrevocably except the fate of the Philippines! At
this point the news of the morning gave out, all except the particulars
of the seige, the high claims of the Spaniards, the dissatisfaction
of the insurgents. It was some days before the realization of the
situation was perfected. The full terms of the protocol were not made
known at once. Spain gave up the West Indies and a Ladrone island,
and the United States was to hold the city, bay and harbor of Manila
pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace which should determine the
control, disposition and government of the Philippines. Certainly this
was the conclusive surrender of Spain! General Merritt was ordered to
Paris, and there represented the army of the United States, and its
faith and honor and glory. Our Peace Commissioners were Wm. R. Day,
Cushman K. Davis, William P. Frye, George Gray and Whitelaw Reid,
who started for Paris September 18. The Spanish Commissioners made a
long struggle, and protracted their unhappy task for more than two
months, using all arts of procrastination and persuasion, claiming
that the United States should pay the Cuban debt, and striving for
allowances of indemnity, yielding at last to the inevitable. The text
of the treaty is in seventeen articles as follows:

Article I.--Spain renounces all right of sovereignty over Cuba. Whereas
said isle when evacuated by Spain is to be occupied by the United
States, the United States, while the occupation continues, shall
take upon themselves and fulfill the obligations which, by the fact
of occupation, international law imposes on them for the protection
of life and property.

Article II.--Spain cedes to the United States the Island of Porto Rico
and the other islands now under her sovereignty in the West Indies
and the Isle of Guam in the archipelago of the Marianas or Ladrones.

Article III.--Spain cedes to the United States the archipelago known
as the Philippine Islands, which comprise the islands situated between
the following lines: A line which runs west to east near the twentieth
parallel of north latitude across the center of the navigable canal
of Bachi, from the 118th to the 127th degrees of longitude east of
Greenwich, from here to the width of the 127th degree of longitude
east to parallel 4 degrees 45 minutes of north latitude. From here
following the parallel of north latitude 4 degrees 45 minutes to its
intersection with the meridian of longitude 119 degrees 35 minutes
east from Greenwich. From here following the meridian of 119 degrees
35 minutes east to the parallel of latitude 7 degrees 40 minutes
north. From here following the parallel of 7 degrees 40 minutes north
to its intersection with 116 degrees longitude east. From here along
a straight line to the intersection of the tenth parallel of latitude
north with the 118th meridian east, and from here following the 118th
meridian to the point whence began this demarcation. The United States
shall pay to Spain the sum of $20,000,000 within three months after
the interchange of the ratifications of the present treaty.

Article IV.--The United States shall, during the term of ten years,
counting from the interchange of the ratifications of the treaty,
admit to the ports of the Philippine Islands Spanish ships and
merchandise under the same conditions as the ships and merchandise
of the United States.

Article V.--The United States, on the signing of the present treaty,
shall transport to Spain at their cost the Spanish soldiers whom the
American forces made prisoners of war when Manila was captured. The
arms of these soldiers shall be returned to them. Spain, on the
interchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, shall proceed
to evacuate the Philippine Islands, as also Guam, on conditions
similar to those agreed to by the commissions named to concert the
evacuation of Porto Rico and the other islands in the Western Antilles
according to the protocol of Aug. 12, 1898, which shall continue in
force until its terms have been completely complied with. The term
within which the evacuation of the Philippine Islands and Guam shall be
completed shall be fixed by both Governments. Spain shall retain the
flags and stands of colors of the warships not captured, small arms,
cannon of all calibers, with their carriages and accessories, powders,
munitions, cattle, material and effects of all kinds belonging to the
armies of the sea and land of Spain in the Philippines and Guam. The
pieces of heavy caliber which are not field artillery mounted in
fortifications and on the coasts shall remain in their places for
a period of six months from the interchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty, and the United States may during that period buy
from Spain said material if both Governments arrive at a satisfactory
agreement thereon.

Article VI.--Spain, on signing the present treaty, shall place at
liberty all prisoners of war and all those detained or imprisoned for
political offences in consequence of the insurrections in Cuba and
the Philippines and of the war with the United States. Reciprocally
the United States shall place at liberty all prisoners of war made
by the American forces, and shall negotiate for the liberty of all
Spanish prisoners in the power of the insurgents in Cuba and the
Philippines. The Government of the United States shall transport, at
their cost, to Spain, and the Government of Spain shall transport, at
its cost, to the United States, Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippines,
conformably to the situation of their respective dwellings, the
prisoners placed or to be placed at liberty in virtue of this article.

Article VII.--Spain and the United States mutually renounce by the
present treaty all claim to national or private indemnity, of whatever
kind, of one Government against the other, or of their subjects or
citizens against the other Government, which may have arisen from the
beginning of the last insurrection in Cuba, anterior to the interchange
of the ratifications of the present treaty, as also to all indemnity
as regards costs occasioned by the war. The United States shall judge
and settle the claims of its citizens against Spain which she renounces
in this article.

Article VIII.--In fulfilment of Articles I., II. and III. of this
treaty Spain renounces in Cuba and cedes in Porto Rico and the
other West Indian isles, in Guam and the Philippine archipelago,
all buildings, moles, barracks, fortresses, establishments, public
roads and other real property which by custom or right are of the
public domain, and as such belong to the crown of Spain. Nevertheless,
it is declared that this renouncement or cession, as the case may be,
referred to in the previous paragraph, in no way lessens the property
or rights which belong by custom or law to the peaceful possessor of
goods of all kinds in the provinces and cities, public or private
establishments, civil or ecclesiastical corporations or whatever
bodies have judicial personality to acquire and possess goods in the
above-mentioned, renounced or ceded territories, and those of private
individuals, whatever be their nationality.

The said renouncement or cession includes all those documents which
exclusively refer to said renounced or ceded sovereignty which exist
in the archives of the peninsula. When these documents existing in
said archives only in part refer to said sovereignty, copies of
said part shall be supplied, provided they be requested. Similar
rules are to be reciprocally observed in favor of Spain with respect
to the documents existing in the archives of the before-mentioned
islands. In the above-mentioned renunciation or cession are comprised
those rights of the crown of Spain and of its authorities over the
archives and official registers, as well administrative as judicial,
of said islands which refer to them and to the rights and properties
of their inhabitants. Said archives and registers must be carefully
preserved, and all individuals, without exception, shall have the
right to obtain, conformably to law, authorized copies of contracts,
wills and other documents which form part of notarial protocols or
which are kept in administrative and judicial archives, whether the
same be in Spain or in the islands above mentioned.

Article IX.--Spanish subjects, natives of the peninsula, dwelling
in the territory whose sovereignty Spain renounces or cedes in the
present treaty, may remain in said territory or leave it, maintaining
in one or the other case all their rights of property, including the
right to sell and dispose of said property or its produces; and,
moreover, they shall retain the right to exercise their industry,
business or profession, submitting themselves in this respect to the
laws which are applicable to other foreigners. In case they remain
in the territory they may preserve their Spanish nationality by
making in a registry office, within a year after the interchange of
the ratifications of this treaty, a declaration of their intention
to preserve said nationality. Failing this declaration they will be
considered as having renounced said nationality and as having adopted
that of the territory in which they may reside. The civil rights and
political status of the native inhabitants of the territories hereby
ceded to the United States shall be determined by Congress.

Article X.--The inhabitants of the territories whose sovereignty Spain
renounces or cedes shall have assured to them the free exercise of
their religion.

Article XI.--Spaniards residing in the territories whose sovereignty
Spain cedes or renounces shall be subject in civil and criminal
matters to the tribunals of the country in which they reside,
conformably with the common laws which regulate their competence,
being enabled to appear before them in the same manner and to employ
the same proceedings as the citizens of the country to which the
tribunal belongs must observe.

Article XII.--Judicial proceedings pending on the interchange of
the ratifications of this treaty in the territories over which Spain
renounces or cedes sovereignty shall be determined conformably with
the following rules: First, sentences pronounced in civil cases
between individuals or in criminal cases before the above-mentioned
date, and against which there is no appeal or annulment conformably
with the Spanish law, shall be considered as lasting, and shall be
executed in due form by competent authority in the territory within
which said sentences should be carried out. Second, civil actions
between individuals which on the aforementioned date have not been
decided shall continue their course before the tribunal in which the
lawsuit is proceeding or before that which shall replace it. Third,
criminal actions pending on the aforementioned date before the supreme
tribunal of Spain against citizens of territory which, according
to this treaty, will cease to be Spanish, shall continue under its
jurisdiction until definite sentence is pronounced, but once sentence
is decreed its execution shall be intrusted to competent authority
of the place where the action arose.

Article XIII.--Literary, artistic and industrial rights of property
acquired by Spaniards in Cuba, Porto Rico, the Philippines and other
territories ceded on the interchange of ratifications of this treaty
shall continue to be respected. Spanish scientific, literary and
artistic works which shall not be dangerous to public order in said
territories shall continue entering therein with freedom from all
customs duties for a period of ten years dating from the interchange
of the ratifications of this treaty.

Article XIV.--Spain may establish consular agents in the ports and
places of the territories whose renunciation or cession are the object
of this treaty.

Article XV.--The Government of either country shall concede for a term
of ten years to the merchant ships of the other the same treatment
as regards all port dues, including those of entry and departure,
lighthouse and tonnage dues, as it concedes to its own merchant ships
not employed in the coasting trade. This article may be repudiated
at any time by either Government giving previous notice thereof six
months beforehand.

Article XVI.--Be it understood that whatever obligation is accepted
under this treaty by the United States with respect to Cuba is limited
to the period their occupation of the island shall continue, but at
the end of said occupation they will advise the Government that may be
established in the island that it should accept the same obligations.

Article XVII.--The present treaty shall be ratified by the Queen Regent
of Spain and the President of the United States, in agreement and with
the approval of the Senate, and ratifications shall be exchanged in
Washington within a period of six months from this date or earlier
if possible.

The treaty of peace will he ratified by the Senate. It appears before
ratification, as was the case of the protocol, through the favor of
the French translations. The treaty fitly crowns the triumphs of the
war. The payment of the small indemnity of twenty million dollars
only covers at a reasonable estimate the public property of Spain,
in territory ceded to us, that was beyond the lines of the areas that
formally submitted to our arms.



CHAPTER XXVIII

Battles with the Filipinos before Manila.

The Aguinaldo War Upon the Americans--The Course of Events in
the Philippines Since the Fall of Manila--Origin of the Filipino
War--Aguinaldo's Insolent and Aggressive Acts, Including Treachery--His
Agent's Vanity and Duplicity in Washington--Insurgents Under
Aguinaldo Attack American Forces--Battle of Manila, February 4 and
5--Heroism of American Troops in Repelling the Insurgents--Aguinaldo's
Proclamations--Agoncillo's Flight to Canada--The Ratification of
the Treaty of Peace With Spain by the American Senate Followed
the Fighting--The Gallantry and Efficiency of the American
Volunteers--Another Glorious Chapter of Our War History.

When Manila fell, August 13th, the insurgents made demonstrations
of their purpose to insist upon the occupation of the city as part
of their business, and were so excited by the prohibition of the
indulgence of their passion for looting and revenge, that they fired
several volleys in the direction of the Americans. The way they were
prevented from executing their purposes is stated in the 10th chapter
of this volume,--"The Official History of the Conquest of Manila." The
Filipino forces were excluded from the city unless unarmed, and
Aguinaldo made various claims to high consideration, asserting that
the Spaniards could have escaped from the city if it had not been for
his army. He was, in his conversations before the destruction of the
Spanish fleet, and while he was on his way to Cavite, a professed
friend of the annexation of the Philippines to the United States,
and constantly a very voluble creature. The American Consul at Manila,
writing from Manila Bay, opposite to the city, May 12th, 1898, said:

"These natives are eager to be organized and led by United States
officers, and the members of their cabinet visited me and gave
assurance that all would swear allegiance to and cheerfully follow
our flag. They are brave, submissive, and cheaply provided for.

"To show their friendliness for me as our nation's only representative
in this part of the world, I last week went on shore at Cavite with
British Consul, in his launch, to show the destruction wrought by
our fleet. As soon as natives found me out, they crowded around
me, hats off, shouting "Viva los Americanos," thronged about me by
hundreds to shake either hand, even several at a time, men, women,
and children striving to get even a finger to shake. So I moved half
a mile, shaking continuously with both hands. The British Consul,
a smiling spectator, said he never before saw such an evidence of
friendship. Two thousand escorted me to the launch amid hurrahs of
good feeling for our nation, hence I must conclude."

Nov. 3, 1897, the American Consul at Hong Kong gave this account of
Mr. Agoncillo, who is an interesting person because of his celebrity
for insistent and vain letters written at Washington, and his flight
to Canada when the Filipinos attacked the Americans at Manila:

Mr. Wildman to Mr. Day.

No. 19.]

Hongkong, November 3, 1897.

Sir: Since my arrival in Hongkong I have been called upon several
times by Mr. F. Agoncillo, foreign agent and high commissioner, etc.,
of the new republic of the Philippines.

Mr. Agoncillo holds a commission, signed by the president, members
of cabinet, and general in chief of the republic of Philippines,
empowering him absolutely with power to conclude treaties with
foreign governments.

Mr. Agoncillo offers on behalf of his government alliance offensive and
defensive with the United States when the United States declares war
on Spain, which, in Mr. Agoncillo's judgment, will be very soon. In
the meantime he wishes the United States to send to some port in the
Philippines 20,000 stand of arms and 200,000 rounds of ammunition for
the use of his government, to be paid for on the recognition of his
government by the United States. He pledges as security two provinces
and the custom-house at Manila.

He is not particular about the price--is willing the United States
should make 25 per cent or 30 per cent profit.

He is a very earnest and attentive diplomat and a great admirer of
the United States.

On his last visit he surprised me with the information that he had
written his government that he had hopes of inducing the United States
to supply the much-needed guns, etc.

In case Senor Agoncillo's dispatch should fall into the hands of an
unfriendly power and find its way into the newspapers, I have thought
it wise to apprise the State Department of the nature of the high
commissioner's proposals.

Senor Agoncillo informs me by late mail that he will proceed at once
to Washington to conclude the proposed treaty, if I advise.

I shall not advise said step until so instructed by the State
Department.

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

_Rounseville Wildman_, Consul.

The offensive impertinence of Mr. Agoncillo is quite conspicuous
in this consular communication. On the money question he was very
peculiar.

Mr. Wildman was instructed by Assistant Secretary Cridler to "briefly
advise Mr. Agoncillo" that the United States "does not negotiate such
treaties," and that he "should not encourage any advances on the part
of Mr. Agoncillo." Mr. Wildman busied himself with sending tenders
of allegiance to the United States from influential families of Manila.

Mr. Williams cabled the following:

Manila, September 5, 1898, (Received 10.20 a.m.)

To-day delegation from 4,000 Viscayan soldiers, also representing
southern business interests, came to me pledging loyalty to
annexation. Several insurgent leaders, likewise. Spain can not control;
if we evacuate, anarchy rules. _Williams._

Mr. Wildman, writing from Hongkong, July 18th, said:

"I believe I know the sentiments of the political leaders and of the
moneyed men among the insurgents, and, in spite of all statements to
the contrary, I know that they are fighting for annexation to the
United States first, and for independence secondly, if the United
States decides to decline the sovereignty of the islands. In fact I
have had the most prominent leaders call on me and say they would not
raise one finger unless I could assure them that the United States
intended to give them United States citizenship if they wished it."

August 9th, Mr. Wildman gave the following character sketch of
Aguinaldo, writing of the position Consul Williams, of Manila, and
himself took toward the insurgents, says:

"I tried to briefly outline the position Consul Williams and myself
have taken toward the insurgents. We believed that they were a
necessary evil, and that if Aguinaldo was placed in command, and was
acceptable to the insurgents as their leader, that Admiral Dewey or
General Merritt would have some one whom they could hold responsible
for any excesses. The other alternative was to allow the entire islands
to be overrun by small bands bent only on revenge and looting. We
considered that Aguinaldo had more qualifications for leadership
than any of his rivals. We made him no pledges and extracted from
him but two, viz., to obey unquestioning the commander of the United
States forces in the Philippine Islands, and to conduct his warfare
on civilized lines. He was in and out of the consulate for nearly
a month, and I believe I have taken his measure and that I acquired
some influence with him. I have striven to retain his influence and
have used it in conjunction with and with the full knowledge of both
Admiral Dewey and Consul Williams.

"Aguinaldo has written me by every opportunity, and I believe that he
has been frank with me regarding both his actions and his motives. I
do not doubt but that he would like to be President of the Philippine
Republic, and there may be a small coterie of his native advisers who
entertain a like ambition, but I am perfectly certain that the great
majority of his followers, and all the wealthy educated Filipinos
have but the one desire--to become citizens of the United States
of America. As for the mass of uneducated natives, they would be
content under any rule save that of the friars. My correspondence with
Aguinaldo has been strictly of a personal nature, and I have missed no
opportunity to remind him of his ante-bellum promises. His letters are
childish, and he is far more interested in the kind of cane he will
carry or the breastplate he will wear than in the figure he will make
in history. The demands that he and his junta here have made upon my
time is excessive and most tiresome. He is a man of petty moods, and
I have repeatedly had letters from Consul Williams requesting me to
write to Aguinaldo a friendly letter congratulating him on his success,
and reminding him of his obligations. I do not care to quote Admiral
Dewey, as his letters are all of a strictly personal nature, but I
feel perfectly free to refer you to him as to my attitude and actions."

Mr. Pratt, the United States Consul General at Singapore, took in
hand Aguinaldo--this was April 28--and got him off to Hong Kong,
having had this correspondence by cable with Admiral Dewey:

Aguinaldo, insurgent leader, here. Will come Hongkong arrange
with Commodore for general co-operation insurgents Manila if
desired. Telegraph. _Pratt._

The Commodore's reply reading thus:

Tell Aguinaldo come soon as possible. _Dewey_.

Mr. Pratt says of this:

I received it late that night, and at once communicated to General
Aguinaldo, who, with his aid-de-camp and private secretary, all under
assumed names, I succeeded in getting off by the British steamer
Malacca, which left here on Tuesday, the 26th.

And Mr. Pratt made the following report to the Secretary of State of
the United States:

Consulate-General of the United States,
Singapore, April 30, 1898.


Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 212, of the 28th instant, I have
the honor to report that in the second and last interview I had with
Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo on the eve of his departure for Hongkong, I
enjoined upon him the necessity, under Commodore Dewey's direction,
of exerting absolute control over his forces in the Philippines, as no
excesses on their part would be tolerated by the American Government,
the President having declared that the present hostilities with
Spain were to be carried on in strict accord with modern principles
of civilized warfare.

To this General Aguinaldo fully assented, assuring me that he intended
and was perfectly able, once on the field, to hold his followers,
the insurgents, in check and lead them as our commander should direct.

The general further stated that he hoped the United States would
assume protection of the Philippines for at least long enough to
allow the inhabitants to establish a government of their own, in the
organization of which he would desire American advice and assistance.

These questions I told him I had no authority to discuss.

I have, etc.,

_E. Spencer Pratt_,
United States Consul-General.

June 16th Secretary Day cabled Consul Pratt: "Avoid unauthorized
negotiations with the Philippine insurgents," and the Secretary wrote
the consul on the same day:

"The Department observes that you informed General Aguinaldo that you
had no authority to speak for the United States; and, in the absence
of the fuller report which you promise, it is assumed that you did not
attempt to commit this Government to any alliance with the Philippine
insurgents. To obtain the unconditional personal assistance of General
Aguinaldo in the expedition to Manila was proper, if in so doing he
was not induced to form hopes which it might not he practicable to
gratify. This Government has known the Philippine insurgents only as
discontented and rebellious subjects of Spain, and is not acquainted
with their purposes. While their contest with that power has been
a matter of public notoriety, they have neither asked nor received
from this Government any recognition. The United States, in entering
upon the occupation of the islands, as the result of its military
operations in that quarter, will do so in the exercise of the rights
which the state of war confers, and will expect from the inhabitants,
without regard to their former attitude toward the Spanish Government,
that obedience which will be lawfully due from them.

"If, in the course of your conferences with General Aguinaldo, you
acted upon the assumption that this Government would co-operate with
him for the furtherance of any plan of his own, or that, in accepting
his co-operation, it would consider itself pledged to recognize any
political claims which he may put forward, your action was unauthorized
and can not be approved.

Respectfully yours,

_William E. Day_.

The following letter is a valuable link in the chain of the story of
the Philippines:

Hongkong, August 4, 1898.

Sir: By request I have the honor to confirm the following telegram
sent you on the 2d instant:

Cortes family, representing wealthy educated families Manila, implore
you through Consul-General Wildman, in name humanity and Christianity,
not to desert them, and aid to obtain annexation Philippines to
America. Please see the President.

I may add in explanation of this telegram that there is a large
colony of wealthy Filipinos who have been driven out of Manila, and
the bulk of whose fortunes have been confiscated, resident here. They
are people of education as well as wealth, and they are intensely loyal
to the United States. The Cortes family are particularly so, and they
have contributed money liberally to aid Aguinaldo on the understanding
that he was fighting for annexation of the Philippines to the United
States. Naturally I sympathize with them in their desire to become a
part of the United States, and have advised them that you would give
their cablegram your kindly consideration.

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

_Rounsevelle Wildman_,
Consul-General.

Hon. Marcus Hanna,
United States Senate, Washington.

Mr. Andre, the Belgian Consul at Manila, an important man, wrote the
American Commission in Paris, that "everybody in the Philippines, even
Spanish merchants," begged the Americans for protection, and added:

"The Indians do not desire independence. They know that they are not
strong enough. They trust the United States, and they know that they
will be treated risditly. The present rebellion only represents a
half per cent, of the inhabitants, and it would not be right to oblige
6,000,000 inhabitants to submit to 30,000 rebels. Luzon is only partly
held by them, and it is not to be expected that a civilized nation
will make them present with the rest of the island, which is hostile
to the Tagals of Luzon. The Spanish officers refuse to fight for the
sake of the priests, and if the Spanish Government should retain the
Philippines their soldiers will all fall prisoners in the hands of
the Indians in the same way as they did already, and this is because
the army is sick of war without result, and only to put the country
at the mercy of the rapacious empleados and luxurious monks.

"The monks know that they are no more wanted in the Philippines,
and they asked me to help them go away as soon as possible, and it
is principally for them that I asked for the transports to the United
States Government, and to send them to Hongkong. The Indians will be
delighted to see them go, and will be grateful to the United States.

"If some chiefs of the rebellion will be a little disappointed in
their personal pride, they will be convinced that it is better for
them to submit in any case, for most of these chiefs prefer American
authority."

Aguinaldo became swollen with the conceit of greatness, and flattered
to believe he had a commanding destiny, he took on airs of extravagant
consequence in his correspondence with General Anderson, who commanded
the first expedition of the United States troops to the Philippines,
and dared to assume to have authority as to the disembarkation of the
soldiers of the United States. July 24th Aguinaldo wrote to Anderson:

"I came from Hongkong to prevent my countrymen from making common
cause with the Spanish against the North Americans, pledging before
my word to Admiral Dewey to not give place [to allow] to any internal
discord, because, [being] a judge of their desires, I had the strong
conviction I could succeed in both objects."

After this false and foolish presumption, he proceeded in a pompous
way to observe that "without the destruction of the Spanish squadron
the Philippine revolution would not have advanced so rapidly." He
claimed, in a letter dated August 1st to Consul Williams, that if he
did not assert himself as he was doing he would be held by his people
to be a traitor. His point at Singapore was that he could wield his
people at his pleasure. His observation was:

"I have done what they desire, establishing a government in order
that nothing important may be done without consulting fully their
sovereign will, not only because it was my duty, but also because
acting in any other manner they would fail to recognize me as the
interpreter of their aspirations and would punish me as a traitor,
replacing me by another more careful of his own honor and dignity."

On the day after the storming of Manila, Aguinaldo wrote to Anderson:

"My troops, who have been for so long besieging Manila, have always
been promised that they could appear in it, as you know and can not
deny, and for this reason and on account of the many sacrifices made of
money and lives, I do not consider it prudent to issue orders to the
contrary, as they might be disobeyed against my authority. Besides,
I hope that you will allow the troops to enter, because we have given
proofs many times of our friendship."

On the day of occupancy of Manila Aguinaldo wrote Anderson:

"I received a telegram. My interpreter is in Cavite; in consequence
of this I have not answered till now. My troops are forced by yours,
by means of threats of violence, to retire from positions taken. It
is necessary, to avoid conflicts, which I should lament, that you
order your troops that they avoid difficulty with mine, as until now
they have conducted themselves as brothers to take Manila."

General Merritt did not tolerate any folly about "joint occupation,"
and sharply demanded the insurgents should restore the city the water
supply from the mountain stream that is diverted from the Pasig to
the city, and Aguinaldo claimed credit on the water question in these
terms of prevarication and presumption.

"Since I have permitted the use of water before the formal declaration
of the treaty, you can easily see that I am disposed to sacrifice to
friendship everything not greatly prejudicial to the rights of the
Philippine city.

"I comprehend, like yourself, the inconvenience of a double occupation
of the city of Manila and its environs, considering the conditions
of the capitulation with the Spaniards, but you must also understand
that without the wide blockade maintained by my forces you would
have obtained possession of the ruins of the city, but never the
surrender of the Spanish forces, who would have been able to retire
to the interior towns.

"Now, do not make light of the aid formerly given by us to secure
the capitulation mentioned. Greatly though justice may suffer, and
risking well-founded fears in regard to my city, I do not insist upon
the retention of all the positions conquered by my forces within
the environs at the cost of much bloodshed, unspeakable fatigue,
and much money."

At the same time this Dictator was strutting with the powerful
persuasion that the United States must be subordinate to his will,
he was ambitious to live in the palace of the Governor General,
putting an impertinance to that effect in his correspondence, but
General Merritt told him he wanted it for himself and had already
occupied and taken it into possession. It has been made clear that
Aguinaldo was from the first appearance of Americans writhing with
the pangs of wounded vanity, conspiring to initiate the ignorant and
inflate the insignificant, exciting a considerable force to share
his sentiments. Unquestionably the news communicated by Agoncillo to
Aguinaldo of the sailing of the regular troops to reinforce the army
in Manila caused the desperate assault upon our lines, and it may
be accepted as the measurement of the Filipino ignorance of American
character, that the insurgent calculation was that the combat designed
and its influence estimated, was expected to cause the defeat of the
ratification of the treaty in the Senate.

General Merritt assumed the Governor's duties on August 23, at
Matacanan palace. Insurgents seemed more pacific, and business was
resumed. On August 25, Aguinaldo sent the following cablegram to the
American press:

Manila, August 24.--I am satisfied with America's occupation. The
Filipinos are disbanding.

_Aguinaldo_.

Head of the Philippine Insurgent Army.

The same day Aguinaldo issued orders for his soldiers to return
to their homes. The order was obeyed, and the insurgents expressed
willingness to surrender if assured that the islands would remain
under American or British control.

In a clash at Cavite between United States soldiers and insurgents
on August 25, George Hudson, a member of the Utah regiment, was
killed, and Corporal William Anderson, of the same battery, was
mortally wounded. Four troopers of the Fourth Cavalry were slightly
wounded. Aguinaldo expressed his regret and promised to punish the
offenders.

Complaint of the conduct of Aguinaldo was reported by insurgents a
few days later, and he said many of his compatriots accused him of
endeavoring to sell out their cause. This story was his standing excuse
for insolence to Americans, and the commission of savage injustice. He
announced his intention to send peace commissioners to Paris.

On September 5, Aguinaldo effected an important alliance with
the Santiaglesia party in the northern Provinces of Pangasinan
Zamballes. This party commanded 5,000 troops which hitherto had
resisted Aguinaldo's claims to dictatorship.

At a meeting of twenty leaders of the Filipinos on September 5,
eighteen of them declared in favor of annexation to the United States.

Aguinaldo, on September 10, demanded the right to occupy part of
Manila. His demand was refused by General Otis, who ordered him to
remove his forces by a given day to avoid trouble. Aguinaldo removed
his headquarters to Malolos on the railroad forty miles north of
Manila.

It was on October 10 that the open arrogance of Aguinaldo asserted
itself. He refused to permit a burial party from the British ship
Powerful to pass into the city carrying arms. For this he was reproved
by the American commanders, and he apologized.

October 16 Aguinaldo again took the offensive, refusing to permit
the American schooner Mermanos to load. Following that report came
the report of a battle between Americans and insurgents, which was
exaggerated, but showed the seriousness of the situation. The same
day the Czar of Russia suggested a joint note from the powers to the
United States on the Philippine question.

Later Aguinaldo refused the request of General Otis for the release
of Spanish priests held as captives by the Filipinos, and General
Otis reported the entire island of Panay, with the exception of the
City of Iloilo, in the hands of insurgents.

On November 14, the Filipino Junta at Hongkong issued a long statement
and petition directed to President McKinley, demanding recognition
of the insurgents.

On November 18, President McKinley issued orders to General Otis to
occupy the Islands of Panay and Negros, and for this purpose troops
were later sent from Manila on an unsuccessful mission. January 1 came
the serious news from Manila that the American forces before Iloilo,
under the command of General Miller, were confronted by 6,000 armed
Filipinos, who refused them permission to land.

The Spanish had yielded Iloilo to the insurgents for the purpose of
troubling the Americans.

Agoncillo, on January 6, filed a request with the authorities at
Washington for an interview with the President to discuss affairs in
the Philippines. The next day the government officials were surprised
to learn that messages to General Otis to deal mildly with the rebels
and not to force a conflict had become known to Agoncillo, and cabled
by him to Aguinaldo. At the same time came Aguinaldo's protest against
General Otis signing himself "Military Governor of the Philippines."

Agoncillo expressed still more violent sentiments during the second
week in January. On the 8th of the month he gave out this statement:

"In my opinion the Filipino people, whom I represent, will never
consent to become a colony dependency of the United States. The
soldiers of the Filipino army have pledged their lives that they will
not lay down their arms until General Aguinaldo tells them to do so,
and they will keep that pledge, I feel confident."

On the day after Aguinaldo issued his second proclamation in Manila,
in which he threatened to drive the Americans from the islands, called
the Deity to witness that their blood would be on their own heads if it
was shed, and detailed at greater length the promises he claimed were
made by the Americans as to the part of the insurgents in the campaign.

The Filipino committees in London, Paris and Madrid about this time
telegraphed to President McKinley as follows:

"We protest against the disembarkation of American troops at
Iloilo. The treaty of peace still unratified, the American claim to
sovereignty is premature. Pray reconsider the resolution regarding
Iloilo. Filipinos wish for the friendship of America and abhor
militarism and deceit."

The threats that Manila must be taken never ceased in the rebel camp,
and they hung around with sweltering venom, cultivating grievances,
like a horde of wolves and panthers, hungry and rabid.

At the beginning of February the situation at Manila was regarded as
serious, but the officials saw no reason why they could not command it
for a time at least. General Otis reported, in connection with some
matters pertaining to the shipment home of sick Spanish soldiers,
that he could hold out beyond a doubt until his reinforcements
arrived, and added that as the news had reached Manila that there
was every prospect that the peace treaty would soon be ratified,
the effect on the natives had been satisfactory. Sunday morning,
February 5, reports were received by the American press that the
Filipino insurgents under Aguinaldo had attacked the American lines
before Manila, and that a battle had been fought, in which many on
both sides had been killed or wounded.

When news of the attack of the Filipinos was received at Washington,
Agoncillo, the special representative of Aguinaldo, immediately left
the capital, taking the first train for Canada. He reached Montreal
February 6. In an interview at the latter place he professed not
to know that an attack on the American forces at Manila had been
planned by his people. Furthermore, he stated it as his belief that
no attack had been made as described in the reports. His manner and
somewhat evasive statements indicated that he knew more than he cared
to tell. His action in fleeing from Washington indicated complicity.

One of the immediate results of the Filipinos' attack on Manila
was the hastening of the ratification by the Senate of the peace
treaty. At 2:45 o'clock, Monday afternoon, February 6, the Senate met
in executive session, and three-fourths of an hour later the vote on
the ratification of the treaty was announced. It stood 57 for, and
27 against, the absent and paired being six. The treaty was ratified
by a majority of 1.

The Senators who voted for the treaty were: Aldrich, Allen, Allison,
Baker, Burrows, Butler, Carter, Chandler, Clark, Clay, Cullom,
Davis, Deboe, Elkins, Fairbanks, Faulkner, Foraker, Frye, Gallinger,
Gear, Gray, Hanna, Hansbrough, Harris, Hawley, Jones (Nev.), Kenney,
Kyle, Lindsay, Lodge, McBride, McEnery, McLaurin, McMillan, Mantle,
Mason, Morgan, Nelson, Penrose, Perkins, Pettus, Platt (Conn.), Platt
(N.Y.), Pritchard, Quay, Ross, Sewell, Shoup, Simon, Spooner, Stewart,
Sullivan, Teller, Thurston, Warren, Wellington, Wolcott.

The Senators who voted against the treaty were: Bacon, Bate, Berry,
Caffery, Chilton, Cockrell, Daniel, Gorman, Hale, Heitfeld, Hoar,
Jones (Ark.), Mallory, Martin, Mills, Mitchell, Money, Murphy, Pasco,
Pettigrew, Rawlins, Roach, Smith, Tillman, Turley, Turner, Vest.

Those who were absent and paired were: Cannon and Wilson for, with
White against; Proctor and Wetmore for, with Turpie against.

The ratification of the treaty was not a party question. Thirty-nine
Republicans, ten Democrats, and eight Silver men voted for the treaty,
and two Republicans, twenty-two Democrats and three Silver men voted
against it.

On February 4, Aguinaldo issued the following proclamation:

"I order and command:

1. That peace and friendly relations with the Americans be broken and
that the latter be treated as enemies, within the limits prescribed
by the laws of war.

2. That the Americans captured be held as prisoners of war.

3. That this proclamation be communicated to the consuls and that
congress order and accord a suspension of the constitutional guarantee,
resulting from the declaration of war."

February 5th, Aguinaldo issued a second proclamation in which he
said that the outbreak of hostilities was "unjustly and unexpectedly
provoked by the Americans." He also spoke of "the constant outrages and
taunts which have been causing misery to the Manilans," and referred
to the "useless conferences" and contempt shown for the Filipino
government as proving a "premeditated transgression of justice and
liberty." He called on his people to "sacrifice all upon the altar of
honor and national integrity," and insisted that he tried to avoid as
far as possible an armed conflict. He claimed that all his efforts
"were useless before the unmeasured pride of the Americans," whom
he charged as having treated him as a rebel "because I defended the
interests of my country and would not become the instrument of their
dastardly intentions." He concluded by saying:

"Be not discouraged. Our independence was watered freely by the
blood of martyrs, and more will be shed in the future to strengthen
it. Remember that efforts are not to be wasted that ends may be
gained. It is indispensable to adjust our actions to the rules of law
and right and to learn to triumph over our enemies. We have fought
our ancient oppressors without arms, and we now trust to God to defend
us against the foreign foe."

_The Official Battle Bulletins_.

The messages following were received in the order given.

"Manila, February 5.--Adjutant-General, Washington: Have established
our permanent lines well out and have driven off the insurgents. The
troops have conducted themselves with great heroism. The country
about Manila is peaceful, and the city is perfectly quiet. List of
casualties to-morrow. _Otis_."

"Manila, February 5.--To the Adjutant-General: Insurgents in large
force opened attack on our outer lines at 8:45 p. m. last evening;
renewed attack several times during night; at 4 o'clock this morning
entire line engaged; all attacks repulsed; at daybreak advanced
against insurgents, and have driven them beyond the lines they formerly
occupied, capturing several villages and their defense works; insurgent
loss in dead and wounded large; our own casualties thus far estimated
at 175, few fatal. Troops enthusiastic and acting fearlessly. Navy
did splendid execution on flanks of enemy; city held in check, and
absolute quiet prevails; insurgents have secured a good many Mauser
rifles, a few field pieces and quick-firing guns, with ammunition,
during last month. _Otis_."

"Manila, February 5.--To Adjutant-General: Situation most
satisfactory. No apprehension need be felt. Perfect quiet prevails
in city and vicinity. List of casualties being prepared, and will
be forwarded as soon as possible. Troops in excellent health and
spirits. _Otis_."

"Manila, February 7.--Adjutant-General, Washington: The insurgent army
concentrated around Manila from Luzon provinces, numbered over 20,000,
possessing several quick-firing and Krupp field guns. Good portion
of enemy armed with Mausers, latest pattern. Two Krupp and great many
rifles captured. Insurgents fired great quantity of ammunition. Quite
a number of Spanish soldiers in insurgent service who served artillery.

Insurgents constructed strong intrenchments near our lines, mostly
in bamboo thickets. These our men charged, killing or capturing many
of the enemy. Our casualties probably aggregate 250. Full reports
to-day. Casualties of insurgents very heavy. Have buried some 500
of their dead and hold 500 prisoners. Their loss, killed, wounded,
and prisoners, probably 4,000.

"Took waterworks pumping station yesterday, six miles out. Considerable
skirmish with enemy, which made no stand. Pumps damaged; will
be working in a week. Have number of condensers set up in city,
which furnish good water. Troops in excellent spirits. Quiet
prevails. _Otis_."

"Manila, February 3.--Adjutant-General, Washington: Situation rapidly
improving. Reconnaissance yesterday to south several miles; to east
to Laguna Bay; to northeast eight miles, driving straggling insurgent
troops in various directions, encountering no decided opposition.

"Army disintegrated, and natives returning to village, displaying
white flag.

"Near Caloocan, six miles north, enemy made stand behind
entrenchments. Charged by Kansas troops, led by Colonel Funston;
close encounter, resulting in rout of enemy, with very heavy loss.

"Loss to Kansas troops, Lieutenant Alford killed, six men wounded.

"Night of 4th, Aguinaldo issued flying proclamation, charging Americans
with initiative, and declared war.

"His influence throughout this section destroyed. Now applies for
cessation of hostilities and conference. Have declined to answer.

"Insurgents' expectation of rising in city on night of 4th
unrealized. Provost Marshal-General, with admirable disposition of
troops, defeated every attempt.

"City quiet. Business resumed. Natives respectful and cheerful.

"The fighting qualities of American troops a revelation to all
inhabitants. Signed, _Otis_."

Secretary Alger sent the following cablegram to General Otis,
at Manila:

"Accept my best congratulations upon your magnificent victory of
Sunday, all the more creditable because you were not the aggressor."

"Manila, February 10.--Adjutant-General: Insurgents collected
considerable force between Manila and Caloocan, where Aguinaldo is
reported to be, and threatened attack and uprising in city.

"This afternoon swung left of McArthur division, which is north of
Pasig River, into Caloocan, driving enemy easy.

"Our left now at Caloocan. Our loss slight; that of insurgents
considerable. Particulars in morning.

"Attack preceded by one-half hour's firing from two of Admiral
Dewey's vessels.

"_Otis_."

"Manila, February 13.--Adjutant-General, Washington: Everything quiet
this morning; business in city resuming former activity. _Otis_."

"Manila, February 13.--General Miller reports from Iloilo that that
town was taken on the 11th inst., and is held by troops. Insurgents
given until evening of 11th to surrender, but their hostile actions
brought on an engagement during the morning. Insurgents fired the
native portion of town, but little losses to property of foreign
inhabitants. No casualties among United States troops reported.

"_Otis_."

The legal situation, while the treaty was not ratified, and seemed
gravely in doubt, was an embarrassment to the executive of the United
States. The Philippine question was by the act of the President a
special reservation, and it was submitted to the people as too great in
scope and various in detail, to be determined by one man, especially as
the Philippine Archipelago was so far away from our Pacific shore as to
be, according to the average citizen's information, a new departure;
and the novelties in a Republic need much consideration. Really the
departure is not new--it is in the direct line of the logic of our
history. The President exceedingly desired to preserve the peace with
the Filipinos, and gave orders not to attack them. He trusted this
anxious care would prevent bloodshed. Hence the annoying attitude of
waiting acquiesence at Iloilo, and at Manila under almost intolerable
provocation. A personal letter from Manila, dated December 8th,
and written by a general officer contains this.

"Aguinaldo has sent for a new hatter with inflated blocks, and has
his people dragging up field guns in face of our outposts. You can
draw your own inferences."

There is a flavor of bitter humor in this, but the fact is prominent
that the desperadoes were quite wild, and had no understanding of
themselves or of us, and could acquire it only by getting themselves
whipped by us.

We quote again from the letter of which we have taken the passage
above:

"The able and thinking men in this country tell me in unmistakable
language that they are in no way prepared to take up the government
of these islands. They insist upon the fact that tribunals will have,
through lack of native material, to be mixed bodies. They say that
with all the harshness that must accompany occupancy, the people
here never had as much liberty as they have now, and that they show
a strong inclination to abuse what is given them."

This is the true story of the Philippine people wherever there has
been a free and intelligent expression.

Our army did not go to Manila to harm the Filipinos who have the
misfortune to become infatuated with the malicious vanity of those
who have surrounded themselves with a cloud of superstition and all
the inventions of falsehood. It was necessary that Americans should
protect themselves, or yield the country to the destructiveness of
barbarism, and they have defended Americanism and civilization.

The dragging of field pieces to bear upon our pickets was with the
purpose of bringing American soldiers into contempt, at once, and
to force fighting ultimately. The poor men who became victims were
deluded and carried their defiance to an intolerable pitch. In the
same style employed when he demanded that General Anderson should
consult him about getting on Philippine soil, Aguinaldo attempted to
intimidate General Otis by inviting a conference, and avowing that he
would make war if any more troops were sent to Manila. He would have
bloodshed, and is responsible for it, so far as he is an accountable
being. It is of the horrors of war that the blood of brave men is
shed on both sides of a controversy that has been appealed to the
arbitrament of arms, though the origin of the affray may be obscure
and the issue uncertain. In the bloodshed around Manila the case is
clear and the conclusion certain, and there is the compensation that
the heroism, enterprise, activity and dash and continuance of the
American soldiers under the most trying circumstances, flame forth,
and the glory of our soldiers is equal to that of our sailors in the
judgment of the men of all nations.

There is something more in this second clash of arms at Manila. It
is difficult to find ground harder to carry in offensive movements
than the sultry thickets in which the Filipinos were hidden, but
our soldiers obeyed all orders to advance with alacrity, energy
and enthusiasm, and were eager for their work. The men who can
do what ours did at Manila can do anything that may rationally be
dared. And in this story of Manila is the testimony that after the
volunteers have been seasoned, they do keep step with the dread music
of war with the regulars of any race or people, and there can be no
national retreat from the duty destiny defines in the Philippines,
any more than from the States of the valley that is the heart of the
country--the valley watered by the Ohio, the noblest river in the
world, that flows westward in the course of empire.

The dispatches of General Otis are clear and striking in tone, and
may at once be classified as model bulletins of history. He is a most
energetic, careful, studious and laborious soldier, bearing himself
with the dignity of a man modest as brave, and full of kindliness, but
determined in discipline, knowing it to be for the common good. He is
resolute in demanding that the requisitions shall be according to the
forms, and those associated with him must respect the regulations. The
objection to him of those who seek one is that he attends too much to
details, but that is well when the commander is absolute in duty and
has an appetite for hard work before which the small matters disappear
as by magic and the greater ones are conquered by force of habit.

The scenery of the battle fields around Manila should be carefully
regarded and remembered. The bay is a vast sheet nearly thirty miles
in length, with a width exceeding twenty miles. The shores of the
bay are low--not more than six feet at most, above high tide. They
are also sandy and soft, resembling in some respects the banks of
Louisiana rivers, but no levees are attempted. The famous Pasig
river is only twenty miles long, and drains a large lake, in which
there is an immense multiplication of vegetable growth that floats
perpetually to the Bay, and is called "lilies," though having the
look of small cabbages. The stream is almost as broad as the Ohio,
and, in its snaky turns, crooked as the Mississippi. The banks seem
to be prevented from washing away by the dense matting of grasses,
and the overhanging thickets, imposing in luxuriance. The houses are
close to the water, for the tidal river does not rise and fall enough
to disturb the inhabitants. There are mountains a few miles away
east and south--big lumps of blue. The stream that furnishes pure
water to Manila is from the mountains, and tapped near the mouth,
where it empties into the Pasig, seven miles from the city. Manila
is widespread, and of structures whose height has been moderated by
experience of earthquakes. There is a great deal of marshy land, and
rice fields, and the jungles, so thick and thorny, and the grasses so
tall, fibrous, and rasping, that the marching of columns of soldiers
is excessively fatiguing. It was a terrible task that was cut out
for our men, by the delay in the Senate, mischievously elongated,
the insurgents having fortified themselves in a way that they knew
would have been utterly impervious by Spaniards. The military leaders
of the Filipinos have the explanation to offer, if they have the
enlightenment to comprehend their own predicament, as a discomfited
mass of fugitives, that they never, before the American regulars and
volunteers charged them, met soldiers who would not have retreated
in dismay from the fiery ambuscades. The achievement of the Americans
in confronting, rushing and routing the array, formidable in numbers,
of natives, gathered with great expectations of a victory that would
convert them into the barbaric conquerors of a civilized community--the
consecutive and conclusive victories over them that covered our arms,
will have honorable distinction, of putting soldiers to the proof
and finding them pure steel, for a long time to come. Our boys,
weary of the aggressive attitude of the still insurgent crowds,
though the power of Spain had been broken, welcomed with cheers the
order to charge; and it has been many days since there has been a
trial of manliness more severe, or testimony of devotion more true,
and of the staunch fighting quality of the troops whose only way out
of difficulty was to find the enemy and drive them headlong.

It is not to be forgotten, while the flag of the nation flies, that the
brave regiments that will bear upon their banners the name Manila, with
the dates of February, 1899, are from all sections of the country, from
the Alleghenies to the Pacific. They come from western Pennsylvania,
Tennessee, Wisconsin, the Dakotas, Oregon, Washington, Wyoming, Utah,
Montana, Idaho, and California, and as Admiral Dewey said so well of
the crews of his ships on his immortal May day, "There was not a man
in the fleet who did not do his duty, and no man did more." It is,
as Admiral Schley said of the famous naval victory on the Southern
Cuban coast, "There is glory enough to go around." Take the list of
regiments and batteries and troops in the Eighth Army Corps, under the
command of Major-General E.S. Otis, and there is but one record--each
officer and enlisted man was in his place, and all are worthy to be
glorified, for their dashing rushes through the swamps and the hideous
tropic tangles, they penetrated to find the foe, equally with those
heroes who mounted with unquailing ardor that only death could quench
and that victory crowned the bloody hills of Santiago.

The easy capture of Iloilo proves the inadequacy of the followers of
Aguinaldo to do any mischief beyond bushwhacking, and it will not be
found worth while to pursue the natives who made an occupation of war
far into the jungles. The complete possession of the railroad by our
troops will be necessary, and the navy will have business for light
vessels in preventing the smuggling of Japanese arms, which are,
no doubt, furnished at low rates for special purposes.

Two proclamations have appeared in the Philippines--one by General
Otis, the American General commanding the Eighth Army Corps, and the
other by Aguinaldo, that make clear in a few words the policy of those
engaged in the war that has followed the downfall of the sovereignty
of Spain over the bits of the archipelago they occupied. General Otis
said, January 4th, that the "United States forces came to give the
blessings of peace and individual freedom to the Philippine people. We
are here as friends of the Filipinos to protect them in their homes,
their employments, their individual and religious liberty. All persons
who, either by active aid or honest endeavor, co-operate with the
government of the United States to give effect to these beneficient
purposes will receive the reward of its support and protection."

The General quoted the instructions of the President, and remarked:

"I am fully of the opinion that it is the intention of the United
States government, while directing affairs generally, to appoint
the representative men now forming the controlling element of the
Filipinos to civil positions of trust and responsibility, and it will
be my aim to appoint to these such Filipinos as may be acceptable to
the supreme authorities at Washington.

"It is also my belief that it is the intention of the United States
Government to draw from the Filipino people so much of the military
force of the islands as possible and consistent with a free and
well-constituted government of the country, and it is my desire to
inaugurate a policy of that character.

"I am also convinced that it is the intention of the United States
government to seek the establishment of a most liberal government
for the islands, in which the people themselves shall have as full
representation as the maintenance of order and law will permit,
and which shall be susceptible of development on lines of increased
representation and the bestowal of increased powers into a government
as free and independent as is enjoyed by the most favored provinces
of the world.

"It will be my constant endeavor to co-operate with the Filipino
people, seeking the good of the country, and I invite their full
confidence and aid."

Aguinaldo, on this conciliatory definition of American purposes,
objects to General Otis calling himself "Military Governor," and
cries out, with "all the energy of his soul against such authority,"
and alludes to the policy of the President referring to the Philippine
annexation, adding:

"I solemnly protest, in the name of God, the root and fountain of all
justice and of all right, and who has given to me power to direct my
dear brothers in the difficult work of our regeneration, against this
intrusion of the government of the United States in the sovereignty
of these islands.

"And so, you must understand, my dear brothers, that, united by bonds
which it will be impossible to break, such is the idea of our liberty
and our absolute independence, which have been our noble aspirations,
all must work together to arrive at this happy end, with the force
which gives conviction, already so generally felt, among all the
people, to never turn back in the road of glory, on which we have
already so far advanced."

President McKinley, on the evening of February l5th, addressed at
the Boston Home Market Club banquet, all civilized nations, setting
forth the policy of the United States in the Philippines, saying:

"The Philippines, like Cuba and Porto Rico, were intrusted to our hands
by the war, and to that great trust, under the providence of God and
in the name of human progress and civilization, we are committed. It
is a trust from which we will not flinch.

"There is universal agreement that the Philippines shall not be turned
back to Spain. No true American would consent to that.

"The suggestions that they should be tossed into the arena for the
strife of nations or be left to the anarchy or chaos of no protectorate
at all were too shameful to be considered. The treaty gave them to
the United States. Could we have required less and done our duty?

"Our concern is not for territory, or trade, or empire, but for the
people whose interests and destiny were put in our hands.

"It is not a good time for the liberator to submit important
questions to the liberated while they are engaged in shooting down
their rescuers.

"The future of the Philippine Islands is now in the hands of the
American people.

"I know of no better or safer human tribunal than the people.

"Until Congress shall direct otherwise, it will be the duty of the
executive to possess and hold the Philippines.

"That the inhabitants of the Philippines will be benefited is my
unshaken belief.

"No imperial designs lurk in the American mind. They are alien to
American sentiment."

There is a directness of purpose and precision of statement about
this that bears the stamp of sincerity, is impressive with the power
of authority, and shines with the spirit of patriotism.



CHAPTER XXIX

The Aguinaldo War of Skirmishes.

The Filipino Swarms, After Being Repulsed with Slaughter, Continue
Their Scattering Efforts to Be Assassins--They Plan a General
Massacre and the Burning of Manila--Defeated in Barbarous Schemes,
They Tell False Tales and Have Two Objects, One to Deceive the People
of the Philippines, the Other to Influence Intervention--The Peril of
Fire--Six Thousand Regulars Sent to General Otis--Americans Capture
Iloilo and Many Natives Want Peace--The People of the Isla of Negros
Ask That They May Go with Us--Dewey Wants Battleships and Gunboats,
Gets Them, and Is Made an Admiral--Arrival of Peace Commissioners,
with Their School Books, Just Ahead of the Regulars with Magazine
Rifles--The Germans at Manila Salute Admiral Dewey at Last.

The activity of the Aguinaldo insurgents was persisted in, while their
commissioners were on the way to us, and ours to them. While Congress
was in a reactionary state owing to political games, and many members
tearful on the side of the barbarians, there was a desperate conspiracy
to massacre the white people of Manila and destroy the city by fire;
and fighting was going on along our extended lines, the Filipinos
shooting at Americans from the jungles. On February 15th the California
Volunteers abandoned Guadalupe church and retired to San Pedro Macati,
and the Filipinos held ambuscades near the Pasig River. It was reported
that on the night of the 14th the retirement of General King's advance
posts upon San Pedro Macati had evidently been construed by the rebels
as a sign of weakness, as they pressed forward along both sides of
the river, persistently harassing the occupants of the town.

The rebels poured volley after volley into San Pedro Macati from
the brush on the adjacent ridge, but without effect. General King's
headquarters, in the center of the town, was the target for scores of
bullets. The rebels were using smokeless powder and it was extremely
difficult to locate individual marksmen.

The heat was intense and increasing perceptibly. It was impossible
to provide shade for the troops in parts of the line.

On the 21st the following remarkable dispatch was received from
General Otis:

"Manila, Feb. 21.--Adjutant-General, Washington: Following issued by
an important officer of insurgent government at Malolos February 15,
1899, for execution during that evening and night in this city:

"'You will so dispose that at 8 o'clock at night the individuals of
the territorial militia at your order will be found united in all
of the streets of San Pedro, armed with their bolos and revolvers or
guns and ammunition, if convenient.

"'Philippine families only will be respected. They should not be
molested, but all other individuals, of whatever race they may be,
will be exterminated without any compassion after the extermination
of the army of occupation.

"'The defenders of the Philippines in your command will attack the
guard at Bilibid and liberate the prisoners and "presidiarios," and,
having accomplished this, they will be armed, saying to them:

"'"Brothers, we must avenge ourselves on the Americans and exterminate
them, that we may take our revenge for the infamy and treachery
which they have committed upon us; have no compassion upon them;
attack with vigor. All Filipinos en masse will second you. Long live
Filipino independence."

"'The order which will be followed in the attack will be as follows:
The sharpshooters of Tondo and Santa Ana will begin the attack from
without and these shots will be the signal for the militia of Troso
Binondo, Quiata and Sampaloe to go out into the street and do their
duty; those of Pake, Ermita and Malate, Santa Cruz and San Miguel will
not start out until 12 o'clock unless they see that their companions
need assistance.

"'The militia of Tondo will start out at 3 o'clock in the morning;
if all do their duty our revenge will be complete. Brothers, Europe
contemplates us; we know how to die as men, shedding our blood in
defense of the liberty of our country. Death to the tyrants.

"'War without quarter to the false Americans who have deceived us.

"'Either independence or death.'"

There is not sufficient reason to assume that this paper setting forth
an order to carry out a conspiracy of house burning and assassination
is beyond belief. It is characteristic of the Filipino literature
that relates to Americans. General Otis is a man whose communications
may be relied upon absolutely. He is a believer in the exact truth
and has shown exemplary care in stating it. The Filipino faction
of warriors are habitually false, and wherever they have an agent,
are circulating falsehoods manufactured to order. The Junta of the
Aguinaldo pretenders, issued at Hongkong a statement as follows:

"Information which has leaked through the Pinkertons, sent by President
McKinley to investigate the shipment of arms to the Filipinos,
shows that the first shipments to Aguinaldo were made by order of
the American government, through Consul Wildman, hence the shipment
per the Wing Foi. The American government subsequently telegraphed
to cease this, coincident with the change of policy to annexation.

"Mr. Wildman and Rear Admiral Dewey promised to pay, but have not yet
paid, for a subsequent expedition by the Abbey, authorized by Admiral
Dewey, who afterward seized the steamer, and it is still held. Papers
respecting this are now in the possession of the Secretary of the Navy.

"The protestations of Admiral Dewey and other Americans that they
made no promises are ridiculous. In view of these facts let the
American people judge how the nation's word of honor was pledged to
the Filipinos and confided in by them, and violated by the recent
treachery of General Otis."

There may be an occasional member of Congress who cannot help believing
this, but he does not allow his ignorance to be moderated by any
ingredient of information.

On the same day the above publication appeared there was given at
Hongkong to the American Consul, Wildman, news of the "discovery of
20,000 rifles and 2,000,000 cartridges stored on lighters at Nankin by
Filipinos and ready for shipment to the islands. The American Minister
promptly induced the Chinese authorities to impound the munitions,
thus inflicting a hard blow to Aguinaldo.

"The extraordinary thing is that the Japanese government sold the
arms to the regular agent of the Filipinos at Yokohama, although,
for the sake of appearances, a form of auction was used. The Japanese
officials, it develops, offered 100,000 rifles, with machinery for
loading and ammunition, to the Filipinos in September.

"Traitorous Americans here are aiding the insurgents to smuggle
arms. Agoncillo's dispatches are leading the Filipinos to believe
President McKinley intends to treat with them."

The official correspondence of the American Consuls at Singapore,
Manila and Hongkong with the State Department, proves that there was
no treaty with Aguinaldo, no deception so far as our Government was
concerned, and that he was a professor of Americanism, talking of
annexation and a protectorate and his gratitude; and then a sulking
and swollen little creature; as Wildman wrote, a spoiled child,
requiring flatteries to keep him in a good humor. Admiral Dewey was
very careful never to promise Aguinaldo anything--giving him some
old guns and encouraging him to keep the Spaniards busy, but never
presuming or allowing it to be assumed that he was speaking for our
Government. By way of Seattle we have an extract of a letter written
by an insurgent officer at Hongkong in these terms:

"More than 25,000 families have left Manila since we began our war
on the Americans. American soldiers are deserting and presenting
themselves to our officers. In order to get the American troops
who were ordered to Iloilo on board the transport many of the men
had first been made drunk, others were embarked forcibly. They all
protested against going, saying that they had come to fight Spaniards,
not Filipinos. After the boat got under way the men mutinied. Many
jumped overboard and swam ashore. Those who remained began to wreck
all parts of the vessel."

The intensity of the folly of the Filipinos making war upon the United
States is on exhibition in this letter, and it is serviceable as a
measure of their intelligence. It is with this equipment of elementary
knowledge that Agoncillo is in Europe to solicit the intervention
of the great powers for his country and asserts that he lost Dewey's
letters in a shipwreck. He should exploit his mission in Madrid.

It was on the nights of the 22nd and 23d of February that an effort was
made by the Filipinos to burn Manila. The attempt to destroy property
closely resembled in the stealthy preliminaries, and desperate strife
to burn the city, the cunningly prepared first attack upon the American
army, repulsed with a slaughter that has moved deeply the sympathies
of our statesmen opposed to the administration of our Government
the growth of the country and the public honor. The fact is they are
sentimentalists in decay or degenerates running for a decline and fall.

There was some fighting in the streets during the night, but the
Americans quickly quelled the uprising. A number of the insurgents were
killed and several American soldiers severely wounded. A large market
place was the first to burn. Between six and seven hundred residences
and business houses were destroyed. Fires started at several points
simultaneously, and, spreading with great rapidity, resisted efforts
to control them. Hundreds of homeless natives were huddled in the
streets, making the patrol duty of the Americans difficult. The fire
was started in three places. Native sharpshooters were concealed behind
corner buildings. They shot at every American in sight. Flames burst
forth simultaneously from Santa Cruz, San Nicolas and Tondo. From
these points the fire spread. In a short time a great part of the
city was burning. Notwithstanding the continual activity of the hidden
sharpshooters the American garrison turned out and fought the fire. In
many cases they had first to drive away the lurking assassins.

No one of our troops was killed, but seven members of the
Minnesota regiment ere wounded making a rush into the burning Tondo
quarter. Captain C. Robinson of Company C was one of the wounded. The
troops were rallied from some of the outlying encampments, quickly
spread through all parts of the city and subdued what was evidently
planned for a general uprising and massacre.

The fire lasted all night. The native rebels in the city have
been completely checked by the prompt work of General Otis and the
other commanders. It is evident that the incendiaries and assassins
believed that the entire town would be destroyed and with it the
foreign residents and the American soldiers.

General Otis telegraphed Adjutant-General Corbin February 23d:

"Determined endeavors to burn city last night. Buildings fired in
three different sections of city. Fires controlled by troops, after
severe labor.

"A considerable number of incendiaries shot and a few soldiers wounded.

"Early this morning a large body of insurgents made a demonstration
off MacArthur's front, near Caloocan, and were repulsed. Loss of
property by fire last night probably $500,000."

February 21st, 9:35 P. M.--"The natives of the village of Paco made a
bold attempt last night to burn the quarters of the First Washington
Volunteers by setting fire to the huts adjoining their quarters in
the rear.

"Fortunately the wind changed at the moment the fire was discovered,
and, fanned by a stiff breeze, the flames spread in the opposite
direction, destroying fully twenty shacks and houses opposite the
ruins of the church. The incendiaries escaped.

"Mysterious signals were frequently made along the enemy's lines
during the night."

From the high points in the city fires were seen in a dozen places,
and a cloud of smoke hovered over the city, conveying the impression
to people about the bay and in the outside districts that the whole
city was burning.

On the 21st of February the Nebraska troops drove a force of 300
insurgents three miles to Pasig. Twenty-one of them were found dead
on the field and many more were believed to have been killed. The
Americans had three wounded.

A most serious problem confronts General Otis in the protection
of Manila and the suburban towns from fire, not only because of the
treacherous character of the rebel Filipinos, but also because outside
of the business establishments the houses are built of the flimsiest
bamboo, hung with matting screens. Even the floors are made of strips
of bamboo, separated so as to allow the free circulation of air. It is
within the power of almost any person to set fire to these houses from
without or within in a few seconds, and, as they are closely built,
the ravages of a single fire in a quarter so closely constructed
might easily reach the $500,000 point mentioned by General Otis.

The foreign quarter is of better construction, but still includes
many of these light bamboo houses, which the older residents seem to
find cooler than those of more solid construction. The walled town,
which the insurgents threaten to burn, is said to be of substantial
structures, and probably is more easily defended against such an
attempt than any other section of the town.

February 26th, 6:30 A. M., a dispatch was received from Colombo,
Island of Colon, as follows:

"The United States transport Grant, which sailed from New York for
Manila January 19 with troops under command of Major-General Henry
W. Lawton on board, arrived here to-day. General Lawton received a
cablegram from Major-General Otis saying:

"'Situation critical. Your early arrival necessary.'

"He also received from General Corbin, United States Adjutant-General,
a cable dispatch urging him to hurry.

"General Lawton ordered his officers to buy supplies regardless of
expense, and the transport is taking on coal and water hurriedly. She
will try to reach Manila without further stop."

March 4th a dispatch from General Lawton on the Grant at Singapore
was received as follows:

"Arrived here to-night. Will stop six hours for coal. Have no serious
illness to report. Favorable conditions still continue.

"We shall probably reach Manila early on morning of March 10. Have
so informed Otis."

This shows the strong impression the Manila news made in the War
Department, of the attempt to burn the city, which was part of the
announced plan of the insurgents. Filipino spies and sympathizers
had been watched by the American troops day and night seeking to
locate places of weakness. Many were captured. Some of them were
disguised in women's clothing. Plots of all kinds were rife. There
had been constant fear for weeks in the city that a massacre and
conflagration would be attempted. General Otis warned his officers to
be ever vigilant. Since the first battle our troops have guarded all
quarters within the lines. The conclusion of the very serious phase of
the incendiary period was announced by General Otis in this dispatch:

"Manila, Feb. 24.--To Secretary of War, Washington: Scandia arrived
last night. On nights 21st and 22d and yesterday morning insurgent
troops gained access to outskirts of city behind our lines. Many in
hiding and about 1,000 intrenched themselves. Completely routed
yesterday, with loss of killed and wounded about 500 and 200
prisoners. Our loss was slight. City quiet, confidence restored,
business progressing.

_Otis_."

On the afternoon of February 25th it was stated in a Manila cablegram
that the military police had raided several suspected houses in various
districts, capturing small bodies of twenty or thirty prisoners
in each place. This and the 7 o'clock order effectually dispelled
the fears of a threatened outbreak of the natives, who do not dare
singly, or collectively, to appear on the streets after dark. The
feeling in the city decidedly improved, although the Chinese were
timorous. Hundreds of applicants for cedulus besiege the register's
office, the natives apparently being under the impression that their
possession insures them from interference and the ignominy of being
searched for arms on the streets.

There was a mystery lasting a day or two about this unusual cable
communication:

"Manila, Feb. 24.--To Secretary of Navy, Washington: For political
reasons the Oregon should be sent here at once.

_Dewey_."

It was not a secret, however, in Manila Bay in August that Admiral
Dewey wanted two battleships, just as he wanted and had needed two
monitors, and that he then preferred the Oregon and the Iowa. He
has deemed it of the utmost importance that he should have a force
at Manila Bay superior to that of any other power. The German fleet
had for a considerable part of the time since the destruction of
the Spanish squadron been in a menacing attitude. The Germans were
ostentatious in discourtesy during Admiral Diedrich's personal
presence.

The Congress of the United States that was so divided and distracted
about the Philippine question was unanimous as to the pre-eminent
merits as a naval commander of George Dewey, though he was the
embodiment of all the anti-Americans railed at. This is the official
paper that proclaims Dewey's promotion:

"_President_ of the United States of America.

"To All Who Shall See These Presents: Greeting:

"Know ye, that, reposing special trust and confidence in the
patriotism, valor and fidelity and abilities of

"_George Dewey_.

I have nominated, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
do appoint him Admiral of the Navy from the second day of March,
1899, in the service of the United States.

"He is, therefore, carefully and diligently to discharge the duties of
Admiral by doing and performing all manner of duties thereto belonging.

"And I do strictly charge and require all officers, seamen and marines
under his command to be obedient to his orders as Admiral.

"And he is to observe and follow such orders and directions from time
to time as he shall receive from me or the future President of the
United States of America.

"Given under my hand at Washington the second day of March, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine, and in the one
hundred and twenty-third year of the independence of the United States.

"By the President:

_William M'Kinley_.

"_John D. Long_, Secretary of the Navy."

The Admiral personally responded, cabling to the Secretary of the Navy:

"Manila, March 4.--Please accept for yourself, the President and
Congress and my countrymen my heartfelt thanks for the great honor
which has been conferred upon me.

_Dewey_."

He will draw from the Government $14,700 a year, including allowances,
and is entitled to a larger staff. His direct pay is $13,000 per annum,
a rise of $7,000. He outranks any officer in the United States army,
the fact being that Rear Admirals rank with the Major-Generals,
who are the highest officers at present in the army, and Dewey is a
full Admiral. This is the result of not being afraid of torpedoes or
to risk ships in front of shore batteries. On the 3rd of March the
President nominated Brigadier-General Elwell S. Otis, U.S.A., to be
Major-General by brevet, to rank from February 4, 1899, for military
skill and most distinguished service in the Philippine Islands. The
nomination was confirmed by the Senate. Secretary Alger sent the
following congratulatory message to General Otis:

"You have been nominated and confirmed a Major-General by brevet in
the Regular Army. The President wishes this message of congratulations
sent you, in which I cordially join."

The Spanish way of dealing with unfortunate officers appears in this:

"Madrid, Friday.--Admiral Montojo, who was in command of the Spanish
squadron destroyed by Admiral Dewey in the battle of Manila Bay, and
the commander of the Cavite arsenal were this evening incarcerated in
the military prison pending trial for their conduct at Manila. Admiral
Cervera has also been imprisoned, along with General Linares, the
two men in the Spanish service who gave the Americans trouble.

The Colon Gazette on the 23d of February publishes extracts from a
private letter dated Iloilo, January 12, that prior to the conclusion
of peace Lieutenant Brandeis, formerly of the Twenty-first Baden
Dragoons, with 800 Spanish troops, held the town against 20,000
to 30,000 Filipinos, who were monkeying about and assuming to be
conducting a siege, just as the Aguinaldo crowd was doing at Manila
when General Merritt arrived. When peace was declared the Iloilo
Spaniards presently surrendered and the Filipinos rushed in as
conquering heroes. The pacific policy of the President prevented the
United States troops from taking the place from the swarm of islanders
until the outbreak in front of Manila, when our strict defensive was
unavailable and General Miller quietly occupied and possessed Iloilo,
the important sugar-exporting town of the Philippines.

The natives of the Island of Negros sent a delegation to General
Miller, after he had captured Iloilo, to offer their allegiance to
the United States, and the General holds Jaro and Molo, where there
has been skirmishing recently. The insurgents have 2,000 men at
Santa Barbara.

The governor of Camarines, in the interior of Luzon, has issued
a proclamation declaring that the Americans intend to make the
Filipinos slaves.

March 4th the United States cruiser Baltimore arrived at Manila
having on board the civil members of the United States Philippine
Commission. On the same day the rebels of the village of San Jose
fired on the United States gunboat Bennington and the warship shelled
that place and other suburbs of Manila in the afternoon.

At daylight General Wheaton's outposts discovered a large body of
rebels attempting to cross the river for the purpose of re-enforcing
the enemy at Guadalupe.

A gunboat advanced under a heavy fire and poured shot into
the jungle on both sides of the river and shelled the enemy's
position at Guadalupe, effectually but temporarily scattering the
rebels. The enemy's loss was heavy. American loss, one killed and
two wounded. General Otis cabled:

"The transport Senator just arrived; troops in good health. One
casualty, accidental drowning.

_Otis_."

The Senator carried Companies A, B, C, D, H and K of the Twenty-second
Infantry and sailed from San Francisco on February 1. The remainder of
this regiment arrived at Manila on the transport Ohio, which followed
the Senator.

The transport Valentia sailed from San Francisco March 4th, carrying
in addition to 150 soldiers, stores and supplies, $1,500,000 to pay
the soldiers now in the Philippines.

March 3d general order No. 30 was issued from the Adjutant-General's
office, War Department of the United States:

"The following regiments will be put in readiness for service in
the Philippine Islands without delay, the movement to take place
from time to time under instructions to be communicated hereafter:
Sixth Artillery, Sixth Infantry, Ninth Infantry, Thirteenth Infantry,
Sixteenth Infantry and Twenty-first Infantry.

"The following troops will he put in readiness for early departure
for station in Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands:

"Twenty-fourth Infantry, one field officer and four companies;
one company from Fort Douglas, Utah, and three companies from Fort
D. A. Russell, Wyoming.

"The department commanders are charged with the preparation of their
commands for these movements. The Quartermaster-General will make
timely arrangements for the transportation of the various commands. The
Commissary-General of Subsistence and the Surgeon-General will make
necessary provision for proper subsistence and medical supplies
and attendance."

This means that our army at Manila will he re-enforced by 6,000
regulars. Recent advices show that Aniceto Lanson, President of Negros
Island, called on General Otis with his fellow-delegates, Pose De
Luzuriago, President of Negros Congress; Gosebio Luzuriago, Secretary
of Finance, and Deputy Andries Azcoule. They assured General Otis
of the hearty support of the Visayas except those few who have been
stirred into revolt by the agents of Aguinaldo on the Island of Panay.

The government of Negros, they declared, was in favor of American rule,
and there was no adverse sentiment whatever among the natives. The
stars and stripes are now floating over all the official buildings
on the island. The commission offered to raise an army of 100,000
Visayans to fight the Tagalos on the Island of Luzon. The commissioners
represent large sugar-interests in Negros.

The Negros Island deputation was greatly pleased with its reception.

Admiral Dewey's flag as a full American Admiral was saluted becomingly
by all the warships of foreign nations at Manila, even including the
Germans, who had not until then showed the Americans any significant
courtesy. The English led the function with an Admiral's salute. There
was no novelty in this, for they long ago in every friendly way
recognized Manila as an American port. The Germans have given signal
manifestation of their desire to promote the most cordial relations
between Germany and the United States by ordering the withdrawal
of all vessels of their navy from Philippine waters and placing the
lives and property of their subjects there under the protection of
the United States Government.

A Hongkong dispatch of February 28 contained this information:

"Professors Schurman and Worcester to-day, after a long consultation
with Wildman, who is looked upon as one of the best-posted men in
the Orient in regard to Philippine affairs, expressed themselves as
satisfied with the outlook.

"They are especially pleased with the action of President McKinley
in restoring to the wealthy Cortes family the great estates illegally
confiscated by the Spaniards.

"'It is good politics,' said a leading member of the Hongkong colonial
cabinet to-day. 'It will seal to America every Filipino who possesses
property. It is the hardest blow Aguinaldo has suffered.'"

Admiral Dewey is strengthened by gunboats enough to keep out the
Filipino supplies of arms picked up in Asia, and Congress may not
be making a noise agreeable to our enemies for the rest of this
year. There is compensation in the omission. There will be no European
or American interference in the process of pacificating the military
faction of Filipinos, who are ungrateful and murderous, during the
rest of the last year of the century.

Hugh Brown, an Englishman, who arrived at Hongkong from Manila February
11, gives in detail evidence of the conspiracy of the insurgent swarms
in attacking the American army. He was at a circus where there were
no natives when our soldiers were called out. They behaved nobly,
disarming natives, but not killing them. There was mysterious shooting
going on in the city "when an American shell struck a tree 200 yards
away, and four natives dropped to the ground. The trees were found
to be full of hiding natives, using smokeless powder." Aguinaldo was
fifty miles away and telegraphed Admiral Dewey that he was not to
blame, and for God's sake to stop the firing of the fleet.

Captain Frazer of London, late of the Imperial British forces,
arrived at Vancouver direct from Hongkong March 8th, and gave this
account of the declining health of Admiral Dewey:

"The war at Manila will have to end soon or the life of the great
American Admiral will be worth nothing.

"I dined with him at Manila within a month, and am convinced that if
he is not relieved of the terrible strain imposed upon him he cannot
last a month longer. As he sat at the banquet table, surrounded by
his staff, he looked to me like a dying man. His hair is snowy white,
his face ashen, and he ate hardly anything.

"I had the pleasure of a few minutes' conversation with him when we
retired to the smoking-room. Having in mind his enfeebled appearance.,
I asked him if he thought of returning to America soon.

"'I would like to, but my work is by no means finished here. When it
is, and only then, will I return.'

"I am thoroughly convinced that only the Admiral's indomitable will has
kept him up so long. The strain on him is terrible, and the climatic
conditions have reduced him to a shadow.

"One of his officers said to me just before I left Manila:

"'The war will be ended by the Admiral soon or it will end him. No
man can stand such a strain as he does in this climate and live long.'"

If this is to be literally accepted, and we may hope that it
is overstated, there has been a distressingly unfavorable change
within five months in the Admiral. His trouble is said to be with his
liver. There is no question the strain upon him has been more wearing
than the public have realized. Last summer his anxieties afflicted
him with insomnia at night, and he has not for a day since he left
Hongkong in April been free from burdens of harrassing care. His last
words on the deck of the China to the Author of this Book were that
the President had invited him to go home and counsel with him, but he
had written the substance of what he held to be the way to deal with
the Philippines, and would not leave Manila Bay "without peremptory
orders to go, until all things here are settled--settled--settled,"
a characteristic repetition of the important word. He had already
stated he wanted "two battleships" and the Oregon and Iowa were
accordingly ordered to join him. Instead of anticipating pleasure from
the ovations that thousands of letters and all callers assure him he
could not avoid in this country he sincerely dreads them, and when
told what the inevitable was whenever he put his foot on his native
shore he said: "That would be very distasteful to me." He is human,
and, of course, not insensible of the boundless compliment of the
endless enthusiasm of the public regarding him, but he habitually
insists that every man in his fleet did his duty on the day of battle
and victory, and it would be "injustice to brave men if one man got
all the glory." The Admiral knows the President's invitation to him
to come home is a standing one, and no limit on it, but the sense of
duty of the Admiral, in whose judgment there is perfect confidence,
forbids. The information of his declining health will certainly result
in his recall overruling his personal feeling and official purpose,
if it is believed that there is danger he is sacrificing himself.






NOTES

[1] In another chapter of this story of the Philippines will be found
Senor Filipe Agoncillo's personal account of this affair.

[2] Principally to Singapore.

[3] Principally to Japan.

[4] Principally to Singapore.

[5] Tagalo.--Name of one of the tribes of Indians inhabiting the
Philippine Islands.--Trans. Note.

[6] Tinapa.--Small white-bait fish, which, mixed with rice,
constitutes the daily diet of the lower class of natives in the
Philippine Islands.--Trans. Note.

[7] Gallego.--Native of Galicia, northwestern Province in Spain. On
account of their healthy and robust constitution, the lower class of
Gallego are found employed in the hardest work throughout the country,
where physical strength is necessary, although they are considered slow
and lazy. Their predominant characteristic seems to be an insatiable
greed of hoarding money.--Trans. Note.

[8] Cataluna.--Province of Spain, which capital is
Barcelona.--Trans. Note.

[9] This account of Magellan is from Antonio de Marga's rare volume
published in Mexico.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the Philippines
and Our New Possessions, Including The Ladrones, Hawaii, Cuba
and Porto Rico, by Murat Halstead

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE PHILIPPINES ***

***** This file should be named 12409.txt or 12409.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/4/0/12409/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Distributed Proofreaders Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


