The Project Gutenberg eBook, How John Became a Man, by Isabel C. Byrum


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: How John Became a Man

Author: Isabel C. Byrum

Release Date: June 3, 2004  [eBook #12493]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW JOHN BECAME A MAN***


E-text prepared by Joel Erickson, Christine Gehring, David Garcia, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 12493-h.htm or 12493-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/4/9/12493/12493-h/12493-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/4/9/12493/12493-h.zip)




HOW JOHN BECAME A MAN

Life Story of a Motherless Boy

By

ISABEL C. BYRUM






[Illustration: Learning to Pray]




Author's Preface


In presenting this little volume, the author hopes that it may be useful
in suggesting to the minds of young boys the great wrong there is in
indulging in evil habits.

We read, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge," and this is
true concerning most boys who form habits that are harmful both to body
and soul.

The story of John's life is a true one; and his earnest prayer that it
may be the means of helping some boys from Satan's snares and prove a
blessing to them, I trust, will be answered.

Isabel C. Byrum

Year 1917





Contents


Chapter

I      The Prairie Pasture
II     In the Sod Cellar
III    What the Big Chest Contained
IV     Early School Days
V      The Card Parties
VI     Visitors and Pastimes
VII    Leaving Home
VIII   With the Circus
IX     Caught Unawares
X      A Child Again
XI     How John Became a Man


ILLUSTRATIONS

Learning to Pray
Opening the Chest
A Card Party
Leaving the Old Homestead





CHAPTER I

The Prairie Pasture


Out on the prairie in one of the western states where buffaloes and
wild horses once had roamed at their pleasure and where cacti and
yuccas still thrived and bloomed could be seen a small two-story frame
building. There was nothing strange in this except that the house was
different from the average house of the plains; for at this particular
time the greater part of the dwellings were made of sod, mud, and brush.

The people, generally speaking, were of that type who think principally
of getting all the enjoyment from their every-day lives that it is
possible to obtain. There was, therefore, little thought among them of
the hereafter, when men must give an account of themselves before a just
and living God. In fact, the younger generation scarcely knew that there
was a God who took note of all their ways.

The building, so different from the ordinary dwellings upon the prairie,
was the home of a tiny lad named John. It was a happy home; for both
his parents were living, and the love that bound their hearts together
brought peace and happiness to each member of the little household. But
could this happy group have known of the presence of a grim monster just
outside the door, who at that very moment was seeking an entrance, their
joy would have given place to sorrow. Death was soon to destroy the
light and comfort of that home. The devoted wife and mother was not
strong; and after a severe illness lasting but a few short days, her
spirit left the ones she loved and her lifeless body was carried to
its last resting place in the cemetery a few miles away.

Little John was, of course, too young to realize the true meaning of the
change; but that something dreadful had happened he very well knew, and
his large pathetic eyes spoke the grief that he did understand and could
not express. During the three years of his short life he had known the
care of a tender, loving mother, whose ambitions were high and noble.
Although not a Christian, she had often expressed her wish that her
little brown-eyed boy might grow up to be an honor to his father and
mother, and a blessing to his country. After her death his papa's eyes
were often filled with tears, for he loved and pitied his little boy.

One evening when the lights were dim and the hands of the clock were
pointing to the bedtime hour, John felt his father's arms tenderly
encircled about him and heard him softly saying: "My little John, we are
left all alone now, and you must hurry up and become a man as soon as
you can; for I need you to help me. Mama has gone away and left us, and
she cannot teach you the things that she had planned that you should
know; so we will have to do the best that we can, but you must help me.
First of all, I want you to learn how to pray; for there is a God in
heaven, who made you, and of whom your mother expected to tell you.
Before Him we should bow down and pray every night before we go to
sleep."

"Does He hear all the words we say?" asked little John in an awed tone,
quite unable to comprehend his father's meaning, "and does He look at us
when we are asleep?"

"Yes," his father answered; "God sees and knows everything. Now, I will
tell you the short prayer that I used to say when I was a little boy
like you--the prayer that my mother taught me."

Thus it was that John, kneeling beside his little bed repeated the
prayer that has been lisped by thousands of other baby voices:

  "Now I lay me down to sleep;
  I pray thee, Lord, my soul to keep.
  If I should die before I wake,
  I pray thee, Lord, my soul to take."


As the days and weeks sped by, John thought often of his dear mama and
wished that he might see her; but he as often would recall his father's
words to be a little man, and with all his strength he endeavored to be
what he considered a man ought to be. But although he tried, in his
childish way, to be one, he was often very lonely; and had it not been
for frequent visits to his uncle's home, several miles distant, he would
have missed his precious mother even more than he did. While at his
uncle's, he could play with his two cousins, Will and Charley. At last
it was decided that it would be best for John and his father to go and
make their home with the uncle until John was older.

Now Charley was just about John's age; but as Charley was a cripple,
John had chosen Will, who was several years the oldest, to be his
closest friend and companion. Regardless of these facts, however, the
three boys generally played together. Their playground was the vast
dooryard extending far out over the prairie.

In time they were given the responsibility of herding the cows. To herd
the cows meant to see that the cattle did not wander about in the
neighborhood corn, wheat, and barley fields that were scattered about
here and there over the prairies and that were in but few instances
fenced, and to see that they were driven to some water-place at certain
intervals and were brought home at the milking hour.

The watering places were known as "buffalo-wallows," for they had been
made by the buffalos in wallowing. These basins were usually kept filled
with water by the rains. Some of the "wallows," or "ponds," were rather
deep, and were treacherous because of sudden "drop-offs"; but they were
usually shallow, and it was generally safe for the children to play
along the edge.

After the first sharp edge of his grief was dulled, John's father did
not feel it so keenly his duty to instruct his child and to teach him
to reverence his Creator; and when John was about six years of age, the
father was kept so busy with his work that he had but little time to
spend with the child. John's aunt, too, although a good woman, was too
much occupied with housekeeping to do her duty by her own two boys, much
less by a third. So John and his cousins had spent nearly all of the
three years that they had been together in doing as they pleased, and in
finding as much enjoyment in living as it was possible for them to find.
It was, therefore, not strange that they had learned and invented many
new ways to get amusement, and that some of these were evil; for Satan,
as he always does in such cases, had lent them a helping hand.

The work of attending to the cows did not, of course, occupy nearly all
their time, and the boys found it great sport to play around the wallows
and in them.

On one occasion Will said:

"Say, boys, did you ever hear the story about the man who walked upon
the water? I don't remember just how the story went; but I heard
somebody say that the man's name was Jesus, and that another man got out
of a boat to go and meet Him. The first fellow did all right, but the
second one came very near drowning because he looked down at the water.
Maybe he wanted to see how deep the water was, and I guess he would have
got drowned if they hadn't been close to the shore. Now, I am going to
do like Jesus did. Want to see me?"

Naturally both the boys wanted to see him perform a feat like that, and
Will quickly scampered into the water. Now, the wallow was very shallow
all the way across, and Will was soon on the opposite side. The smaller
boys, not knowing the depth of the water, supposed that it was deep and
that Will had actually done some marvelous thing. Will did not know that
he was doing wrong by speaking lightly of one of the Savior's miracles;
for he had never been in Sunday-school, and his parents had not taught
him the sacredness of the words and acts of the Savior. He simply wanted
to play a joke on his companions.

The smaller boys talked the matter over when they were alone, and John
said:

"Say, Charley, what do you suppose held Will up the other day on that
water? That wallow must have been deep out in the middle. Let's try it
some time for ourselves when Will isn't around. I believe we could do it
as well as he did."

Charley was agreed, and the two smaller lads watched their chance. One
day when Will was not with them, they chose a wallow that they thought
would answer their purpose. "I'll go first," Charley said, and he
hurried forward as rapidly as his little crippled limb could carry him,
to the water's edge and out into the pond.

Suddenly poor little Charley disappeared. John saw his cousin as he
went down into the deep water, and realized his danger. He knew that
something must be done and done at once, and with a bound he sprang in
after his companion. He did not, however, go beyond the shallow water,
and when his cousin came to the surface, he reached out his hand and
caught him by the hair; and as Charley had not lost the power to help
himself, he was soon able, by John's assistance, to scramble to a place
of safety.

The boys decided that they would say nothing about the accident; and as
they remained away from the house long enough for Charley's clothing to
dry, no questions were asked. But was the scene unnoticed? No. He who
notes the sparrow's fall was watching over these little boys; He had not
forgotten John's little prayer that had been taught him by his father.
God was caring for these little untaught children in that vast prairie
pasture.




CHAPTER II

In the Sod Cellar


Almost without exception the homes on the prairies were provided with
sod cellars. Even the few modern dwellings in the community in which
John's uncle lived were not without these old-fashioned cellars, which
served as a protection in times of storms and tornadoes. The cellars
served also as places in which to store the fruits and vegetables for
winter use. And very often, too, a large quantity of tobacco leaves that
had been dried and kept back when the summer's crop was sold could be
discovered in one of these places.

The home of John's uncle was provided with just such a cellar--a deep
hole dug in the ground and covered over with a dense roofing of brush,
mud, and sod. Within this cellar a large supply of tobacco leaves had
been stored. John had been in the cellar many times. He knew the tobacco
was there, and he knew to what use his uncle put the tobacco. He knew
also that his cousin Will both chewed and smoked the leaves, but it had
not occurred to him that he himself could do so.

The reason why he had not thought of using it was perhaps that his
father had once told him that the using of tobacco was a bad habit and
urged him to let it alone. But the fact that he had not been tempted did
not guarantee that he would not be; the fact that he had no appetite for
tobacco did not conclusively prove that he would never acquire one; nor
did the fact that he had been told to let tobacco alone warrant that he
would need no further watching--for an unforeseen temptation was lurking
near.

One day when John went into the cellar with his cousin Will, his cousin
filled a pipe with the leaves and offered it to him, bidding him smoke.
John shook his head, and said that he did not want to smoke, for his
father had said that using tobacco was a bad habit and that it would
ruin his health.

"Then, why does he use it himself?" Will reasoned. "Do you suppose that
he would use it if he thought that it was going to hurt him? Now, John,
look here; you said that you wanted to become a man. Here's your chance.
If you get to where you can smoke a pipe, chew tobacco, and spit, in the
way that your father and my dad do, you will be a man. Just some folks'
saying that it is a bad habit doesn't need to make any difference with
you."

As John thought over his cousin's words, they did seem reasonable, and
he remembered that all the men he had ever seen used tobacco. So he
decided that, if he expected to be a man himself, he must soon begin to
use it, too. He therefore accepted the pipe and began to puff vigorously
at the stem. But try as he would, he couldn't make the pretty little
curls of smoke mount up into the air as he had watched his father and
other men do. Very soon, however, a deathly sickness began to steal over
him. His head and stomach hurt, and he could scarcely help falling down
on the floor of the cellar.

"O Will," he said, as he gave the pipe to his cousin, "I am so sick!
Let's get out of here. I feel as though I was going to die!" And John
started in an attempt to find the opening through which he had entered
the cellar, but to his surprise and terror he could not find it.

"O Will," he said, "this is all your fault! You know I didn't want to
smoke. I wish now that I hadn't listened to you. Father said tobacco
would make me sick, but I didn't know it would be so bad as this. Tell
me, does it always make people sick? and do they ever die?"

"Yes, it usually makes them pretty sick," Will answered. "But they
always get over it; and each time they smoke, they get more used to it,
or something, and after a while they don't get sick at all. Look at me.
It never makes me sick, but it did at first. Surely you can stand a
little sickness when you know that it is going to make a man of you!"

John concluded that under those circumstances he could endure his
suffering. But he did not try to smoke any more that morning. With
Will's assistance he found the doorway of the cellar and went out where
the air was more pure. Gradually, he began to feel better. When dinner
time came, however, he did not care to eat; but he kept repeating to
himself, "It won't be this way long, and I can afford to suffer if it
will make a man of me." How sad to think that one so young should be
so deceived!

Could someone have taught him then that the sick feeling that had so
distressed him was caused by the strong poison contained in the tobacco,
it might have encouraged him never to touch it again. Had his father
explained that every pound of tobacco contains three hundred and twenty
grains of this poison, one grain of which will kill a large dog in about
three minutes; or told him the story of how a man once ran a needle and
thread that had been dipped in the poison through the skin of a frog and
of how the frog in a few moments began to act like a drunken person,
vomited, and hopped about as fast as possible, and then laid down,
twitched for a moment in agony, and died; or informed him that many
people become insane just through the use of tobacco, John might have
yet been influenced to leave the poisonous stuff alone--but perhaps his
father did not know. Anyway, John was left without this much-needed
information.

Boys who are not properly warned of the danger of tobacco-using are to
be pitied more than blamed if they indulge; but their ignorance does not
lessen the harm and the evils wrought. When the poison gets into the
system, it affects the most vital organs; it undermines that strength
and destroys that beauty which ornament true manhood and which assure an
individual of success. Besides, the continued using causes the indulger
to form a habit that cannot be easily overcome.

John, being not fully warned of the dreadful consequences of using
tobacco, and yet determined to become a man, kept on smoking until he
so accustomed his system to the shock that he felt satisfied he was
becoming a conqueror and would soon be able to show his father that
he was now a man.

During the time that John was undergoing such severe temptation, his
father was very busy. He realized that his child needed more instruction
than he was receiving and that Will's influence over John was not good;
but just what advice to give, he hardly knew. Once he thought that he
could smell tobacco smoke on his boy's clothing so calling John to his
side, he said:

"John, I feel that I must tell you something more about certain bad
habits that so many boys form while they are young. You remember I told
you that smoking and chewing tobacco ruin many a life. Now, I am not
going to say that you cannot use tobacco; but I wish that for my sake,
as well as for your own, you would let it alone, for it is indeed a very
bad habit."

To this advice John made no reply; for an appetite was being formed,
and in his heart he decided to keep right on. It would have been better
could his father have remembered the temptations of his own boyhood
days. He might then have more fully realized how next to impossible it
is for a parent to availingly teach his child to do something without
first setting before the child an example that is worthy of imitation.
Could he have helped his little son to understand the true meaning of
manhood and the necessity of building up within himself in youth a
noble, honest, and always-to-be-depended-upon character, as well as the
need of developing a strong body, he might have laid a foundation upon
which John could have later safely builded.

John dearly loved his father and wanted to please him. And to his mind
he could best please his father by as quickly as possible becoming a
man. So, with the thought of early manhood ever before him, he felt
that, in using tobacco, he was doing right. And then, too, Charley had
learned to smoke and chew, and it would be very hard indeed to be near
the boys and not to join in with them.

By the time that John had passed his seventh birthday, the small amount
of tobacco that was kept in the cellar was not sufficient to fill the
demand of the three boys without too rapidly diminishing the uncle's
supply, and the boys decided to look elsewhere.

Now, John's aunt had at one time explained to the boys that lying and
stealing are wrong; but she had not made it clear that deceiving is
lying and that taking little things that did not belong to them, even
though they took the things from some member of the family, is stealing,
and that just such thefts lead to the greater crimes that send men and
women to prison. Instead, she gave the advice in such a way that, though
they were impressed with a horror of stealing, the boys could only in
part comprehend her meaning. But because she had warned them, she felt
that she had done her duty and that they ought to know right from wrong
in regard to that matter without further explanation.

She did not realize that it was her duty to watch, encourage, and
advise, and also to find out when mischief was being planned. In fact,
this aunt and mother, busy with her own cares, knew nothing of the
possibilities for a child whose confidence and love had been won, and
who, through loving counsel, had gained a knowledge of evils and their
effects before he had formed ruinous habits or his mind had been
polluted with false ideas. Being thus left to themselves to discern as
best they could the difference between right and wrong, the boys nearly
always chose the wrong; and as a result, constantly went deeper and
deeper into sinful things.




CHAPTER III

What the Big Chest Contained


Great sins always have a beginning; the first attempts to do evil are
not hard to check if taken in time, but if allowed to be carried out, it
is impossible to tell what the results may be. How sad it was that John
and his cousins did not have someone to check them!

The boys now decided to keep close watch, and to avail themselves of
every opportunity to procure tobacco, even if they were forced to steal
it. The word "steal" had, of course, a certain horror to John because
of the picture his aunt had described of a prison and a thief; but he
soothed his conscience by saying, "There isn't anything else in the
world except tobacco that I would think of stealing." But the stealing
habit, like the tobacco habit, continues to grow stronger, unless it
is in some way broken. As tobacco contains a poison that affects the
physical being, so in a similar manner lying and stealing have a ruinous
effect upon the moral nature. The three--lying, stealing, and tobacco
using--too often go hand in hand.

The first effort of the boys to secure the much-coveted tobacco was made
one day when they, while roaming about over the prairie, discovered a
man hard at work in a field. The man seemed to be lifting something that
was very heavy, and Will suggested to the boys that they go and lend
their services provided the man would give them each a chew of his
tobacco in return; and Will did not forget to add that they must each
take as generous a bite as their mouths could accommodate. The man was
glad to accept their help; and together with his own efforts, the work
was soon finished. Then, in fulfillment of his agreement, he handed them
his plug of tobacco that they might each take the "chew" he had promised
them.

According to Will's suggestion the boys did not stop with an ordinary
chew; but each took all that his mouth would contain. When they returned
the plug, it was so small that the boys were all afraid the man would
find fault with them; so they hurried away from the spot as rapidly as
possible. As soon as they were far enough away, they removed the tobacco
from their mouths; and they found that, by taking very small chews at
a time, the amount was sufficient to last them for some time. Several
times they succeeded in securing tobacco in this way, and by economizing
were able to get along pretty well for a while. But the plan did not
always work; for the neighbors' becoming aware of the scheme, prepared
themselves with a small piece of tobacco to offer the greedy boys.

After that, in order to secure their tobacco, they were often forced
to pick up partly-chewed quids, found where they had been thrown away
by the owners. These the boys usually washed; sometimes, however, in
their eagerness they could not wait to attend to even this amount of
cleanliness, but crammed the tobacco into their mouths just as they had
found it. Even cigar stubs; in fact, everything in the form of tobacco,
that had been thrown away, they eagerly gathered and used to satisfy
their ravenous appetites.

With a foundation now laid for both lying and stealing and with their
consciences dulled, the boys were constantly laying plans to gratify
their evil desires. Many a pocket they robbed of its contents if it
happened to contain tobacco in any form. But this was a slow process at
best; even under the most favorable circumstances it yielded them but
very little returns for their efforts. But one day Will informed the
boys that he had made a discovery--that he had found out that there was
a lot of plug tobacco in the big chest in his father's room. "Now, if we
could think up some way to get into that chest when the old folks are
gone away to town," he suggested, "we could get all the chewing tobacco
we would want for a long while. I thought I would watch and see where
Dad put the key, but he took it with him. Guess he carries it with him
everywhere he goes. I wonder if we couldn't manage in some way to break
the lock. My, but I tell you we could get a big haul! I wonder if we
hadn't better try it some day when the old folks go to town?"

"Hooray, that's just it!" shouted the smaller boys in the same breath.

And John asked quickly: "When will they go to town again? This is only
Wednesday."

"It won't be long, I'm sure," Will answered reassuringly. "They'll go
either Friday or Saturday sure. But we'll have to get busy and think out
a way to break that lock. My, but won't the old man be mad when he finds
out about it! We'll have to act just as if we couldn't see how on earth
such a thing could have happened."

"Yes; and we'll have to hide the tobacco good, or Pa might find it,"
chimed in Charley.

"Hey, Will," John exclaimed in a hurried undertone--for all the boys had
learned to speak low when mentioning their plans--"if we could take the
hinges off from the back of the chest, we wouldn't have to break the
lock at all."

"Why, John, that's just it! How in the world did you think of that
scheme?" Will exclaimed, as he slapped his little cousin on the back. "I
say, my boy, you had better look out or you'll be a man before your big
cousin! It doesn't matter, you know, about the height, if you have the
sense."

Now, John (although so young) was quite ingenious; and he often
suggested ideas that, for their shrewdness, were far beyond his years.
For such he was always praised by Will, and was encouraged to make other
plans.

Being encouraged by his cousin's praise, the child's brain became even
more active, and he said, "If we just cut a little piece from each plug,
Uncle won't be so apt to miss the tobacco."

"That's just it again!" emphatically assented Will. "I declare, John,
you surprise me! And now, we must have everything all ready so that
the minute they leave we can get busy. Let's see, what'll we need?
A screw-driver--and will we need a hammer?"

"We'll need a real sharp knife to cut the tobacco," John suggested.

"I'll get the things ready," Charley volunteered; and so they planned
and waited for the time to come when they could carry out their scheme.

The time came on the following Saturday. Early in the morning the uncle
and aunt drove away in the "buckboard," and were on their way to the
city where they were to do their trading. All three of the boys had been
unusually anxious to help their elders get started, forgetting in their
eagerness that they might be thus revealing some of their plans.
Scarcely did they give the uncle and aunt time to disappear in the
distance before they had commenced their evil work.

"Here's the tools," Charley said, as he brought forth the screw-driver,
hammer, and sharp knife. "Where shall I put them?"

"Oh, anywhere so they'll be handy!" Will told him; and then the three
boys hastened to the room containing the chest and were soon kneeling on
the floor, examining carefully the object of their interest.

The chest, a long, narrow, flat box somewhat darkened with age, was
closed and securely fastened; and the tiny padlock that hung from its
side seemed to say, "If you please, I am here to protect my master's
property from the hand of any thieves; and to the extent that it is
within my power, I shall perform my duty." Its bold front and defiant
appearance did not, however, daunt the purpose of the boys. After giving
it a brief examination, they slipped around to the opposite side of the
chest, and by the aid of the screw-driver, removed the lower half of the
rusty hinges.

"Thank goodness, this chest is old!" Will exclaimed as he brushed from
his forehead the large beads of perspiration. "If these screws turned
any harder, I never could get them out. Guess we'll earn our tobacco
this time all right!"

[Illustration: Opening the Chest]

Scarcely had the last screw been removed when up came the lid; and
almost instantly three pairs of eager eyes were greedily gazing down
upon the contents of the wooden chest. There were in it a package of
old letters, various articles of clothing, a few trinkets, etc.; but
only that part of the contents that was carefully packed in one corner
claimed the attention of the boys. This, a pile of long brown strips,
or plugs, of tobacco, was what they wanted; and soon Will was busily
engaged in cutting a narrow slice from each plug and John and Charley
were dividing the slices into three equal parts. But in their haste and
excitement, none of the boys forgot to fill their mouths with the filthy
stuff, and to chew while they worked.

As Will cut a piece from the last plug, he glanced about over the piles
and said with a look of satisfaction: "Now that ain't so bad, is it,
boys? That ought to last quite a spell; and when it's gone, we can come
back here, or maybe something else will turn up." And then, when he saw
the boys rearranging the tobacco in the chest, he said, "Look out there!
You'll have to get everything just like it was, or we'll be caught and
have had our fun for nothing!" When the chest was repacked, the last
screw in its place, and the tiny scraps of tobacco that had fallen upon
the floor had been carefully preserved, the boys looked at one another
with satisfaction, and Will said, "That's a pretty slick job all right,
if I do say so; and its a lot better than breaking the lock would have
been. I'll tell you it takes some brains to do up a thing like that,
and it makes me feel as if I'd like more of them."

To this John smiled and said: "Hey, Will, do you know what's in that
trunk?" John referred to a large trunk that was sitting near the bed
on the opposite side of the room.

"Couldn't tell you all that's in it, but it's locked; and it's in that
trunk that Dad keeps his revolvers. There's two of them, because I saw
inside the trunk the other day." And then as the new thought presented
itself to his mind, he exclaimed, "I wonder why we couldn't get into
that trunk the same as we did the chest?"

In a twinkling, all the boys were examining the trunk, but to their
dismay, they found that the hinges, instead of being on the outside of
the trunk, were arranged differently, and they could not get at them.
Again it was John who suggested a plan whereby they could accomplish
their desires. "Just take a nail," he said, "and turn the head of it
around in the lock. I've watched my father do that, and he gets his
open every time."

The trunk, which was an old one, yielded quickly to the efforts made
by the boys; and upon raising the lid, they saw before them two shining
weapons that were supposed to have been carefully hidden away from their
inexperienced fingers. John and Will each quickly caught one up in his
hand; and Will began handling his as though it were a toy, but not so
did John.

John's father had taught him something of the dangers connected with the
handling of a gun or revolver. Besides, John was at one time present
when a duel was fought; and on that occasion one of the duelists was
killed. The memory of that incident and of his father's warnings, made
John very careful about pointing the revolver at either of his cousins.
It was, therefore, with intense fear that John looked into the barrel
of his cousin's revolver as Will snapped it, aimlessly pointing in his
direction; and John exclaimed, "Turn that thing away, or you'll shoot
me."

Will's answer was: "You needn't be afraid, John. This revolver isn't
loaded."

But John, seeing his cousin's careless attitude, was afraid; and he
dodged down behind a barrel of carpet-rags near which he had been
standing. It was well that John did not longer remain where he had been;
for the revolver contained a solitary load, and the frequent pulling of
the trigger discharged this. The bullet passed the very spot where John
had a moment before been standing, and lodged itself deep in the side of
the trunk.

This experience marked an awakening-time in all of the boys' lives; at
that moment their consciences, which had almost fallen asleep, were
aroused, and in startling phrases gave them accounts of their evil
deeds. With great haste the boys returned the weapons to their former
hiding place, relocked the trunk, and in so far as it was possible,
covered all the traces of the accident. Then, with hearts full of guilty
thoughts, the three boys hastened from the place where a scene of horror
had very nearly been enacted.

Out in the open, where the air was fresh and pure, their spirits to a
certain degree revived. But their usual laughter, fun, and merry-making
had been dampened; and as they wended their way to the prairie
pasture-land, few words were passed between them. Poor little misguided
boys! warned, and yet left so ignorant of what was the right and the
wrong way.

Through the voice of conscience God endeavored to speak to John and to
tell him that his ways were evil and that he and his cousins would some
day get into serious trouble if they continued in the way they were
going; but, although he was sad, he could not understand. He wanted to
be a good boy for his father's sake (for his father was the best friend
he knew); and most of all he desired to become the man that that parent
had wished him to be. John's disregard for his father's warnings from
time to time had been due to the fear that, if he obeyed, his early
manhood would be hindered.

Could that father have given his little son an object-lesson such as an
aged monk once, while walking through a forest, gave his scholar, John
might have been spared much suffering. The monk, stepping before four
plants that were close by, pointed to the first, a plant just beginning
to peep above the ground; to the second, one well-rooted in the earth;
to the third, a small shrub; and to the fourth, a full-sized tree.

Then turning to his young companion, he said, "Pull up the first." This
the boy easily did.

"Now, pull up the second." The youth obeyed, but not with so much ease.

"And now the third." This time before the boy succeeded in uprooting the
plant, he had to put forth all his strength and to use both his arms.

"And now," said his master, "try your hand on the fourth." But although
the lad grasped the trunk of the tree in his arms, he scarcely shook its
leaves; and he found it impossible to tear its roots from the earth.
Then the wise old man explained the meaning of the four trials.

"This, my son," he said, "is just what happens to our bad habits and
passions. When they are young and weak, we can by a little watchfulness
and by a little discipline, easily tear them up; but if we let them cast
their roots deep down into our souls, no human power can uproot them.
Only the almighty hand of the Creator can pluck them out. For this
reason, my boy, watch your first impulses."

Or, could John have heard the story of the giant who fell in with a
company of pigmies, he might have taken a different course. The giant
roared with laughter at the insignificant stature and wonderful
boastings of the pigmies. He ridiculed their threats when they told what
they expected to do to him; but when he fell asleep that night, he was
at their mercy. And he did not know until he awoke in the morning that
while he was asleep these tiny people of whom he had made sport had
bound him with innumerable threads and that he was their helpless
captive. But John knew nothing of these stories or of other things that
teach the lessons he so much needed; and perhaps his father did not
know, so that he could tell his son what he should have been told.

The use of tobacco is an evil. When God made tobacco and pronounced it
good, He did not mean for it to go into the mouth of any man or woman,
much less into the mouths of children. Tobacco is a deadly poison; and
the constant use of any poison must injure the body of the one who uses
it. When it has sapped the strength from both the mind and the body, it
leaves the individual weakened in every way and makes it harder for him
to live a good, pure life.

No person who uses tobacco may be said to be perfectly well. Such a
person may not realize how his health is impaired, because the stupor
that the poison produces numbs his sensibilities; but the very appetite
he has for tobacco is in itself a disease. In order for an habitual user
to realize the harm that tobacco is doing to his health, he has simply
to stop its use for a short time and watch the effect on his system.

Tobacco is not a food that God intended man to eat. In man's case it
feeds only a craving that it has itself created. But the leaves of the
tobacco plant do serve as food for the large, green worms that live and
thrive in tobacco fields. Yes; tobacco is "very good" for the "creeping
things" for which it was created; but it was not intended as food for
man.

Could John and his cousins have understood all this when the next
tobacco famine came to them, it seems that each would surely have
resisted the temptation to stoop down, pick up a partly chewed quid of
tobacco, cram it greedily into his watering mouth, and chew it as though
it was the sweetest morsel he had ever tasted. But the boys did not
know. They thought such things were manly.




CHAPTER IV

Early School Days


By the time John was eight years old, the evil influences with which he
had been surrounded in his uncle's home were rapidly telling on him. To
be sure, there was still the same pathetic expression in his deep, brown
eyes, and now and then there could be observed in them a mischievous
glance or a merry twinkle; but his general appearance was that of a
sadly neglected child. Still the busy aunt took little notice either
of him or of her own boys.

In his heart John was longing for someone to take an interest in him and
to love him--someone to whom he could go with his boyish heartaches and
from whom he could gain the sympathy for which his heart was craving.
To be sure, his father was still kind, and sometimes John would imagine
that he could even feel his father's love. At such times the boy would
press closer to his parent, hoping that he would at least with his arm
caress him; but his father did not understand. He could see only the
outward roughness; and he said in his heart:

"It is all because he has never had a chance. He has grown up here on
the prairie like a wild thing. He has never been to school, and I must
send him at once."

With this purpose in his heart John's father decided to return with his
child to the place that had once been his happy home. In making the
change there were, of course, many things to take into consideration.
But under the circumstances, to go seemed the best and proper thing to
do. The sad events, he reasoned, were all in a lifetime; and he must
make the best of them. The home would for a time seem desolate, he knew,
but he thought that perhaps they could become used to it; anyway, his
boy must be in school. The school terms would not be long (for only
three or four months of each year were set apart for school purposes);
but even these short terms would be better than none.

To John the change meant more. The five years that he had spent in the
home of his uncle had made his cousins seem to him like brothers; but
still, as he considered his father's plans, he thought, "Perhaps it may
be all right." His aunt was very kind while John and his father were
preparing to move; and the day they bade her good-by she said such sweet
things that he wanted to throw his arms about her neck. To his mind it
was the very way in which his own dear mother would have spoken had she
been alive.

When all was ready for the departure, the aunt said: "John, here are the
two little turkeys that you have liked so well all summer. You may take
them with you. They will help you to forget that you are alone when your
father is away at his work"; and she handed him a small covered basket.
Then the wagon containing their few belongings moved away from the place
that for nearly five years they had called their home.

As they wended their way along the thoroughfare, they saw men at work in
the fields. Some were shucking corn and tossing the bright golden ears
into wagons that were placed between the rows for that purpose, while
others were hauling the grain to their barns to store it away for the
winter's use. The broad corn leaves rustling in the wind seemed to
whisper, "Winter is coming with his cold, bleak storms to rob the earth
of her summer splendor; but he will bring his beautiful coverlet of snow
to protect her fields and to prepare them for the coming year."

The foliage on the small bushes that were scattered here and there
was fading; but the air was still soft and mild. Near the willows
might still be seen the bending goldenrods, asters, and sunflowers.
And occasionally blue smoke could be seen curling up from some
sod-house chimney.

It was evening when the father and his son drove up to the door of their
long-desolate home; the sun was sinking lower and lower in the west. A
few soft glimmers of its mellow light lingered timidly about the doorway
as if to bid the home-comers welcome, and then they were gone. A rabbit,
hopping boldly about in the neglected doorway, stopped suddenly as if
to ask why these people had come to a place that she had chosen for her
home; and some prairie dogs that had formed a colony close by anxiously
watched from the entrance of their underground homes to see what was
going on.

John and his father, each absorbed with his own thoughts, sprang from
the wagon, and soon began to air out the musty house and to rearrange
the furniture that had long been idly awaiting their return. After a
while John found that his aunt had not forgotten that he would be very
hungry, and soon he was sampling some large bread-and-meat sandwiches;
his father, too, came for his share. Thus quickly passed the first
evening in their old home. But before John retired to his own bed, he
saw that his little turkeys received some attention; and in the morning
he let them have their freedom.

As the days sped by and lengthened into weeks and months, John would
have indeed been lonely had it not been for his little pets, the
turkeys. They received his earliest attention in the morning, and it
was their little beaks that touched his cheek the last thing before he
retired at night; and to himself alone was their roosting-place known.

How different everything seemed to John in his new home! The change from
knowing nothing but perfect freedom in God's great open out-of-doors to
being left alone to hustle off to school in the early morning hours,
where he must sit like a statue and prepare humdrum lessons, was to John
a wonderful change. John, however, was determined to make the very best
of his lot and to do all that he could to please his teacher.

Allowing this purpose to govern his life, John's conduct was such that
he became in a very short time the favorite pupil in the school; and his
kindly, generous, and ambitious nature won him many friends. He was soon
noted for his witty remarks, made in a manner so droll and unpretentious
that often merry bursts of laughter were heard from his teacher as well
as his playmates.

But regardless of these pleasant conditions, John was far from happy.
He still wanted someone to show deep love for him and to take an interest
in his welfare; and though he constantly tried to smother the deep
suffering he felt it still smoldered in his heart. This, perhaps, caused
him to crave all the more tobacco that in a way had dulled his senses
and caused him to realize his troubles less.




CHAPTER V

The Card Parties


While John was forming new acquaintances at school, Satan was not
asleep. John's active mind was soon being schooled in many evils that he
had not known before. And to make the matter still worse, John's father
had a number of bachelor friends with whom he was in the habit of
meeting for pleasant evenings, and their amusements were mostly drinking
strong drinks and playing card games.

Among these men, as among his schoolmates, John became a favorite; and
he was often praised and admired for his shrewd and manly ways. And when
the report concerning his intense desire to become a man was circulated
among them, they urged him to drink beer, saying that it would make him
more manly and that all men must learn how to drink and smoke if they
would be thought of as being manly. As a result John was soon able to
drink his share of the beer, although he did not like the taste at
first. Besides this, John discovered that at these evening gatherings he
could often replenish his supply of tobacco by slipping a little from
someone's pocket when the owner was not on his guard.

Poor little John!--such a favorite! so gifted, and yet so neglected! in
regard to high ideals and purposes in life, so ignorant! and so desirous
of that motherly love and interest that were ever denied him! He
endeavored to fill his life with other things; but in his day-dreams he
often pictured his mother, and wondered: "Was she like my aunt? Would
she take me and hold me in her arms while she smoothed my hair with her
hand? Would she bind my bruises? And would she sit by my bedside at
night and hold my hand in hers while telling me stories that she had
read?" "Oh, how would it all seem?" he would ask himself; and then,
remembering that such could never be, he would try to forget and be
happy. His mother was gone, he reasoned, and he must be content. It was
to his two little feathered friends alone that he confided his sorrows.

Had John's father remembered the determination that filled his soul on
the dark day of his wife's funeral, and had he continued to teach his
little son to pray and to serve God, how much better it might have been!
How much better might John have understood the difference between right
and wrong! In such a case, John's life's record might have been filled
with good and noble deeds, and his habits might have been clean and
wholesome.

As it was, because of his ignorance of right, he was laying a crumbling
foundation formed of evil motives and desires. And should he continue to
build, using similar material, his life's structure would be unsafe; it
would be momentarily in danger of falling. As Satan is ever waiting with
the needed supplies for a work of this kind, so he was ready to aid
little John. The card parties at which John and his father were often
present furnished John with much of his material.

The younger men among those who attended these gatherings, recognizing
in John material of the entertaining sort, began at once to educate him.
They taught him, not only to drink beer, but also to play cards and to
swear. To John beer did not at first have a pleasant taste; but as it
was when he was trying to learn to use tobacco, so it was now--the
promise that it would help him in becoming manly encouraged him to take
more; and as he drank, the appetite grew. Finally, he would sometimes
drink so much that he could not keep awake.

Usually on these occasions beer was served only as a prize to the
winners of the games. The lucky fellow alone was given a drink while
those who had lost were given only a smell of the bottle. One time when
John had won in a number of games and had been treated to as many drinks
from the bottle of beer, he became very sleepy. Going over to one corner
of the room, he crept up on a table and soon was apparently asleep.
It happened, however, that, although he was sleepy, he was not wholly
unconscious to what was going on; and suddenly he heard a plot that
seemed to him so cruel that he could scarcely believe his ears.

[Illustration: A Card-Party]

At the close of such gatherings, a chicken-roast was generally in order,
and the fowl used was usually taken from some hen-roost not far distant.
On this particular occasion when the party was about to break up, John
heard the roughest of the company ask:

"I say, boys, who's goin' fer the roast tonight? Some one ought to be
off fer it's nigh onter the midnight hour, and I, fer one's got a big
job ahead a me tomorrer."

"I'll go, Bill," someone answered; "but wha do ye say ter go?"

"Oh, it don't make no difference, so's it's not too fer away!" the other
answered, and added: "Whist, Tom, why can't we git John's turkeys?
They'd make fust-rate eatin' all right. He's too far gone to know
anything about it."

John was just about to call out that they must let his turkeys alone
when he remembered how hard it would be in the darkness to discover
their roosting-place, so he remained quiet. It was, however, with some
uneasiness that he awaited the thieves' return. When they came, he was
relieved; for they were carrying chickens instead of turkeys. Although,
because of the safety of his pets, a thrill of satisfaction swept over
John, yet he had received in his heart a wound that was deep and wide.
These cruel, heartless men were willing to take from him, in so
unprincipled a manner, his only companions and playfellows. John
somewhat realized that life had a hard and bitter side for him; but
again he endeavored with all his strength to make the best of it.

It was morning before John and his father returned to their home;
and it was with unusual joy that John found his pets waiting for their
breakfast. As he held them close to his breast, with their beaks close
to his cheek, he again thought of his mother; also he wondered about a
certain change that had come over his father.

For a time after their removal to their own home, the father had been
very devoted to John and had seemed to understand something of the boy's
loneliness. Perhaps it was a realization of this loneliness and a desire
to bring into the life of the child the motherly interest of which he
had been deprived that had turned the father's heart toward a certain
young lady of his acquaintance. Anyway, whatever was the cause, the
father became more and more interested in this young woman; while, on
the other hand, he paid less attention to John, whose loneliness daily
increased. Night after night John's pillow was dampened by the tears he
shed while waiting and listening for the sound of his father's returning
footsteps.

In course of time the father married and brought home his new bride.
At first John was very shy; but he was glad. Oh, how he wished that she
would be what he had day-dreamed that his own mother might have been!
He could then have given her all his love and confidence. He could have
told her all his boyish plans for the future, asking her for the advice
he would need. But the new mother failed to fulfill his hopes. Even she
did not understand the longings of his boyish heart; nor did she realize
that the poor little neglected boy was measuring her by what he had
imagined a true mother to be. She was kind to John; but that was all.
Her time and attention were given to her husband; and John daily saw the
gulf between his father and himself widening and deepening. A feeling of
discord crept into John's heart; all attraction for home was severed;
and he felt that his happiness would have to be sought from other
sources.




CHAPTER VI

Visitors and Pastimes


During the winter that followed his father's marriage, John's
stepmother's brother came to live with the family; and the influence of
this stepuncle, whose name was Ed, was as bad or worse than Will's or
Charley's could ever have been; for Ed was older and wiser, and knew
much more of sin.

In Ed's home both the father and the mother used tobacco a long time
before their child was born. When he was just a little infant, he
worried and cried a great deal. He continued to do this, seemingly never
to be satisfied, until finally the parents imagined that he wanted
tobacco; and sure enough he did. The mother tied a small amount in a rag
and gave it to her baby to suck, and immediately he became quiet and
contented. So, from that time she gave him tobacco to stop his crying.
As he grew, the quantity he used gradually increased until, when he was
in his teens, he spent much of his money for tobacco. He went without
many of the necessary things of life in order that he might have the
money those things would cost to spend for tobacco.

The Bible tells us that God is abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands and forgiving iniquity and transgression and
sin ... Parents may be sorry for their sins, and be forgiven for
their transgressions; but their children must suffer from inherited
ill-dispositions, unnatural appetites, or diseases.... Oh, what a
responsibility is resting upon the parents of the future generations!

Now, tobacco acts directly on the mind. It clouds the understanding and
dulls the memory; and sometimes it has much worse effects. The story is
told of the experience of a brilliant young man--a graduate from Andover
College--who, for a time, seemed to have a wonderful future before him.
After a few short successful years, however, all hopes were blighted;
he was thrown into an insane asylum a physical wreck. The doctors said
that tobacco had done it; but regardless of this, he was each day given,
according to the rules of the asylum, a small quantity of tobacco.
For twenty years he was in this seemingly hopeless condition; and then
suddenly, one day as he was walking the floor, his reason returned, and
he realized what was the matter. Throwing the plug of tobacco through
the iron grate of his cell, he said: "What brought me here? What keeps
me here? Why am I here? Tobacco! tobacco! tobacco! God help, help!
I will never use it again!"

He was restored; and for ten years he preached the gospel.

But not only does tobacco injure the mind; it also affects the blood and
sensitive tissues and the different organs of the body, which in order
to act normally and to do their work properly must be in healthful
condition. When the blood becomes saturated with the deadly poison that
comes from the pipe or cigar, and the soft membranes of the mouth become
filled with the poisonous secretion from the quid, as a consequence,
every member of the body becomes affected, and disease and suffering
are the final results. Lord Bacon said, "To smoke is a secret delight,
serving to steal away men's brains." Many others have expressed
themselves in even louder terms against the evil effects of tobacco;
but we must now return to John and to Ed, his stepuncle.

Soon after Ed came to live in the family, he paid a visit to a
neighboring town; and while there, he stole from a store a case of plug
tobacco. This he stealthily brought to his sister's new home, confiding
his secret to no one except John; and by generous promises he persuaded
John to say nothing about the matter. At this time John was in his
thirteenth year. He still keenly felt that something was dreadfully
missing in his life; so he turned to Ed, hoping to find that something
in his companionship. But again he was disappointed. The standard of
Ed's ideals were so far below the standard that John had fixed for
himself that John was conscious of a constant repulsion in his heart
toward Ed. As a consequence, John's loneliness increased.

About the time Ed arrived in the neighborhood, another dangerous pastime
was introduced. Dancing found a place in the social gatherings; and
again John was an apt scholar. Before very long he was considered to be
one of the best among the young people in this art; and for the time
being he seemed to find real enjoyment in the amusement. There was a
fascination about it that helped him partly to forget his troubles and
heartaches, also the discouragements with which he had been haunted so
much of late.

During the winter that followed, the social spirit increased and the
months were full of changes and excitement. The uncle with whom John and
his father had spent several years came with his family for a prolonged
visit. A hearty welcome was given the visitors, especially by John; for
regardless of the fact that in order to make room for the company he had
to exchange his nice warm bed in the house for a less comfortable one in
the sod cellar, he rejoiced in the thought that he could once more be
with his old companion, Will. In fact, any change was appreciated by
John in his restless, discontented frame of mind.

The first evening the boys retired early, partly because they had no
light and partly because they wanted to visit about bygone days. They
had so many things to say to each other; and besides, they wanted to lay
their plans for a jolly time while they could be together. Will laughed
heartily about John's intense desire to become a man, and asked him how
he felt about it now. It was in a discouraged tone of voice that John
replied:

"There ain't so much fun in it as I supposed. The older I get, the
more unhappy I feel. Why, Will, there are times when I almost wish that
I were dead. No one seems to care for me or to have any time to give me.
It's just 'John here' and 'John there'; and if I dare to say anything,
I'm laughed at or told to keep still. It was different before Pa got
married. Then he used to talk to me and try to help me when I got
lonesome; but now I just have to get along the best way I can.
If I like anything it's all right, and if I don't it's the same.

"I'll just tell you, if it wasn't for Pa, I'd run away from home! As for
being a man, I don't think that it is so wonderful after all. The men
that I know are all so bad. Just look at Ed! I'm getting so that I can
hardly endure Ed!"

In reply to John's great outburst of sorrow, Will had no words of
sympathy to offer. All that he could propose was that they could spend
their evenings in playing cards (for Will, too, had learned many things
since John had left; and card-playing was one of them). John was pleased
with the suggestion; but he said, "I haven't any cards." As usual,
however, he was quick to invent a way out of that difficulty and added:
"Hey, Will! why couldn't we make some? I know where there's a lot of
cardboard boxes that we could cut up. One could cut while the other
marked them. You would know how to make them, would you not?"

"Yes, I think so," Will answered. "We could do that all right in the
daytime; but how could we work in the dark? And does it get very cold
in here?"

"Oh, it doesn't get so awfully cold; and as for a light, I can get a
dish of lard and put a rag in it which we can light! That won't be a
very good light; but I think we can get along."

The boys found that it was no small task to make the cards. First they
had to cut the cardboard. This John did with a very sharp knife. Next,
they drew hearts and diamonds and other necessary markings. To be sure,
the set of cards was a very crude one when it was finished; and when the
boys began to shuffle them in the pack, they were disappointed because
of the bulky appearance and wished for a more perfect set. But John
had done a good job in cutting them out, and the marking answered the
purpose very well. So night after night, by the aid of the flickering
and sputtering light, furnished by the rag burning in the saucer of
lard, the two boys, with heads bent low, sat scheming and planning,
each striving to get ahead of the other in the game.

Long before Will's visit was ended, both boys had become so skillful in
playing that the one could scarcely get the better of the other unless
one in some way cheated. This caused them to try many underhanded tricks
and encouraged them to bet and gamble; and in course of time they had
exchanged as wagers the greater part of their simple belongings. Taking
advantage of one another became a part of the game and seemingly was the
principal aim. And the evenings that they did not spend in dancing were
spent in indulging in these dangerous amusements. (Card-playing--as does
also dancing--wields an influence that is very harmful, especially to
the young. As the interest in the game increases, the players' desire
for things that are good and wholesome is lessened. One player sees only
the pleasure that he derives from getting the better of the one he is
playing against. He fails to see that each time he stoops to unfair
methods in order to gain his purpose he helps to pave the way for other
things that are wrong and deceitful.)

When the first warm days of spring arrived and the grass of the prairie
began to unfold its tiny blades, John's uncle said it was time for him
and his family to return home. "It's a long way, Will," he said; "and
we must get there in good time to plant a big crop of 'tobaker.' You
remember we didn't have near enough to do us last year!" Will agreed;
but the boys were all sorry to be separated again, and when the day of
departure came, it was very hard indeed for them to bid one another
farewell.

During the winter months John had not thought much about his aunt, for
Will and he had been too deeply interested in other things. But now at
the last moment that old longing again clutched at his heart. When he
saw them disappearing in the distance and finally lost them to view,
like a flash the desire that had so long been smoldering within his
heart was fanned, as it were, into a mighty flame, and in his mind he
resolved what he would do. "I will stay in this home no longer!" he
cried in his distress. "My father may miss me; but if I stay here,
I shall die!" and going to his father, he stated his intentions.




CHAPTER VII

Leaving Home


As John's father looked into the deep pathetic eyes of his son, he
in part understood the meaning of what he read. He could see that the
soul of his child was crying out for something; but again he failed to
understand the true longings of the young heart. He failed to see that
the boy was being crushed by sinful habits, and that for parental care
and interest he was starving. In ignorance the father supposed that
the boy's unrest was due to a longing to know more of the world, to
a feeling akin to that which an explorer experiences.

Poor man! Could he have known just then what really was troubling his
boy, he could have stayed the spirit of unrest by holding out to John
the "olive branch of peace." He could have said: "John, we have drifted
apart. We are not to one another what we used to be. Stop, my boy; sit
down here. Let us carefully talk these things over before you take such
a step. Out in the world you will meet many temptations and evils, more
than you have ever known." And many other tender words of advice he
might have spoken to the child; but these things were left unspoken.

Instead, his father only said, "John, I would like to have you remain
at home a while longer; but if you are determined to go, you may, only
remember to try to do as nearly right as you can! I have wanted to bring
you up well for your mother's sake; for she had made so many plans for
your future. My wish, John, is that you become a good man."

John was deeply touched by his father's farewell speech; and had there
been any other drawing to keep him at home, he certainly would have
remained. As it was, he soon gathered together his belongings, and while
still in his thirteenth year, said good-by to his people, and went away
to work for a thrifty farmer.

During the two years preceding his departure from home, John had now
and then worked for the farmers in different parts of the country. This
and his attendance at the social gatherings had enabled him to become
acquainted with numbers of boys, some of whom were very wild and rough.
But because of the companionship of Will during the winter months, the
evil influences of his wide circle of friends had not been so strong.
But when the cousins were parted, John's companions were again some of
the roughest and toughest in the community. Because of this his tobacco
and beer bills increased, and to this alarming expenditure he added many
accounts for whiskey.

John had made a discovery. He had found that Ed, in order to satisfy the
awful craving and gnawing in his stomach (a sensation produced by the
tobacco poison), was using a generous supply of whiskey; and for the
same reason John began to use it. Whiskey did perhaps satisfy for the
time being; but John also discovered that the seemingly good effect
was very soon gone and that the old trouble was again there, only with
renewed force and strength. Another thing he found, too, was that he had
added to his list of evil habits one even more fierce and strong than
the others.

When John left home, his desire was principally to find relief for his
loneliness; but he had another object. His expenses had been heavy and
hard to defray. And now with the amount he had to pay for his whiskey
added to what he was already spending for beer and tobacco, his bills
were so high he felt that he must have more money in order to meet them.
This seeming necessity was, therefore, one thing that urged him to take
the step he took.

[Illustration: Leaving the Old Homestead]

The farmer for whom John began to work was known among his men as "the
captain." All the hired help worked under one manager, or boss; so
John's experience while in this service was new and varied.

"We have orders today to work for Farmer Z," explained the boss one
morning a few weeks after John's arrival. "And the captain says we must
be sure and get around there early in the morning, for we are to get our
breakfast over there."

The home of Farmer Z was some distance from that of John's employer; but
the prancing horses on which the men were to ride were soon carrying
them across the prairie, and it was not long until they were in sight
of Farmer Z's modest farmhouse. As they entered the gateway, Farmer Z
stepped into the doorway; and when he greeted the men with a kindly
"Good morning," John particularly noticed his countenance and expression
and wondered why he was so different from the comrades with whom he had
always associated. He noticed, too, that, as the men gathered in the
dining room and took their places around the table, they were quiet and
reserved; and he was puzzled by still another thing--Farmer Z bowed his
head and thanked God for all of His blessings and benefits and goodness
to them all.

Such things were new and strange to John; and when at the close of the
meal, the farmer invited them into another room, saying, "We always have
reading and prayer immediately after breakfast and would be glad to have
you all join with us," John suddenly felt extremely awkward and out of
place, and he longed to make his escape to the barn.

John could have given no reason for his feelings, unless it was that the
farmer's suggestion of prayer made him think about his mother and of the
time when his father had taught him the little prayer, "Now I lay me
down to sleep," and had told him that he very much desired him to be
a little man. But it was not strange that John should feel as he did;
for he had so often associated other scenes with that of learning the
prayer, but had since that time heard very little about the Bible. In
fact, the only part of the Bible that he had ever read was a few verses
in the small New Testament that had belonged to his mother; and he had
read these because he had heard that the reading of certain passages
would stop the toothache and relieve the nosebleed. He experimented one
time when he had the nosebleed, and his nosebleed did stop; but he was
not sure that it would not have stopped as soon had he not read the
verses.

Now, for some reason unknown to himself, John did not want to remain for
worship; so when he noticed one of the other men slipping out of the
back door, he quickly followed. The two were just about to enter the
barn when the farmer, calling to them in words that were gentle but
firm, said, "We always have our help come in with us for worship."
Seeing then that there was no way around going in except to stoutly
refuse, the two returned to the house; and with the others they seated
themselves in the room where it was evident that the family worship was
to be held. This experience was so entirely new to John that he actually
suffered. He did not know what to do nor how to act.

He observed that the children, the workmen, and the farmer's wife, were
all seated, so he sat down, too. He also observed that the men had left
their hats outside where they had washed; and this caused him to feel
very strangely, because he had his own in his hand. He dropped it,
however, beside his chair; then he began to watch the children and to
try to do just as they were doing. But as no two of the youngsters were
doing the same thing, he again felt troubled. The older members of the
family, he noticed, sat very still; and suddenly John realized that they
must be listening to the farmer, who had been reading. John knew that he
had not heard one single word that had been read, and here, the farmer
was now saying, "Let us pray."

When they knelt beside their chairs, John was again bewildered; but
having decided to do just as nearly as he possibly could the way the
rest did, he, too, slipped down upon his knees. For some reason that he
could not understand, a burning shame that seemed to benumb his whole
being swept over him, and he could hardly hear the farmer's words; but
he realized suddenly that the farmer was saying, "Dear Lord, bless the
help today, and keep them from accidents and danger."

Hurriedly glancing around, John saw the children peeking from between
their fingers; and hastily covering his own face with his hands, he gave
a quick glance toward Mr. A, his boss. Mr. A was kneeling beside his
chair, but was picking his teeth and looking out of the window. Just
then the farmer said, "Amen," and they all arose.

Then, as John compared his own attitude with that of Mr. A.'s, another
feeling of shame came over him; and for some time he kept asking
himself, "Why didn't I act unconcerned like the boss?" But John was not
a bad boy naturally. He was ignorant of what was right. He had never
understood that there is a Savior and that that Savior loved him and
left an example for him to follow. To be sure, he had often heard both
his Savior's and his Creator's names reviled and abused by his evil
companions. But he did not know that these were Beings to whom he could
go when in trouble; nor did he understand that in God's sight he was
a sinner.

More than once that day while working, John thought of the farmer's
words and wondered if the prayer would have any effect upon the day.
Some way he thought it would, and he decided to watch and see. The day
was ideal, and the help orderly; and God kept them free from accident
and trouble. It was all a mystery to John, and he pondered over it along
the way home and even during the night. Farmer Z had opened up a new
channel for his thoughts.




CHAPTER VIII

With the Circus


During the following year a circus that was passing through the country
stopped at a town near by; and John, together with a number of his
associates, attended some of the exhibitions. John's interest was at
once captivated, and he felt that it would be great to join the company
and to act the part of the clown; and he soon began to plan to secretly
join them the following season. His visions of great wealth enlarged day
by day, and in fancy he pictured a future of wonderful fame.

In due time the show company returned. They gladly accepted John's
proposal to join them; and so John, with his few earthly possessions,
to the surprise of all who knew him, disappeared from his home locality.
But John seemed doomed to disappointment; the showman's life was not
at all as he had pictured it. Instead of becoming fabulously rich in a
fairy-like way, he was taken very ill and had soon lost all the money he
did have. As soon, therefore, as he was able, he returned to his friends
at home, thoroughly disgusted with his undertakings; he was a wiser lad
than he was when he went away.

But, although John was disgusted, he was not disheartened. When he
was laughed at by his friends, he bravely bore their ridicule, and
endeavored to look on the bright side of things. Also, he explained to
them that show life, on the outside and to the sightseer, was not at
all what it was among the members of the company; but that behind the
curtains oaths were uttered, and abuse and nearly every kind of evils
could be witnessed.

When he was back once more among his old associates, he endeavored
to pass away the time in as pleasant a way as possible. Card playing,
gambling, and dancing were his amusements, but tobacco and whiskey were
his enjoyments; and as before, he was considered among his friends as a
jolly good fellow. But John was not truly happy; beneath his superficial
joyousness was a longing for something that he was unable to name or
describe.

Let us stop a moment and look at John. A glance tells us that a great
change has taken place. The ruddy complexion and childish features
were replaced by a sallow hue upon the sunken cheek; and the roguish
expression of the large brown eyes was lost in the haggard look that
well accorded with the telltale cough and the stooping shoulders. The
poisons of the tobacco and whiskey were doing their fatal work. His
entire system was heavily charged with nicotine and alcohol; and the
effect of these poisons constantly operating upon his nervous system and
digestive organs had made him but a wreck of his former self. It is true
that in stature he was as large as the man his father had desired him to
be; but he was far from being of the strong manly type that that parent
would have had him to become. Instead, he was weakly; and his body was
never free from pain and suffering.

The old adage that ignorance is bliss can never be aptly applied to
nicotine and alcohol. For only those who let them both entirely alone
can be truly happy or safe. When we examine what doctors have written
about the use of these poisons, we find that alcohol as well as nicotine
is a stimulant and a narcotic. As a stimulant, it excites the brain and
nerves, quickens the circulation of the blood, and intoxicates (makes
drunk); while as a narcotic it blunts the powers of the brain and nerves
and produces stupor and death.

Tests in the army, navy, and arctic explorations have definitely proved
that alcohol is not a food.

Alcohol will not allay thirst: "Alcohol has a great attraction for
water; and when swallowed, it draws the water to itself, thus depriving
the tissues of the body of that merit necessary inorganic food. Again,
alcohol causes a rush of blood to the skin, which causes a sensation of
warmth to be felt upon the surface of the body. However, the sensation
of heat is, like beauty, 'only skin deep,' as the heat of the system has
really been diminished rather than increased; because when the blood is
upon the surface, it parts with its heat more readily."

I "The effects of alcohol upon the heart may be summed up in the
following statements:

  "(a) It causes a softening of the muscles of the heart, and a fatty
       degeneration, thus clogging the workings of this vital organ.

  "(b) It overworks the heart.

  "(c) Oftentimes it renders the heart weak and flabby.

  "(d) It causes an enlargement or dilation of its parts.

  "(e) There is a consequent effect of drowsiness and lassitude.

  "(f) Its general effect upon the heart is to destroy its strength and
       usefulness."


II "Alcohol has the following effects upon the lungs:

  "(a) It makes the blood impure, thus increasing the work of the lungs.

  "(b) It paralyzes the blood vessels.

  "(c) It weakens the various lung tissues.

  "(d) It impairs breathing."


III "Alcohol's effects upon the stomach:

  "(a) Produces chronic inflammation of the stomach.

  "(b) Injures the mucous lining by hardening the tissues.

  "(c) It destroys some of the small glands and impairs others.

  "(d) It precipitates the pepsin of the gastric juice, thus retarding
       digestion.

  "(e) It thickens the mucus of the stomach.

  "(f) The action of the stomach is at first quickened by the presence
       of alcohol, and then retarded."


IV "The effects of alcohol upon the liver may be:

  "(a) It produces a hardened condition of its tissues.

  "(b) Enlarges the organ.

  "(c) Compresses and lessens the cells for producing bile.

  "(d) Stimulates the liver to overaction, thus reducing the bile supply.

  "(e) It weakens and destroys the usefulness of this organ of digestion."


V "Effect of alcohol upon the blood and blood-vessels:

  "(a) It thins and coagulates the blood according to the amount of
       alcohol.

  "(b) It hastens the circulation, thus weakening it.

  "(c) It prevents combustion.

  "(d) It impairs and destroys the corpuscles, thus affecting their
       powers of transporting oxygen and carbonic acid gas.

  "(e) It weakens the arterial muscles by affecting the nerves governing
       them."


VI "Effects of alcohol upon the brain and nerves are:

  "(a) It causes apoplexy and epilepsy by confusing the brain.

  "(b) It weakens the will and deadens the feelings.

  "(c) It hardens the brain tissues, producing dullness, insensibility,
       and insanity.

  "(d) It destroys the nerve fiber of the brain.

  "(e) It temporarily stimulates and finally depresses this organ.

  "(f) It will at last destroy man, body and soul."

"Alcohol leads every other drug in its far-reaching influence for
mischief and evil. Were the thousands of ruined homes, the untold
numbers of blasted lives, the sorrows, the sins, numberless crimes,
murders, and deaths brought in panoramic review before us, what a
hell-born picture it would be!"

"The effect of alcohol upon the morals is awful. All delicacy, courtesy,
and self-respect are gone; the sense of justice and right is faint or
quite extinct. There is no vice into which the victim of drunkenness
does not easily slide; and no crime from which he can be expected to
refrain. Between this condition and insanity there is but a single
step."

These are only a part of the many evils that come to the one who takes
alcohol into his system. We have already heard something about the
effects of nicotine, the poison that is in tobacco. The constant use of
either poison will impair the health of the strongest person. It saps
the mind of its reasoning qualities; and in nine cases out of ten,
leaves the victim without sufficient strength to seek and obtain his own
deliverance or to live a righteous life. But let us return now to John.




CHAPTER IX

Caught Unawares


At the age of eighteen John had come almost to the point of
discouragement. His health was so poor that he did not know a well
moment; and besides, his longing soul was still unsatisfied. He had
always desired to be good and kind to all; but he did not know how to
rise to a nobler plane of conduct than that on which he was living. He
judged men by their moral conduct, and not by their spiritual life. In
fact, he had very little, if any, comprehension of Christianity. He knew
of a few, like Farmer Z., who professed religion; but he was afraid of
these and he avoided their company.

He had now and then, with a number of other boys about his own age,
visited some places where religious services were being held. But their
object in going was to have a good time; and they seldom remained long
enough to derive any good. On one of these occasions they went to a
small school house that was located a few miles from the town of C.
The meeting had been widely advertised, and a goodly number were in
attendance; and when John and his companions had taken their seats well
to the rear, there was only standing-room left. Curiosity was pictured
on every face; for the ministers (one elderly, the other young) were two
modestly dressed women, and lady preachers had never been heard of in
that part of the country.

The singing was beautiful! John thought that the songs were sweeter
than any he had ever heard. When prayer was being offered, he listened
carefully to every word; and when he heard the ministers address God as
their Father, asking Him to direct them in all that they did and said,
and to prepare the hearts of the people to receive the truths that they
were about to speak, he was instantly filled with wonder and awe.

After they rose from prayer, another song was sung; and then the elderly
lady began to address the people. As she read in a clear, sweet voice a
chapter from the Scriptures, John listened carefully. The account of the
woes pronounced upon the people who would not do right and the promises
made to those who would live right and were prepared to die, were truly
wonderful. Especially was he impressed with one verse she read, though
he realized very little of what it meant: "Therefore be ye also ready:
for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh."

When this speaker took her seat, the other lady, a young, sweet-faced
girl, arose, and said a few words. After telling of how she had been
converted, and of how the Savior had ever since supplied all the
longings of her heart and had enabled her by his grace to live a life
that was pure and spotless, she spoke of her home in heaven; and then
she told the people that God would do the same for others as He had for
her--for everyone who would give up evil habits and forsake sin, and who
would love His Son, whom He had sent to the earth to suffer and die that
all people might be saved. John listened to every word; and as the girl
sat down, he thought, "Why, I would give everything that I have in the
world to be able to say such things about myself!"

When making the announcements, the elderly lady said: "This meeting
will be continued for three weeks or more, and we want as many of you as
can to attend regularly; for there will be many portions of the Bible
explained, and we want everyone to learn what is the road to success and
to find out how to be truly happy." John at once decided that he would
attend every service; but since at the same time he felt an interest
similar to that which had inspired him to become a showman, he
remembered that bitter experience and ground his teeth. He was about to
change his decision to attend the meetings regularly, when he remembered
the words, "Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an hour as ye think
not, the Son of man cometh!"

Instantly he beheld a great panoramic view of his past life, and many of
the evils that had never before appeared to him as sin were painted with
the blackest dyes. He had not meant to be wicked, but he suddenly
realized that his life had been wasted; and he concluded that he was not
ready to meet Christ. But John believed that Christ would come to the
earth, and he felt that he would give anything to be ready to meet Him.

As John, whenever he was perplexed or troubled, had been in the habit
of doing, he reached down into his pocket and drew out a large plug of
tobacco and began biting off a piece to chew. But what was the matter?
The tobacco did not taste as it had in the past and it appealed to him
so differently. It was now actually disgusting and repulsive to him; and
he thought: "What a filthy habit! And to think of the time and money
that it has cost me! Why have I been so foolish?"

The next instant he resolved that he would never again taste the horrid
stuff. And very soon a few scenes of things that happened when he was
under the influence of whisky came to his mind, and he shuddered. Never
again would he touch that stuff, he determined. In fact, the greater
part of the night John spent in reviewing his life; and he found that
the larger portion of the things he had been doing were things he would
not want to be found doing at the Savior's coming.

The following day John could hardly wait until the time came when he
could again return to the little brown school house to hear more of the
beautiful story that had so charmed him. And night after night found
John in one of the seats in the rear of the building. It was not long
until he discovered the pathway to heaven; he saw it bathed with
heaven's sunshine and could see that it was for him to walk upon.
But the next thing was for him to make the start.

It is one thing to decide that a certain thing is right and quite
another thing to take a stand (regardless of what anyone may think or
say) for the right. He had heard the preachers telling about the life of
a Christian, the Savior's love and death, and God's great mercy, night
after night for two weeks; but no invitation to come forward had been
given to those desiring to make a change in their manner of living. The
ministers desired that each one be given a full understanding of God's
plan of salvation so that none would take a step in the dark.

John was fully decided to change his manner of living; but he did not
want to make any more mistakes. For this reason he restrained himself
from going to the motherly lady to inquire of her what he had better do.
His old desire to become a man had revived, but this time he desired to
be a man after God's own heart--pure and holy--like the one that God
created in the beginning.

The time for an invitation to be given to the penitent finally came.
Upon entering the meeting house that evening John noticed a slight
change in the arrangement of the seats. The long row of chairs supplied
by kind-hearted neighbors to help in seating the people had been
removed, and a long, narrow bench had been put in their place. John
wondered at the change, but did not have to wonder long. An announcement
was soon made, stating that the bench was to serve as an altar, where
those who desired to be converted and who wanted to consecrate their
lives and services to God could gather for prayer.

An explanation was also made to the effect that, though God is pleased
to see people humble themselves before Him, there was no virtue in the
wooden altar; it was simply a more convenient place to bow for prayer
than their seats would be. The services were shorter than usual; and
when the invitation to come forward was given to those who desired to
yield their hearts to God, John was ready. He longed to go; but although
he had learned a great many things, he was still uncertain just what was
meant by bowing at the altar; and as he wanted to do the right thing, he
decided to wait until he saw how the others would do. He did not have
long to wait; for a girl in front of him arose, went forward, and knelt
down beside the altar. This was enough for John, because it taught him
just what he desired to know; and he was soon kneeling beside her. That
night was indeed a wonderful time. One by one the people flocked to the
front part of the room; and John afterwards learned that many of his
friends and even those whom he thought would ridicule and make fun of
him, were among the number that, as himself, had sought and found pardon
for their sins.

The invitation lasted a long time; and when it was ended, the ministers
knelt down among the penitent seekers, thanked God for the tender
mercies he had extended to the lost world, and prayed that those who
were at the altar might understand what true salvation is. After
praying, they explained carefully what it meant to be redeemed from all
sin, and told the seekers how God looked upon the sin-cursed world and
its awful wickedness, but also how He was so moved with tender love and
compassion that He sacrificed the brightest Gem of glory--even His only
begotten Son--to be a Redeemer for all who would believe on Him and turn
from their evil ways.

The redemption price, they said, was great; but nothing less could have
proved so well God's great love for mankind. And they quoted from the
Bible, "For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world;
but that the world through him might be saved" (John 3:16, 17); also,
"The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost" (Luke
19:10). These words were as a soothing balm to John's aching heart.
Having been fully awakened to his awful condition and made to long for
the way of deliverance, he rejoiced as these rays of hope came streaming
down into his soul.

One by one he recalled his sins--smoking and chewing tobacco, drinking
whisky and beer, stealing, lying, card-playing, betting, gambling, and
many other things; but these he had already given up. One thing only
came to his mind that caused him a struggle, and for a few moments it
seemed that he could not give that up. John loved to dance, and it had
seemed to him that there was nothing wrong with that pastime. Since he
knew none of the pleasures that the Christian enjoys, this was not
strange. Always he had danced just for the pleasure he derived from
dancing, and he considered dancing an innocent amusement. When, however,
he was made aware of the evils of dancing and the temptations it causes
boys and girls whose characters are weak, he could see how that to some
it might mean the loss of virtue; and, too, he found that much of his
suffering had been caused by the late hours that dancing and other
things had caused him to keep. Then he gladly bade adieu to the
dance-hall and all its trivial gaiety.

After he had asked the Lord to pardon him for his transgressions, his
simple faith took hold of the promises and he received a clear witness
of his acceptance as a child of God. At last, after so many weeks and
months--yes, years--of dissatisfaction, he was indeed truly happy; and
the deep aching in his hungry heart was replaced by the Savior's love.
His companions, too, went away from that service rejoicing. Their
language, once so rough and vile, was now becoming to any Christian;
and the things that they had loved, no longer attracted their attention.
In fact, the entire neighborhood was changed; for many haunts of sin
and vice were entirely vacated.

John soon found that it was his duty to make all of his wrongs right
as far as it lay in his power to do so; and this he gladly did. In many
instances he was surprised to see the effect that this act of obedience
had upon the ones concerned. Many, with tears in their eyes, exclaimed,
"John, I only wish that I possessed the joy in my own heart that I can
see written in your face!"




CHAPTER X

A Child Again


No one could doubt the change in John's life; and many wondered how such
a thing could have been accomplished. But they did not realize that with
God all things are possible. How well it was for John that he discovered
before it was too late that he was a sinner, lost in God's sight, and
that it was necessary for him to forsake all of his evil ways and habits
if he would be freed from the binding chain of Satan! Each sinful habit
formed a link in the chain, and its strength could be measured only by
what it took to release him from its binding power.

John was sorry to see the meetings close; and as he bade the sweet-faced
women farewell, he was loath to see them go, because of their Christian
influence. But life to him was no longer what it had been in the past.
With the poet, he had found that

  "Life is real! life is earnest.
  And the grave is not its goal;
  Dust thou art, to dust returnest
  Was not spoken of the soul."


He procured a Bible and studied it diligently. He soon found that it was
a wonderful book, for what troubled him in one part was explained in
another. One day while reading in the tenth chapter of Mark, he found
to his surprise that, instead of his being a man, he was only a child,
a mere babe, in God's sight. John had expected to be changed and to be
different in every way, but he did not know that, in order to realize
his desire to be a "man after God's own heart," he must commence at the
beginning and be as a little child again. But he was willing; for he saw
how his past life had been completely wasted, and he was glad to begin
anew.

In the second chapter of I Peter, John found much encouragement, also in
I Cor. 13:11, where he read: "When I was a child, I thought as a child:
but when I became a man, I put away childish things." Again he was
determined to become a man, and to develop as quickly as possible. From
that time on he availed himself of every opportunity to do good to all
mankind, and this was no hardship. His great whole-hearted nature made
him love to do good and to be a help to all who were in need.

At other times John read the conversation between Christ and Nicodemus,
and the account of how Jesus thanked his heavenly Father for hiding His
truths from the wise and prudent and for revealing them to babes. John
was not long in perceiving the mystery concerning the new birth, for he
had gained the experience; and he thanked God that it had been revealed
to him.

Once while studying the Word of God, John discovered that the twelfth
chapter of I Corinthians teaches that Christian people on the earth
represent Christ's spiritual body. As the natural body possesses many
members--hands, feet, eyes, ears, nose, etc.--each having its own
special work, just so the spiritual body of which He (Christ) is the
head has many members to carry on the Lord's work on the earth. And, as
in the human body, each member has its own work to do; similarly, in the
spiritual body, each member has his own work to perform. Some preach,
some teach, some perform miracles, some (perhaps all) pray for the sick,
and some do various other things, each as he is directed; but all work
in harmony. The members are all assigned their work and places in the
body by the directions of the heavenly Father.

From reading the second chapter of Acts, John found that soon after
Christ ascended to heaven God sent His Holy Spirit to the earth to
superintend the work of the members of His Son's spiritual body, or
saved people, and that this same Holy Spirit is still guiding and
helping them. He also read in I John 2:15--"Love not the world, neither
the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him."

By reading further in the apostle John's epistle, John discovered that
there are many false spirits in the world that are trying to deceive
God's people and that it is often necessary to try the spirits to know
which is right. He saw that the test is love. If anyone loves God and
His Son, Jesus, more than anything else in the world, and feels as much
interest in his neighbor's welfare as in his own, that one can be sure
that he is God's own child. And Paul's letter to the Ephesians tells of
an armor that God has prepared for His people to wear that will enable
them to overcome all false spirits.

A Sunday-school was soon started in the neighborhood and John was
chosen to be the teacher of the infant class. At first he tried to plead
his inability, but no one would listen to his excuses. He was glad
afterward; for he learned to love the little ones very dearly. While he
was meeting with the children Sunday after Sunday, he often thought of
many of the hard places through which he had passed when he was a child
and remembered that it was because he had not been warned that he had,
one step at a time, gone down until he was in misery and on the verge of
despair. So John sought to throw light on each one of these dangerous
places and to point out the dangers so clearly that the children could
plainly see and understand the wrong for themselves before they were
beguiled and then bound by Satan's chain of evil habits. In this way he
helped the children to escape many a snare by which they might otherwise
have been caught unawares.

As the weeks sped by into months and John continued to unfold to the
tender questioning minds the hidden mysteries of the Bible, the adult
class became interested; and it was not long until they decided that
they needed him for their class more than the children did for theirs.
While he was teaching the advanced Bible class, his own understanding of
spiritual things was greatly broadened and strengthened, and he became
one on whom the entire congregation could lean and in whom they could
confide.

On one occasion when the lesson was in the epistle of James, John found
by reading the fifth chapter of that book that Jesus is just as able and
ready to heal those who are sick as He was to relieve sufferers in days
gone by and that any who are afflicted may pray expecting to be healed.
He quickly applied the Scripture to himself, and began to pray thus:

"Lord, thou seest how I am afflicted because of the sinful habits that
I formed in my childhood. Thou hast now taken from me the desire for
these things, but the suffering in my back and lungs is so intense.
Lord Jesus, heal me! Make me well, and I will work for Thee all the days
of my life!"

God answered that prayer and made him strong and well; then he could say
with the Psalmist, "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits: who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy
diseases." Oh, the goodness of the Lord to John! He felt that he never
could cease praising Him.

The sad and lonely past, the days of his vain struggles to become
the man that his earthly father had desired him to be, could never be
compared to these days of happiness, the days when his desires to attain
to true manhood were being realized. His heart was lonely no longer.
He had a Friend who was dearer than a mother could have been. And he
felt that it is a wonderful privilege to be a member in Christ's body,
the church.




CHAPTER XI

How John Became a Man


As the news of John's wonderful conversion and of his work among the
people spread throughout the country, it reached the ears of Farmer Z,
in whose home John for the first time had attended family worship. The
kind-hearted man had never forgotten the boy who had endeavored to make
his escape to the barn rather than to come into the sitting-room at the
worship hour, and he felt a desire to have a good heart-to-heart visit
with John and to know just how he came to find the Lord. John was,
therefore, very much surprised one day to hear that this good gentleman,
of whom he had in the past been so fearful, was desiring to see him. But
he was glad; for he, too, had felt a great desire to talk with Farmer Z,
the one who was first to open his heart to a ray of heavenly sunshine.

"I have been hearing wonderful stories about you of late, my boy," the
farmer said as John approached him; and as he took the young man's hand,
his hearty handshake sent the blood tingling through John's veins.
"Come," the farmer continued, "sit down and tell me what it was that
brought about the change. My boy, I understand that you are already
getting to be quite a preacher. Is it true?"

"Well, Mr. Z," John modestly replied, "I hardly know what answer to
make, except that it was the work of my Savior. I am like the poor
beggar who was blind--'one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now
I see.' The same Jesus that healed the blind man has opened my spiritual
eyes, making me to see and understand what never before seemed
possible."

Then as John related some of his Christian experiences, the farmer was
made to wonder at the loving-kindness and the great mercy of his God.

"John," he said, as he looked into the beaming eyes of the young man and
noted the boyish face but manly form (for there was scarcely a trace
of the early dissipation left), "I see that you have found the genuine
article. God has worked a miracle in your life, and I guess he wants you
to go and tell the world about it. How is it, my boy? Do you feel like
preaching the gospel?"

And then it was that John, in his simple, earnest manner, for which he
was so loved and admired, said:

"Mr. Z, I feel as though some power within me is leading me about; and
I long to tell everyone I meet of the Jesus, who so loved the lost world
that He laid down His life upon the cross. It seems I can think of
little else."

"That's it! That's it!" Farmer Z exclaimed; "God has put His Holy Spirit
in your heart and has called you into His harvest-field to go forth and
help spread the gospel. Go, my boy; and may God speed your footsteps in
ways crowned with blessings of success. I rejoice with you in your
calling and shall pray for you. When trials come your way--and they
will--remember that there is always a light in God's window for the
faithful, a light that will guide them safely home at last. Remember
also that He has said, 'Be thou faithful unto death.'"

When the farmer bade John adieu, the sun had disappeared beyond the
horizon and the crimson shades were gathering in the western sky. The
landscape that stretched before him was beautiful. And while John was
not unconscious of these beautiful surroundings, by his inner vision,
which could not be limited by the vast prairie country with its varied
possibilities, he looked upon another scene far beyond--he saw the
heavenly city, the New Jerusalem, once beheld by the sainted John;
and he wondered what could be more grand and majestic.

John had at last developed into a noble-hearted Christian, whose
greatest desire in life was to please his God, and to spend his time
wholly in God's service; and one day a few years later he stood on the
deck of a large Atlantic steamer and waved farewell to his friends on
the shore. He was bound for a far-distant land; God was sending him
as a missionary to carry the gospel to the people of another country.

His large brown eyes, sorrowful no longer, were dimmed by tears of
farewell; but the tears only made them shine the brighter. They
witnessed to the gladness of his heart; and to the eagerness within
his bosom pushing him forward.

John had at last become a man after God's own heart.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW JOHN BECAME A MAN***


******* This file should be named 12493.txt or 12493.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/4/9/12493


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
