The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mistress of the Manse, by J. G. Holland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mistress of the Manse

Author: J. G. Holland

Release Date: July 29, 2004 [EBook #13052]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MISTRESS OF THE MANSE ***




Produced by Al Haines










THE MISTRESS OF THE MANSE

BY

J. G. HOLLAND





NEW YORK

SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO

1874




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1874, by

SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO.,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.






JOHN V. TROW & SON,

PRINTERS AND BOOKBINDERS,

205-213 East 12th St.,

NEW YORK.




CONTENTS.

PRELUDE
LOVE'S EXPERIMENTS
LOVE'S PHILOSOPHIES
LOVE'S CONSUMMATIONS




LOVE'S EXPERIMENTS.




  I.

  A fluttering bevy left the gate
  With hurried steps, and sped away;
  And then a coach with drooping freight,
  Wrapped in its film of dusty gray,
  Stopped; and the pastor and his mate

  Stepped forth, and passed the waiting door,
  And closed it on the gazing street.
  "Oh Philip!"  She could say no more.
  "Oh Mildred!  You're at home, my sweet,--
  The old life closed: the new before!"

  "Dinah, the mistress!"  And the maid,
  Grown motherly with household care
  And loving service, and arrayed
  In homely neatness, took the pair
  Of small gloved hands held out, and paid

  Her low obeisance; then--"this way!"
  And when she brought her forth at last,
  To him who grudged the long delay,
  He found the soil of travel cast,
  And Mildred fresh and fair as May.



  II

  "This is our little Manse," he said.
  "Now look with both your curious eyes
  Around, above and overhead,
  And seeing all things, realize
  That they are ours, and we are wed!

  "Walk through these freshly garnished rooms--
  These halls of oak and tinted pearl--
  And mark the cups of clover-blooms,
  Cut fresh, to greet the stranger-girl,
  By those whose kindliness illumes

  The house beyond the grace of flowers!
  They greet you, mantled by my name,
  And rain their tenderness in showers,--
  Responding to the double claim
  Of love no longer mine, but ours.

  "This is our parlor, plain and sweet:
  Your hands shall make it half divine.
  That wide, old-fashioned window-seat
  Beneath your touch shall grow a shrine;
  And every nooklet and retreat,

  And every barren ledge and shelf,
  Shall wear a charm beyond the boon
  Of treasure-bearing drift, or delf,
  Or dreams that flutter from the moon;
  For it shall blossom with yourself.

  "This is my study: here, alone,
  Prayerful to Him whom I adore,
  And gathering speech to make him known,
  Your far, quick footsteps on the floor,
  Your breezy robe, your cheerful tone,

  As through our pretty home you speed
  The busy ministries of life,
  Will stir me swifter than my creed,
  And be more musical, dear wife,
  Than sweep of harp, or pipe of reed.

  "Here is our fairy banquet hall!
  See how it opens to the East,
  And looks through elms!  The board is small,
  But what it bears shall be a feast
  At morn, and noon, and evenfall.

  "There will you sit in girlish grace,
  And catch, the sunrise in your hair;
  And looking at you, from my place,
  I shall behold more sweet and fair
  The morning in your smiling face.

  "And guests shall come, and guests shall go,
  And break with us our daily bread;
  And sometime--sometime--do you know?
  I hope that--dearest, lift your head;
  And let me speak it, soft and low!

  "The grass is sweeter than the ground:
  Can love be better than its flowers?
  Oh sometime--sometime--in the round
  Of coming years, this board of ours
  I hope may blossom and abound

  With shining curls, and laughing eyes,
  And pleasant jests and merry words,
  And questions full of life's surprise,
  And light and music, when the birds
  Have left us to our gloomy skies.

  "Now mount with me the old oak stair!
  This is your chamber--pink and blue!
  They asked the color of your hair,
  And draped and fitted all for you,
  My fine brunette, with tasteful care.

  "The linen is as white as snow;
  The flowers are set on every sconce;
  And e'en the cushioned pin-heads show
  Your formal "welcome," for the nonce,
  To the sweet home their hands bestow.

  "Declining to the river's marge,
  See, from this window, how the turf
  Runs with a thousand flowers in charge
  To meet the silver feet of surf
  That fly from every passing barge!

  "Along that reach of liquid light
  Flies Commerce with her countless keels;
  There the chained Titan in his might
  Turns slowly round the groaning wheels
  That drag her burdens, day and night.

  "And now the red sun flings his kiss
  Across its waves from finger-tips
  That pause, and grudgingly dismiss
  The one he loves to closer lips,
  And Moonlight's quiet hour of bliss.

  "And here comes Dinah with the steam
  Of evening cups and evening food,
  And coal-red berries quenched with cream,
  And ministry of homely good
  That proves, my dear, we do not dream."



  III.

  He heard the long-drawn organ-peal
  Within his chapel call to prayer;
  And, answering with ready zeal,
  He breathed o'er Mildred's weary chair
  These words, and sealed them with a seal:

  "Only an hour: but comfort take;--
  This home and I are wholly yours;
  And many bosoms fondly ache
  To tell you, that while life endures,
  You shall be cherished for my sake.

  "So throw your heart's door open wide,
  And take in mine as well as me;
  Let no poor creature be denied
  The grace of tender courtesy
  And kindness from the pastor's bride."




  IV.

  The moon came up the summer sky:
  "Oh happy moon!" the lady said;
  "Men love thee for thyself, but I
  Am loved because my life is wed
  To one whose message, pure and high,

  Has spread the world's evangel far,
  And thrown such radiance through the dark
  That men behold him as a star,
  And in his gracious coming mark
  How beautiful his footsteps are.

  "Oh Moon! dost thou take all thy light
  From the great sun so lately gone?
  Are there not shapes upon thy white,
  That mould and make his sheen thy own,
  And charms that soften to the sight

  The ardor of his blinding blaze?
  Who loves thee that thou art the sun's?
  Who does not give thee sweetest praise
  Among the troop of shining ones
  That sweep along the heavenly ways?

  "Yet still within the holy place
  The altar sanctifies the gift!
  Poor, precious gift, that begs for grace!
  Oh towering altar! that doth lift
  The gift so high, that, in its face,

  It bears no beauty to the thought
  Of those who round the altar stand!
  Poor, precious gift, that goes for naught
  From willing heart and ready hand,
  And wins no favor unbesought!

  "The stars are whiter for the blue;
  The sky is deeper for the stars;
  They give and take in commerce true,
  And lend their beauty to the cars
  Of downy dusk, that all night through,

  Roll o'er the void on silver wheels;
  Yet neither starry sky nor cloud
  Is loved the less that it reveals
  A beauty all its own, endowed
  By all the wealth its beauty steals.

  "Am I a dew-drop in a rose,
  With no significance apart?
  Must I but sparkle in repose
  Close to its folded, fragrant, heart,
  Its peerless beauty to disclose?

  "Would I not toil to win his bread,
  And give him all I have to give?
  Would I not die in his sweet stead,
  And die in joy?  But I must live;
  And, living, I must still be fed

  On love that comes in love's own right.
  They must not pet, or pamper me--
  Those who rejoice beneath his light--
  Or pity him, that I can be
  So precious in his princely sight."

  With swifter wings, through heart and brain,
  The little hour unheeded flew;
  And when, behind the blazoned stain
  Of saintly vestures, red and blue,
  The lights on rose and window-pane

  Within the chapel slowly died,
  And figures muffled by the moon
  Went shuffling home on either side--
  One seeking her--she said: How soon!
  And then the pastor kissed his bride.



  V.

  The bright night brightened into dawn;
  The shadows down the mountain passed;
  And tree and shrub and sloping lawn,
  With bending, beaded beauty glassed
  In myriad suns the sun that shone!

  The robin fed her nested young;
  The swallows bickered 'neath the eaves;
  The hang-bird in her hammock swung,
  And, tilting high among the leaves,
  Her red mate sang alone, or flung

  The dew-drops on her lifted head;
  While on the grasses, white and far,
  The tents of fairy hosts were spread
  That, scared before the morning star,
  Had left their reeking camp, and fled.

  The pigeon preened his opal breast;
  And o'er the meads the bobolink,
  With vexed perplexity confessed
  His tinkling gutturals in a kink,
  Or giggled round his secret nest.

  With dizzy wings and dainty craft,
  In green and gold, the humming-bird
  Dashed here and there, and touched and quaffed
  The honey-dew, then flashed and whirred,
  And vanished like the feathered shaft

  That glitters from a random bow.
  The flies were buzzing in the sun,
  The bees were busy in the snow
  Of lilies, and the spider spun,
  And waited for his prey below.

  With sail aloft and sail adown,
  And motion neither slow nor swift,
  With dark-brown hull and shadow brown,
  Half-way between two skies adrift,
  The barque went dreaming toward the town.

  'Twas Sunday in the silent street,
  And Sunday in the silent sky.
  The peace of God came down to meet
  The throng that laid their labor by,
  And rested, weary hands and feet.

  Ah, sweet the scene which caught the glance
  Of eyes that with the morning woke,
  And, from their window in the manse,
  Looked up through sprays of elm and oak
  Into the sky's serene expanse,

  And off upon the distant wood,
  And down into the garden's close,
  And over, where his chapel stood
  In ivy, reaching to its rose,
  Waiting the Sunday multitude!



  VI.

  A red rose in her raven hair
  Whose curls forbade the plait and braid,
  The bride slid down the oaken stair,
  And mantled like a bashful maid,
  As, seated in the waiting chair,

  Behind the fragrant urn, she poured
  The nectar of the morn's repast;
  But fairer lady, fonder lord,
  In happier hall ne'er broke their fast
  With sweeter bread, at prouder board.

  And then they rose with common will,
  And sought the parlor, cool and dim.
  "Sing, love!" he said. "The birds grow still,
  And wait with me to hear your hymn."
  She swept a low, preluding trill--

  A spray of sound--across the keys
  That felt her fingers for the first;
  And then, from simplest cadences,
  A reverent melody she nursed,
  And gave it voice in words like these:

  "From full forgetfulness of pain,
  From joy to opening joy again,
  With bird and flower, and hill and tree,
  We lift our eyes and hands, to thee,
  To greet thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth

  "That thou dost bathe our souls anew
  With balm and boon of heavenly dew,
  And smilest in our upward eyes
  From the far blue of smiling skies,
  We bless thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth!

  "For human love and love divine,
  For love of ours and love of thine,
  For heaven on earth and heaven above--
  To thee and us twin homes of love--
  We thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth!

  "Oh dove-like wings, so wide unfurled
  In brooding calm above the world!
  Waft us your holy peace, and raise
  The incense of our morning praise
  Up to our Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth!"

  VII.

  Full fleetly sped the morning hours;
  Then, wide upon the country round
  A tumult of melodious powers
  In tumult of melodious sound
  Burst forth from all the village towers.

  With blow on blow, and tone on tone,
  And echoes answering everywhere--
  Like bugles from the mountains blown--
  Each sought to whelm the burdened air,
  And make the silence all its own.

  In broad, sonorous, silver swells
  The air was billowed like the sea;
  And listening ears were listening shells
  That caught the Sabbath minstrelsy,
  And sang it with the singing bells.

  The billows heaved, the billows broke,
  The first wild burst went down amain;
  The music fell to slower stroke,
  And in a rhythmic, bold refrain
  The great bells to each other spoke.

  Oh bravely bronze gave forth his word,
  And sharply silver made reply,
  And every tower and turret stirred
  With sounding breath and converse high,
  Or paused with waiting ear, and heard.

  And long they talked, as friend to friend;
  Then faltered to their closing toll,
  Whose long, monotonous repetend,
  From every music-burdened bowl
  Poured the last drop, and brought the end!



  VIII.

  The chapel's chime fell slow and soft,
  And throngs slow-marching to its knoll
  From village home and distant croft,
  With careful feet and reverent soul
  Pressed toward the open door, but oft

  Turned curious and expectant eyes
  Upon the Manse that stood apart.
  There in her quiet, bridal guise
  Fair Mildred sat with shrinking heart;
  While Philip, bold and over wise,

  And knowing naught of woman's ways,
  Smiled at her fears, and could not guess
  How one so armored in his praise,
  And strong in native loveliness,
  Could dread to meet his people's gaze.

  He could not know her fine alarm
  When at his manly side she stood,
  And, leaning faintly on his arm--
  A dainty slip of womanhood--
  Walked forth where every girlish charm

  Was scanned with prying gaze and glance,
  Among the slowly moving crowd
  That, greedy of the precious chance,
  Read furtively, but half aloud,
  The pages of their new romance.

  "A child!"  And Mildred caught the word.
  "A plaything!"  And, another voice:
  "Fine feathers, and a Southern bird!"
  And still one more; "A parson's choice!"
  And trembling Mildred overheard.

  These from the careless or the dull--
  Gossips at best; at wisest, dolts;
  And though her quickened ear might cull
  From out their whispered thunderbolts
  A "lovely!" and a "beautiful!"

  And though sweet mother-faces smiled,
  And bows were given with friendly grace,
  And many a pleasant little child
  Sought sympathy within her face,
  Her aching heart was not beguiled.

  She did not see--she only felt--
  As up the staring aisle she walked--
  The critic glances, coldly dealt,
  By those who looked, and bent, and talked;
  And, even, when at last she knelt

  Alone within the pastor's pew,
  And prayed for self-forgetfulness
  With deep humility, she knew
  She gave her figure and her dress
  To careful eyes with closer view.



  IX.

  At length she raised her head, and tossed
  A burden from her heart, and brain.
  She would have love at any cost
  Of weary toil and patient pain,
  And rightful ease and pleasure lost!

  They could not love her for his sake;
  They would not, and her heart forgave.
  Why should a woman stoop to take
  The poor endowment of a slave,
  And like a menial choose to make

  Her master's mantle half her own?
  They loved her least who loved him most:
  They envied her her little throne!
  He who was cherished by a host
  Was hers by gift, and hers alone,

  And she would prove her woman's right
  To hold the throne to which the king
  Had called her, clothing her with white;
  And never would she show her ring
  To win a loving proselyte!

  These were the thoughts and this the strife
  That through her kindling spirit swept,
  And wrought her purposes of life;
  And powers that waked and powers that slept
  Within the sweet and girlish wife.

  Sprang into energy intense,
  At touch of an inspiring chrism
  That fell on her, she knew not whence,
  And lifted her to heroism
  Which wrapped her wholly, soul and sense.



  X.

  Meanwhile, through all the vaulted space
  The organ sent its angels out;
  And up and down the holy place
  They fanned the cheeks of care and doubt,
  And touched each worn and weary face

  With beauty as their wings went by:
  Then sailed afar with peaceful sweep,
  And, calling heavenward every eye,
  Evanished into silence deep--
  The earth forgotten in the sky!

  Then by the sunlight warmly kissed,
  Far up, in rainbow glory set,
  Rayed round with gold and amethyst,
  She saw upon the great rosette
  The Saviour's visage, pale and trist.

  "Oh Crown of Thorns!" she softly breathed;
  "Oh precious crown of love divine!
  Oh brow with trickling life enwreathed!
  Oh piercing thorns and crimson sign!
  I hold you mine in love bequeathed.

  "But not for sake of these or thee!
  I must win love as thou hast won.
  The thorns are mine, and all must see,
  In sacrifice, and service done,
  The loving Lord they love in me."



  XI.

  Then, through a large and golden hour
  She listened to the golden speech
  Of one who held the priceless dower
  Of love and eloquence, that reach
  And move the hearts of men with power.

  Ah poor the music of the choir
  That voiced the Psalter after him!
  And strong the prayer that, touched with fire,
  Flamed upward, past the seraphim,
  And wrapped the throne of his desire!

  She watched and heard as in a dream,
  When, in the old, familiar ground
  Of sacred truth, he found his theme,
  And led it forth, until it wound
  Through meadows broad--a swollen stream

  That flashed and eddied in the light,
  And fed the grasses at its edge,
  Or thundered in its onward might
  O'er interposing weir and ledge,
  And left them hidden in the white;

  While on it pressed, and, to the eye,
  Grew broader, till its breadth became
  A solemn river, sweeping by,
  That, quick with ships and red with flame,
  Reached far away and kissed the sky!

  Strong men were moved as trees are bowed
  Before a swift and sounding wind;
  And sighs were long and sobs were loud,
  Of those who loved and those who sinned,
  Among the deeply listening crowd.



  XII.

  And Mildred, in the whelming tide
  Of thought and feeling, quite forgot
  That he who thus had magnified
  His office, held a common lot
  With her, and owned her as his bride.

  But when, at length, the thought returned
  That she was his in plighted truth,
  And she with humbled soul discerned
  That, though her youth was given to youth,
  And love by love was fairly earned,

  She could not match him wing-and-wing
  Through all his broad and lofty range,
  And feared what passing years might bring
  No change for good, but only change
  That would degrade her to a thing

  Of homely use and household care,
  And love by duty basely kept--
  She bowed her head upon the bare
  Cold rail that hid her face, and wept,
  And poured her passion in a prayer.



  XIII.

  "Oh Father, Father!" thus she prayed:
  "Thou know'st the priceless boon I seek!
  Before my life, abashed, dismayed,
  I stand, with hopeless hands and weak,
  Of him and of myself afraid!

  "Teach me and lead me where to find,
  Beyond the touch of hand and lip,
  That vital charm of heart, and mind
  Which, in a true companionship,
  My feebler life to his shall bind!

  "His ladder leans upon the sun:
  I cannot climb it: give me wings!
  Grant that my deeds, divinely done,
  May be appraised divinest things,
  Though they be little every one.

  "His stride is strong; his steps are high
  May not my deeds be little stairs
  That, counted swift, shall keep me nigh,
  Till at the summit, unawares,
  We stand with equal foot and eye?

  "If further down toward Nature's heart
  His root is struck, commanding springs
  In whose deep life I have no part,
  Send me, on recompensing wings,
  The rain that gathers where thou art!

  "Oh give me vision to divine
  What he with delving hand explores!
  Feed me with flame that shall refine
  To finest gold the rugged ores
  His strong hands gather from the mine!

  "O dearest Father!  May no sloth,
  Or weakness of my weaker soul,
  Delay him in his kingly growth,
  Or hold him meanly from the goal
  That shines with guerdon for us both!"



  XIV.

  Then all arose as if a spell
  Had been dissolved for their release,
  The while the benediction fell
  Which breathed the gentle Master's peace
  On all the souls that loved him well.

  And Philip, coming from his place,
  Like Moses from the mountain pyre,
  Bore on his brow the shining grace
  Of one who, in the cloud and fire,
  Had met his Maker, face to face.

  And men and women, young and old,
  Pressed up to meet him as he came,
  And children, by their love made bold,
  Grasped both his hands and spoke his name,
  And in their simple language told

  Their joy to see his face once more;
  While half in pleasure, half in pain,
  His bride stood waiting at her door
  The passage of the friendly train
  That slowly swept the crowded floor.

  Half-bows were tendered and returned;
  And welcomes fell from lips and eyes;
  But in her heart she meekly spurned
  The love that came in love's disguise
  Of sympathy--the love unearned.



  XV.

  Then out beneath the noon-day sun
  Of the old Temple, cool and dim,
  She walked beside her chosen one,
  And lost her loneliness in him;
  But hardly was her walk begun

  When, straight before her in the street,
  With tender shock her eye descried
  A little child, with naked feet
  And scanty dress, that, hollow-eyed,
  Looked up and begged for bread to eat.

  Nor pride of place nor dainty spleen
  Felt with her heart the sickening shock.
  She took the hand so soiled and lean;
  And silken robe and ragged frock
  Moved side by side across the green.

  She looked for love, and, low and wild,
  She found it--looking, too, for love!
  So in each other's eyes they smiled,
  As, dark brown hand in snowy glove,
  The bride led home the hungry child.

  And men and women in amaze
  Paused in their homeward steps to see
  The bride retreating from their gaze,
  Clasped hand in hand with misery;
  Then brushed their eyes, and went their ways.



  When the long parley found a close,
  And, clean and kempt, the little oaf--
  Disburdened of her wants and woes,
  And burdened with her wheaten loaf--
  Went forth to minister to those

  Who sent her on her bitter quest,
  The bride stood smiling at her door,
  And in her happiness confessed
  That she had found a friend; nay, more--
  Had entertained a heavenly guest.

  And as she watched her down the street,
  With brow grown bright with sunny thought,
  And heart o'erfilled with something sweet,
  She knew the vagrant child had brought
  The blessing of the Paraclete.

  She turned from out the blazing noon,
  And sought her chamber's quiet shade,
  Like one who had received a boon
  She might not show, but which essayed
  Expression in a happy croon.

  And then, outleaping from the mesh
  Of Memory's net, like bird or bee,
  There thrilled her spirit and her flesh
  This old half-song, half-rhapsody,
  That sang, or said itself, afresh:


  "Poor little wafer of silver!
  More precious to me than its cost!
  It was worn of both image and legend,
  But priceless because it was lost.
  My chamber I carefully swept;
  I hunted, and wondered, and wept;
  And I found it at last with a cry:
  "Oh dear little jewel!" said I;
  And I washed it with tears all the day;
  Then I kissed it, and put it away.

  "Poor little lamb of the sheepfold!
  Unlovely and feeble it grew;
  But it wandered away to the mountains,
  And was fairer the further it flew.
  I followed with hurrying feet
  At the call of its pitiful bleat,
  And precious, with wonderful charms,
  I caught it at last in my arms,
  And bore it far back to its keep,
  And kissed it and put it to sleep.

  "Poor little vagrant from Heaven!
  It wandered away from the fold,
  And its weakness and danger endowed it
  With value more precious than gold.
  Oh happy the day when it came,
  And my heart learned its beautiful name!
  Oh happy the hour when I fed
  This waif of the angels with bread!
  And the lamb that the Shepherd had missed
  Was sheltered and nourished and kissed!"



  XVII.

  To Philip, Mildred was a child,
  Or a fair angel, to be kept
  From all things earthly undenied,
  One who upon his bosom slept,
  And only waked to be beguiled

  From loneliness and homely care
  By love's unfailing ministry;
  No toil of his was she to share,
  No burden hers, that should not be
  Left for his stronger hands to bear.

  His love enwrapped her as a robe,
  Which seemed, by its supernal charm,
  To shield from every poisoned probe
  Of earthly pain and earthly harm
  This one choice creature of the globe.

  The love he bore her lifted him
  Into a bright, sweet atmosphere
  That filled with beauty to the brim
  The world beneath him, far and near,
  And stained the clouds that draped its rim.

  Toil was not toil, except in name;
  Care was not care, but only means
  To feed with holy oil the flame
  That warmed her soul, and lit the scenes
  Through which her figure went and came.

  Her smile of welcome was his meed;
  Her presence was his great reward;
  He questioned sadly if, indeed,
  He loved more loyally his Lord,
  Or if his Lord felt greater need.

  And Mildred, vexed, misunderstood,
  Knew all his love, but might not tell
  How in his thought, so large and good,
  And in his heart, there did not dwell
  The measure of her womanhood.

  She knew the girlish charm would fade;
  She knew the rapture would abate;
  That years would follow when the maid,
  Merged in the matron, and sedate
  With change, and sitting in the shade

  Of a great nature, would become
  As poor and pitiful a thing
  As an old idol, and as dumb,--
  A clog upon an upward wing,--
  A value stricken from the sum

  Which a true woman's hand would raise
  To mighty numbers, and endow
  With kingly power and crowning praise.
  She must be mate of his; but how?
  And, dreaming of a thousand ways

  Her hands would work, her feet would tread,
  She thought to match him as a man!
  His books should be her daily bread;
  She would run swiftly where he ran,
  And follow closely where he led.



  XVIII.

  Since time began, the perfect day
  Has robbed the morrow of its wealth,
  And squandered, in its lavish sway,
  The balm and beauty of the stealth,
  And left its golden throne in gray.

  So when the Sunday light declined,
  A cold wind sprang and shut the flowers
  Then vagrant voices, undefined,
  Grew louder through the evening hours,
  Till the old chimney howled and whined

  As if it were a frightened beast,
  That witnessed from its dizzy post
  The loathsome forms and grewsome feast
  And hideous mirth of ghoul and ghost,
  As on they crowded from the East.

  The willow, gathered into sheaves
  Of scorpions by spectral arms,
  Swung to and fro, and whipped the eaves,
  And filled the house with weird alarms
  That hissed from all its tortured leaves.

  And in the midnight came the rain;--
  In spiteful needles at the first;
  But soon on roof and window-pane
  The slowly gathered fury burst
  In floods that came, and came again,

  And poured their roaring burden out.
  They swept along the sounding street,
  Then paused, and then with shriek and shout
  Hurtled as if a myriad feet
  Had joined the dread and deafening rout.

  But ere the welcome morning broke,
  The loud wind fell, though gray and chill
  The drizzling rain and drifting smoke
  Drove slowly toward the westward hill,
  Half hidden in its phantom cloak.

  And through the mist a clumsy smack,
  Deep loaded with her clumsy freight,
  With shifting boom and frequent tack,
  Like a huge ghost that wandered late,
  Reeled by upon her devious track.



  XIX.

  So Mildred, with prophetic ken,
  Saw in the long and rainy day
  The dreaded host of friendly men
  And friendly women, kept away,
  And time for love, and book, and pen.

  But while she looked, with dreaming eyes
  And heart content, upon the scene,
  She saw a stalwart man arise
  Where the wild water lashed the green,
  And pause a breath, to signalize

  Some one beyond her stinted view;
  Then turn with hurried feet, and straight
  The deep, rain-burdened grasses through,
  And through the manse's open gate,
  Pass to her door.  At once she knew

  That some faint soul, in sad extreme,
  Had sent for succor to the manse,
  And knew its master would redeem
  To sacred use the circumstance
  That made such havoc of her dream.



  XX.

  She saw the quiet men depart,
  She saw them leave the river-side,
  She saw them brave with sturdy art
  The surges of the angry tide,
  And disappear; the while her heart

  Sank down in dismal loneliness.
  Then came her vexing thoughts again;
  And quick, as if she broke duress
  Of heavy weariness or pain,
  She sought the study's dim recess,

  Where rank on rank, against the wall,
  The mighty men of every land
  Stood mutely waiting for the call
  Of him who, with his single hand,
  Had bravely met and mastered all.

  The gray old monarchs of the pen
  Looked down with calm, benignant gaze,
  And Augustine and Origen
  And Ansel justified the ways--
  The wondrous ways--of God with men.

  Among the tall hierophants
  Angelical Aquinas stood;
  While Witsius held the "Covenants,"
  And Irenaeus, wise and good,
  Couched low his silver-bearded lance

  For strife with heresy and schism,
  And Turretin with lordly nod
  Gave system to the dogmatism
  That analyzed the thought of God
  As light is painted by a prism.

  Great Luther, with his great disputes,
  And Calvin, with his finished scheme,
  And Charnock, with his "Attributes,"
  And Taylor with his poet's dream
  Of theologic flowers and flutes,

  And Thomas Fuller, old and quaint,
  And Cudworth, dry with dust of gold,
  And South, the sharp and witty saint,
  With Howe and Owen--broad and bold--
  And Leighton still without the taint

  Of earth upon his robe of white,
  Stood side by side with Hobbes and Locke,
  And, braced by many an acolyte,
  With Edwards standing on his rock,
  And all New England's men of might,

  Whose gifts and offices divine
  Had crowned her with a kingly crown,
  And solemn doctors from the Rhine,
  With Fichte, Kant, and Hegel, down
  Through all the long and stately line!

  As Mildred saw the awful host,
  She felt within no motive stir
  To realize her girlish boast,
  And knew they held no more for her
  Than if each volume were a ghost.



  XXI.

  She sat in Philip's vacant chair,
  And pondered long her doubtful way;
  And, in her impotent despair,
  Lifted her longing eyes to pray,
  When on a shelf, far up, and bare,

  She saw an ancient volume lie;
  And straight her rising thought was checked.
  What were its dubious treasures?  Why
  Had it been banished from respect,
  And from its owner's hand and eye?

  The more she gazed, the stronger grew
  The wish to hold it in her hand.
  Strange fancies round the volume flew,
  And changed the dust their pinions fanned
  To atmospheres of red and blue,

  That blent in purple aureole,--
  As if a lymph of sweetest life
  Stood warm within a golden bowl,
  Crowned with its odor-cloud, and rife
  With strength and solace for her soul!

  And there it lay beyond her arm,
  And wrought its fine and wondrous spell,
  With all its hoard of good or harm,
  Till curious Mildred, struggling well,
  Surrendered to the mighty charm.

  The steps were scaled for boon or bale,
  The book was lifted from its place,
  And, bowing to the fragrant grail,
  She drank with pleased and eager face
  This draught from off an Eastern tale:


  Selim, the haughty Jehangir, the Conqueror of the Earth,
  With royal pomps and pageantries and rites of festal mirth
  Was set to celebrate the day--the white day--of his birth.

  His red pavilions, stretching wide, crowned all with globes of gold,
  And tipped with pinnacles of fire and streamers manifold,
  Flamed with such splendor that the sun at noon looked pale and cold!

  And right and left, along, the plain, far as the eye could gaze,
  His nobles and retainers who were tented in the blaze,
  Kept revel high in honor of that day of all the days.

  The earth was spread, the walls were hung, with silken fabrics fine,
  And arabesque and lotus-flower bore each the broidered sign
  Of jewels plucked from land and sea, and red gold from the mine.

  Upon his throne he sat alone, half buried in the gems
  That strewed his tapestries like stars, and tipped their tawny hems,
  And glittered with the glory of a hundred diadems.

  He saw from his pavilion door the nodding heron plumes
  His nobles wore upon their brows, while, from the rosy glooms
  Which hid his harem, came low songs, on wings of rare perfumes!

  The elephants, a thousand strong, had passed his dreaming eye,
  Caparisoned with golden plates on head and breast and thigh,
  And a hundred flashing troops of horse unmarked had thundered by.

  He sat upon old Akbar's throne, the heir of power and fame,
  But all his glory was as dust, and dust his wondrous name--
  Swept into air, and scattered far, by one consuming flame!

  For on that day of all the days, and in that festal hour,
  He sickened with his glory and grew weary of his power,
  And pined to bind upon his breast his harem's choicest flower,

  "Oh Nourmahal! oh Nourmahal! why sit I here," he cried,--
  "The victim of these gaudy shows, and of my haughty pride,
  When thou art dearer to my soul than all the world beside!

  "Thy eyes are brighter than the gems piled round gilded seat;
  Thy cheeks are softer than the silks that shimmer at my feet,
  And purer heart than thine in woman's breast hath never beat!

  "My first love--and my only love--Oh babe of Candahar!
  Torn from my boyish arms at first, and, like a silver star
  Shining within another heaven, and worshipped from afar,

  "Thou art my own at last, my own!  I pine to see thy face;
  Come to me, Nourmahal!  Oh come, and hallow with thy grace
  The glories that without thy love are meaningless and base!"

  He spoke a word, and, quick as light, before him lying prone
  A dark-eyed page, with gilded vest and crimson-belted zone,
  Looked up with waiting ear to mark the message from the throne.

  "Go summon Nourmahal, my queen; and when her radiance comes,
  Bear my command of silence to the vinas and the drums,
  And for your guerdon take your choice of all these gilded crumbs."

  He tossed a handful of the gems down where his minion lay,
  Who snatched a jewel from the drift, and swiftly sped away
  With his command to Nourmahal, who waited to obey.

  But needlessly the mandate fell of silence on the crowd,
  For when the Empress swept the path, ten thousand heads were bowed,
  And drum and vina ceased their din, and no one spoke aloud.

  As comes the moon from out the sea with her attendant breeze,
  As sweeps the morning up the hills and blossoms in the trees,
  So Nourmahal to Selim came: then fell upon her knees!

  The envious jewels looked at her with chill, barbaric stare,
  The cloth-of-gold she knelt upon grew lusterless and bare,
  And all the place was cooler in the darkness of her hair.

  And while she knelt in queenly pride and beauty strange and wild,
  And held her breast with both her palms and looked on him and smiled,
  She seemed no more of common earth, but Casyapa's child.

  He bent to her as thus she smiled; he kissed her lifted cheek;
  "Oh Nourmahal," he murmured low, "more dear than I can speak,
  I'm weary of my lonely life: give me the rest I seek."

  She rose and paced the silken floor, as if in mad caprice,
  Then paused, and from the Empress changed to improvisatrice,
  And wove this song--a golden chain--that led him into peace:


  Lovely children of the light,
  Draped in radiant locks and pinions,--
  Red and purple, blue and white--
  In their beautiful dominions,
  On the earth and in the spheres,
  Dwell the little glendoveers.

  And the red can know no change,
  And the blue are blue forever,
  And the yellow wings may range
  Toward the white or purple never.
  But they mingle free from strife,
  For their color is their life.

  When their color dies, they die,--
  Blent with earth or ether slowly--
  Leaving where their spirits lie,
  Not a stain, so pure and holy
  Is the essence and the thought
  Which their fading brings to naught!

  Each contented with the hue
  Which indues his wings of beauty,
  Red or yellow, white or blue,
  Sings the measure of his duty
  Through the summer clouds in peace,
  And delights that never cease.

  Not with envy love they more
  Locks and pinions purple-tinted,
  Nor with jealousy adore
  Those whose pleasures are unstinted,
  And whose purple hair and wings
  Give them place with queens and kings.

  When a purple glendoveer
  Flits along the mute expanses,
  They surround him, far and near,
  With their glancing wings and dances,
  And do honor to the hue
  Loved by all and worn by few.

  In the days long gone, alas!
  Two upon a cloud, low-seated,
  Saw their pinions in the glass
  Of a silver lake repeated.
  One was blue and one was red,
  And the lovely pair were wed.

  "Purple wings are very fine,"
  Spoke the voice of Ruby, gently:
  "Ay" said Sapphire, "they're divine!"--
  Looking at his blue intently.
  "But we're blest," said Ruby, then,
  "And we'll not complain like men."

  Sapphire stretched his loving arms,
  And she nestled on his bosom,
  While his heart inhaled her charms
  As the sense inhales a blossom;--
  Drank her wholly, tint and tone,
  Blent her being with his own.

  Rapture passed, they raised their eyes,
  But were startled into clamor
  Of a marvellous surprise!
  Was it color! was it glamour!
  Purple-tinted, sweet and warm,
  Was each wing and folded form!

  Who had wrought it--how it came--
  These were what the twain disputed.
  How were mingled smoke and flame
  Into royal hue transmuted?
  Each was right, the other wrong:
  But their quarrel was not long,

  For the moment that their speech
  Differed o'er their little story,
  Swiftly faded off from each
  Every trace of purple glory,
  Blue was bluer than before,
  And the red was red once more.

  Then they knew that both were wrong,
  And in sympathy of sorrow
  Learned that each was only strong
  In the power to lend and borrow,--
  That the purple never grew
  But by grace of red to blue.

  So, embracing in content,
  Hearts and wings again united,
  Red and blue in purple blent,
  And their holy troth replighted,
  Both, as happy as the day,
  Kissed, and rose, and flew away!

  And for twice a thousand years,
  Floating through the radiant ether,
  Lived the happy glendoveers,
  Of the other, jealous neither,--
  Sapphire naught without the red,
  Ruby still by blue bested.

  But when weary of their life,
  They came down to earth at even--
  Purple husband, purple wife--
  From the upper deeps of heaven,
  And reclined upon the grass,
  That their little lives might pass.

  Wing to wing and arms enwreathed,
  Sank they from their life's long dreaming;--
  Into earth their souls they breathed;
  But when morning's light was streaming,
  All their joys and sweet regrets
  Bloomed in banks of violets!


  As from its dimpled fountain, at its own capricious will,
  Each step a note of music, and each fall and flash a thrill,
  The rill goes singing to the meadow levels and is still,

  So fell from Nourmahal her song upon the captive sense;
  It dashed in spray against the throne, it tinkled through the tents,
  And died at last among the flowery banks of recompense;

  For when great Selim marked her fire, and read her riddle well,
  And watched her from the flushing to the fading of the spell,
  He sprang forgetful, from his seat, and caught her as she fell.

  He raised her in his tender arms; he bore her to his throne:
  "No more, oh! Nourmahal, my wife, no more I sit alone;
  And the future for the dreary past shall royally atone!"

  He called to him the princes and the nobles of the land,
  Then took the signet-ring from his, and placed it on her hand,
  And bade them honor as his own, fair Nourmahal's command.

  And on the minted silver that his largess scattered wide,
  And on the gold of commerce, till the mighty Selim died,
  Her name and his in shining boss stood equal, side by side.



  XXII.

  The opening of the wondrous tome
  Was like the opening of a door
  Into a vast and pictured dome,
  Crowded, from vaulted roof to floor,
  With secrets of her life and home.

  To be like Philip was to be
  Another Philip--only less!
  To win his wit in full degree
  Would bear to him but nothingness,
  From one no wiser grown than he!

  If blue and red in Hindostan
  Were blue and red at home, she knew
  That she--a woman, he--a man,
  Could never wear the royal hue
  Till blue and red together ran

  In complement of each to each;
  She might not tint his life at all
  By learning wisdom he could teach;
  So what she gave, though poor and small,
  Should be of that beyond his reach.

  Where Philip fed, she would not feed;
  Where Philip walked, she would not go;
  The books he read she would not read,
  But live her separate life, and, so,
  Have sole supplies to meet his need.

  He held his mission and his range;
  His way and work were all his own;
  And she would give him in exchange
  What she could win and she alone,
  Of life and learning, fresh and strange.



  XXIII.

  While thus she sat in musing mood,
  Determining her life's emprise,
  The sunlight flushed the distant wood,
  Then, coming closer, filled her eyes,
  And glorified her solitude.

  The clouds were shivered by the lance
  Sped downward by the morning sun,
  And from her heart, in swift advance,
  The shadows vanished, one by one,
  Till more than sunlight filled the manse.

  She closed the volume with a gust
  That sprent the light with powdered gold;
  Then placed it high to hide and rust
  Where, curious and over-bold
  She found it, lying in its dust.

  Her soul was light, her path was plain;
  One shadow only drooped above,--
  The shadow of a heart and brain
  So charged with overwhelming love
  That it oppressed and gave her pain.

  The modest comb that kept her hair;
  To Philip was a golden crown;
  And every ringlet was a snare,
  And every hat, and every gown
  And slipper, something more than fair.

  His love had glorified her grace,
  And she was his, and not her own,--
  So wholly his she had no place
  Beside him on his lonely throne,
  Or share in love's divine embrace.

  And knowing that the coming days
  Would strip her features of their mask,
  That duty then would speak her praise,
  And love become a loyal task,
  Save he should find beneath the glaze

  His fiery love of her had spread,
  Diviner things he had not seen,
  She feared her woman's heart and head
  Were armed with charms and powers too mean
  To win the boon she coveted.

  But still she saw and held her plan,
  And fear made way for springing hope.
  If she was man's, then hers was man:
  Both held their own in even scope;
  And then and there her life began.




  LOVE'S PHILOSOPHIES.

  I.

  A wife is like an unknown sea;--
  Least known to him who thinks he knows
  Where all the shores of promise be,
  Where lie the islands of repose,
  And where the rocks that he must flee.

  Capricious winds, uncertain tides,
  Drive the young sailor on and on,
  Till all his charts and all his guides
  Prove false, and vain conceit is gone,
  And only docile love abides.

  Where lay the shallows of the maid,
  No plummet line the wife may sound;
  Where round the sunny islands played
  The pulses of the great profound,
  Lies low the treacherous everglade.

  And sailing, he becomes, perforce,
  Discoverer of a lovely world;
  And finds, whate'er may be his course,
  Green lands within white seas impearled,
  And streams of unsuspected source

  Which feed with gold delicious fruits,
  Kept by unguessed Hesperides,
  Or cool the lips of gentle brutes
  That breed and browse among the trees
  Whose wind-tossed limbs and leaves are lutes,

  The maiden free, the maiden wed,
  Can never, never be the same.
  A new life springs from out the dead,
  And, with the speaking of a name,
  A breath upon the marriage-bed,

  She finds herself a something new--
  (Which he learns later, but no less);
  And good and evil, false and true,
  May change their features--who can guess?--
  Seen close, or from another view.

  For maiden life, with all its fire,
  Is hid within a grated cell,
  Where every fancy and desire
  And graceless passion, guarded well,
  Sits dumb behind the woven wire.

  Marriage is freedom: only when
  The husband turns the prison-key
  Knows she herself; nor even then
  Knows she more wisely well than he,
  Who finds himself least wise of men.

  New duties bring new powers to birth,
  And new relations, new surprise
  Of depths of weakness or of worth,
  Until he doubt if her disguise
  Mask more of heaven, or more of earth.

  Tears spring beneath a careless touch;
  Endurance hardens with a word;
  She holds a trifle with a clutch
  So strangely, childishly absurd,
  That he who loves and pardons much

  Doubts if her wayward wit be sane,
  When straight beyond his manly power
  She stiffens to the awful strain
  Of some supreme or crucial hour,
  And stands unblanched in fiercest pain!

  A jealous thought, a petty pique,
  Enwraps in gloom, or bursts in storm;
  She questions all that love may speak,
  And weighs its tone, and marks its form,
  Or yields her frailty to a freak

  That vexes him or breeds disgust;
  Then rises in heroic flame,
  And treads a danger into dust,
  Or puts his doubting soul to shame
  With love unfeigned and perfect trust.

  Still seas unknown the husband sails;
  Life-long the lovely marvel lasts;
  In golden calms or driving gales,
  With silent prow, or reeling masts,
  Each hour a fresh surprise unveils.

  The brooding, threatening bank of mist
  Grows into groups of virid isles,
  By sea embraced and sunlight kissed,
  Or breaks into resplendent smiles
  Of cinnabar and amethyst!

  No day so bright but scuds may fall,
  No day so still but winds may blow;
  No morn so dismal with the pall
  Of wintry storm, but stars may glow
  When evening gathers, over all!

  And so thought Philip, when, in haste
  Returning from his lengthened stay--
  The river and the lawn retraced--
  He found his Mildred blithe and gay,
  And all his anxious care a waste.

  To be half vexed that she could thrive
  Without him through a morning's span,
  Upon the honey in her hive,
  Was but to prove himself a man,
  And show that he was quite alive!



  II.

  A sympathetic word or kiss,
  (Mildred had insight to discern,)
  Though grateful quite, is quite amiss,
  In leading to the life etern
  The soul that has no bread in this.

  The present want must aye be fed,
  And first relieved the present care:
  "Give us this day our daily bread"
  Must be recited in our prayer
  Before "forgive us" may be said.

  And he who lifts a soul from vice,
  And leads the way to better lands;
  Must part his raiment, share his slice,
  And oft with weary, bleeding hands,
  Pave the long path with sacrifice.

  So on a pleasant summer morn,
  Wrapped in her motive, sweet and safe,
  She sought the homes of sin and scorn,
  And found her little Sunday waif
  Ragged, and hungry, and forlorn.

  She called her quickly to her knee;
  And with her came a motley troop
  Of children, poor and foul as she,
  Who gathered in a curious group,
  And ceased their play, to hear and see.

  Tanned brown by all the summer suns,
  With brutish brows and vacant eyes,
  They drank her speech and ate her buns,
  While she behind their sad disguise
  Beheld her dear Lord's "little ones."

  She stood like Ruth amid the wheat,
  With ready hand and sickle keen,
  And looked on all with aspect sweet;
  For where she only thought to glean,
  She found a harvest round her feet.

  Ah! little need the tale to write
  Of garments begged from door to door,
  Of needles plying in the night,
  And money gathered from the store
  Alike of screw and Sybarite,

  With which to clothe the little flock.
  She went like one sent forth of God
  To loose the bolts of heart and lock,
  And with the smiting of her rod
  To call a flood from every rock.

  And little need the tale to tell
  How, when the Sunday came again,
  A wondrous change the group befell,
  And how from every noisome den,
  Responding to the chapel bell,

  They issued forth with shout and call,
  And Mildred walking at their head,
  Who, with her silken parasol,
  Bannered the army that she led,
  And with low words commanded all.

  The little army walked through smiles
  That hung like lamps above their march,
  And lit their swart and straggling files,
  While bending elm and plumy larch
  Shaped into broad cathedral aisles

  The paths that led with devious trend
  To where the ivied chapel stood,
  There their long passage found its end,
  And there they gathered in a brood
  Of gentle clamor round their friend.

  A score pressed in on either side
  To share the burden of her care,
  And hearts and house gave entrance wide
  To those to whom the words of prayer
  Were stranger than the curse of pride.

  And Mildred who, without a thought
  Of glory in her week's long task,
  This marvel of the week had wrought,
  Had earned the boon she would not ask,
  And won more love than she had sought.



  III.

  As two who walk through forest aisles,
  Lit all the way by forest flowers,
  Divide at morn through twin defiles
  To meet again in distant hours,
  With plunder plucked from all the miles,

  So Philip and his Mildred went
  Into their walks of daily life,--
  Parting at morn with sweet consent,
  And--tireless husband, busy wife--
  Together when the day was spent,

  Bringing the treasures they had won
  From sundered tracks of enterprise,
  To learn from each what each had done,
  And prove each other grown more wise
  Than when the morning was begun.

  He strengthened her with manly thought
  And learning, gathered from the great;
  And she, whose quicker eye had caught
  The treasures of the broad estate
  Of common life and learning, brought

  Her gleanings from the level field,
  And gave them gladly to his hands,
  Who had not dreamed that they could yield
  Such sheaves, or hold within their bands
  Such wealth of lovely flowers concealed.

  His grave discourse, his judgment sure,
  Gave tone and temper to her soul,
  While her swift thoughts and vision pure,
  And mirth that would not brook control,
  And wit that kept him insecure

  Within his dignified repose,
  Refreshed and quickened him like wine.
  No tender word or dainty gloze
  Could give him pleasure half so fine
  As that which tingled to her blows.

  He gave her food for heart and mind,
  And raised her toward his higher plane;
  She showed him that his eyes were blind;
  She proved his lofty wisdom vain,
  And held him humbly with his kind.



  IV.

  Oh blessed sleep! in which exempt
  From our tired selves long hours we lie,
  Our vapid worthlessness undreamt,
  And our poor spirits saved thereby
  From perishing of self-contempt!

  We weary of our petty aims;
  We sicken with our selfish deeds;
  We shrink and shrivel, in the flames
  That low desire ignites and feeds,
  And grudge the debt that duty claims.

  Oh sweet forgetfulness of sleep!
  Oh bliss, to drop the pride of dress,
  And all the shams o'er which we weep,
  And, toward our native nothingness,
  To drop ten thousand fathoms deep!

  At morning only--strong, erect--
  We face our mirrors not ashamed;
  For then alone we meet unflecked
  The image we at evening blamed,
  And find refreshed our self-respect.

  Ah! little wonderment that those,
  Who see us most and love us best,
  Find that a true affection grows
  The more when, in its parted nest,
  It spends long hours in lone repose!

  Our fruit grows dead in pulp and rind
  When seen and handled overmuch;
  The roses fade, our fingers bind;
  And with familiar kiss and touch
  The graces wither from our kind.

  Man lives on love, at love's expense,
  And woman, so her love be sweet;
  Best honey palls upon the sense
  When it is tempted to repeat
  Too oft its fine experience.

  And Mildred, with instinctive skill,
  And loving neither most nor least,
  Stood out from Philip's grasping will,
  And gave, where he desired a feast,
  The taste that left him hungry still.

  She hid her heart behind a mask,
  And held him to his manly course;
  One hour in love she bade him bask,
  And then she drove, with playful force,
  The laggard to his daily task.

  They went their way and kept their care,
  And met again their toil complete,
  Like angels on a heavenly stair,
  Or pilgrims in a golden street,
  Grown stronger one, and one more fair!



  V.

  As one worn down by petty pains,
  With fevered head and restless limb,
  Flies from the toil that stings and stains,
  And all the cares that wearied him,
  And same far, silent summit gains;

  And in its strong, sweet atmosphere,
  Or in the blue, or in the green,
  Finds his discomforts disappear,
  And loses in the pure serene
  The garnered humors of a year;

  And sees not how and knows not when
  The old vexations leave their seat,
  So Philip, happiest of men,
  Saw all his petty cares retreat,
  And vanish, not to come again.

  Where he had thought to shield and serve,
  Himself had ministry instead,
  He heard no vexing call to swerve
  From larger toil, for labors sped
  By smaller hand and finer nerve.

  In deft and deferential ways
  She took the house by silent siege;
  And Dinah, warmest in her praise,
  Grew, unaware, her loyal liege,
  And served her truly all her days.

  And many a sad and stricken maid,
  And many a lorn and widowed life
  That came for counsel or for aid
  To Philip, met the pastor's wife,
  And on her heart their burden laid.



  VI.

  He gave her what she took--her will;
  And made it space for life full-orbed.
  He learned at last that every rill
  Loses its freshness, when absorbed
  By the great stream that turns the mill.

  With hand ungrasping for her dower,
  He found its royal income his;
  And every swiftly kindling power--
  Self-moved in its activities--
  Becoming brighter every hour.

  The air is sweet which we inspire
  When it is free to come and go;
  And sound of brook and scent of briar
  Rise freshest where the breezes blow,
  That feed our breath and fan our fire.

  That love is weak which is too strong;
  A man may be a woman's grave;
  The right of love swells oft to wrong,
  And silken bonds may bind a slave
  As truly as a leathern thong.

  We may not dine upon the bird
  That fills our home with minstrelsy;
  The living vine may never gird
  Too firm and close the living tree,
  Without sad sacrifice incurred.

  The crystal goblet that we drain
  Will be forever after dry;
  But he who sips, and sips again,
  And leaves it to the open sky,
  Will find it filled with dew and rain.

  The lilies burst, the roses blow
  Into divinest balm and bloom,
  When free above and free below;
  And life and love must have large room,
  That life and love may largest grow.

  So Philip learned (what Mildred saw),
  That love was like a well profound,
  From which two souls had right to draw,
  And in whose waters would be drowned
  The one who took the other's law.



  VII.

  Ambition was an alien word,
  Which Mildred faintly understood;
  Its poisoned breathing had not blurred
  The whiteness of her womanhood,
  Nor had its blatant trumpet stirred

  To quicker pulse her heart content.
  In social tasks and home employ,
  She did not question what it meant;
  But bore her woman's lot with joy
  And sweetness, wheresoe'er she went.

  If ever with unconscious thrill
  It touched her, in some vagrant dream,
  She only wished that God would fill
  With larger tide the goodly stream
  That flowed beside her, strong and still.

  She knew that love was more than fame,
  And happy conscience more than love;--
  Far off and wild, the wings of flame!
  Close by, the pinions of the dove
  That hovered white above her name!

  She honored Philip as a man,
  And joyed in his supreme estate;
  But never dreamed that under ban
  She lives who never can be great,
  Or chieftain of a crowd or clan.

  The public eye was like a knife
  That pierced and plagued her shrinking heart.
  To be a woman, and a wife,
  With privilege to dwell apart,
  And hold unseen her modest life--

  Alike from praise and blame aloof,
  And free to live and move in peace
  Beneath love's consecrated roof--
  Was boon so great she could not cease
  Her thanks for the divine behoof.

  Black turns to brown and blue to blight
  Beneath the blemish of the sun;
  And e'en the spotless robe of white,
  Worn overlong, grows dim and dun
  Through the strange alchemy of light.

  Nor wives nor maidens, weak or brave,
  Can stand and face the public stare,
  And win the plaudits that they crave,
  And stem the hisses that they dare,
  And modest truth and beauty save.

  No woman, in her soul, is she
  Who longs to poise above the roar
  Of motley multitudes, and be
  The idol at whose feet they pour
  The wine of their idolatry.

  Coarse labor makes its doer coarse;
  Great burdens harden softest hands;
  A gentle voice grows harsh and hoarse
  That warns and threatens and commands
  Beyond the measure of its force.

  Oh sweet, beyond all speech, to feel
  Within no answer to the drum,
  Or echo to the bugle-peal,
  That calls to duties which benumb
  In service of the commonweal!

  Oh sweet to feel, beyond all speech,
  That most and best of human kind
  Have leave to live beyond the reach
  Of toil that tarnishes, and find
  No tongue but Envy's to impeach!

  Oh sweet, that most unnoticed deeds
  Give play to fine, heroic blood!--
  That hid from light, and shut from weeds,
  The rose is fairer in its bud
  Than in the blossom that succeeds!

    He is the helpless slave who must;
    And she enfranchised who may sit
    Unblamed above the din and dust,
    Where stronger hands and coarser wit
    Strive equally for crown and crust.

    So ran her thought, and broader yet,
    Who scanned her own by Philip's pace;
    And never did the wife forget
    Her grateful tribute for the grace
    That charged her with so sweet a debt.

    So ran her thought; and in her breast
    Her wifely pride to pity grew,
    That Philip, by his Lord's behest--
    To duty and to nature true--
    Must do his bravest and his best.

    Through winter's cold and summer's heat,
    Where all might praise and all might blame,
    And thus be topic of the street,
    And see his fair and honest name
    A football, kicked by careless feet.

    She loved her creed, and doubting not
    She read it well from Nature's scroll,
    She found no line or word to blot;
    But, from her woman's modest soul,
    Thanked her Creator for her lot.



  VIII.

  He who, upon an Alpine peak,
  Stands, when the sunrise lifts the East,
  And gilds the crown and lights the cheek
  Of largest monarch down to least,
  Of all the summits cold and bleak,

  Finds sadly that it brings no boon
  For all his long and toilsome leagues,
  And chill at once and weary soon,
  Rests from his fevers and fatigues,
  And waits the recompense of noon,

  For then the valleys, near and far,
  The hillsides, fretted by the vine,
  The glacier-drift and torrent-scar
  Whose restless waters shoot and shine,
  And many a tarn, that like a star

  Trembles and flames with stress of light,
  And many a hamlet and chalet
  That dots with brown, or paints with white,
  The landscape quivering in the day,
  With beauty all his toil requite.

  Mountains, from mountain altitudes
  Are only hills, as bleak and bare;
  And he whose daring step intrudes
  Upon their grandeur, and the rare
  Cold light or gloom that o'er them broods,

  Finds that with even brow to stand
  Among the heights that bade him climb,
  Is loss of all that made them grand,
  While all of lovely and sublime
  Looks up to him from lake and land.

  Great men are few, and stand apart;
  And seem divinest when remote.
  From brain to brain, and heart to heart,
  No thoughts of genial commerce float;
  Each holds his own exclusive mart.

  And when we meet them, face to face,
  And hand to hand their greatness greet,
  Our steps we willingly retrace,
  And gather humbly at their feet,
  With those who live upon their grace.

  And man and woman--mount and vale--
  Have charms, each from the other seen,--
  The robe of rose, the coat of mail:
  The springing turf, the black ravine:
  The tossing pines, the waving swale:

  Which please the sight with constant joy.
  Thus living, each has power to call
  The other's thoughts with sweet decoy,
  And one can rise and one can fall
  But to distemper or destroy.

  The dewy meadow breeds the cloud
  That rises on ethereal wings,
  And wraps the mountain in a shroud
  From which the living lightning springs
  And torrents pour, that, lithe and loud,

  Leap down in service to the plains,
  Or feed the fountains at their source;
  And only thus the mountain gains
  The vital fulness of the force
  That fills the meadow's myriad veins.

  In fair, reciprocal exchange
  Of good which each appropriates,
  The meadow and the mountain-range
  Nourish their beautiful estates;
  And lofty wild and lowly grange

  Thrive on the commerce thus ordained;
  And not a reek ascends the rock,
  And not a drift of dew is rained,
  But eyrie-brood and tended flock
  By the sweet gift is entertained.

  A meadow may be fair and broad,
  And hold a river in its rest;
  Or small, arid with the silver gaud
  Of a lone lakelet on its breast,
  Or but a patch, that, overawed,

  Clings humbly to the mountain's hem:
  It matters not: it is the charm
  That cheers his life, and holds the stem
  Of every flower that tempts his arm,
  Or greets his snowy diadem.

  Dolts talk of largest and of least,
  And worse than dolts are they who prate
  Of Beauty captive to the Beast;
  For man in woman finds his mate,
  And thrones her equal at his feast.

  She matches meekness with his might,
  And patience with his power to act,--
  His judgment with her quicker sight;
  And wins by subtlety and tact
  The battles he can only fight.

  And she who strives to take the van
  In conflict, or the common way,
  Does outrage to the heavenly plan,
  And outrage to the finer clay
  That makes her beautiful to man.

  All this, and more than this, she saw
  Who reigned in Philip's house and heart.
  Far off, he seemed without a flaw;
  Close by, her tasteless counterpart,
  And slave to Nature's common law.

  To climb with fierce, familiar stride
  His dizzy paths of life and thought,
  Would but degrade him from her pride,
  And bring the majesty to naught
  Which love and distance magnified.

  If she should grow like him, she knew
  He would admire and love her less;
  The eagle's image might be true,
  But eagle of the wilderness
  Would find no consort in the view.

  A woman, in her woman's sphere,
  A loyal wife and worshipper,
  She only thirsted to appear
  As fair to him as he to her,
  And fairer still, from year to year.

  And he who quickly learned to purge
  His fancy of the tender whim
  That she was floating at the verge
  Of womanhood, half hid to him,
  Saw her with gracious mien emerge,

  And stand full-robed upon the shore,
  With faculties and charms unguessed;
  With wondrous eyes that looked before,
  And hands that helped and words that blessed--
  The mistress of an alien lore

  Beyond the wisdom of the schools
  And all his manly power to win;
  With handicraft of tricks and tools
  That conjured marvels with a pin,
  And miracles with skeins and spools!

  She seemed to mock his dusty dearth
  With flowers that sprang beneath his eyes;
  Till all he was, seemed little worth,
  And she he deemed so little wise,
  Became the wisest of the earth.

  In all the struggles of his soul,
  And all the strifes his soul abhorred,
  She shone before him like a goal--
  A shady power of fresh reward--
  A shallop riding in the mole,

  That waited with obedient helm
  To bear him over sparkling seas,
  Into a new and fragrant realm,
  Before the vigor of a breeze
  That drove, but would not overwhelm.

  IX.

  The river of their life was one;
  The shores, down which they passed were two;
  One mirrored mountains, huge and dun,
  The other crimped the green and blue,
  And sparkled in the kindly sun!

  Twin barks, with answering flags, they moved
  With even canvas down the stream,
  In smooth or ruffled waters grooved,
  And found such islands in their dream
  As rest and loving speech behooved.

  Ah fair the goodly gardens smiled
  On Philip at his rougher strand!
  And grandly loomed the summits, isled
  In seas of cloud, to her who scanned
  From her far shore the lofty wild.

  Two lives, two loves--both self-forgot
  In loving homage to their oath;
  Two lives, two loves, but living not
  By ministry that reached them both
  In service of a common lot,

  They sailed the stream, and every mile
  Broadened with beauty as they passed;
  And fruitful shore and trysting-isle,
  And all love's intercourse were glassed
  And blessed in Heaven's benignant smile.

  X.

  To symmetry the oak is grown
  Which all winds visit on the lea,
  While that which lists the monotone
  Of the long blast that sweeps the sea,
  And answers to its breath alone,

  Turns with aversion from the breeze,
  And stretches all its stunted limbs
  Landward and heavenward, toward the trees
  That listen to a thousand hymns,
  And grow to grander destinies.

  Man may not live on whitest loaves,
  With all of coarser good dismissed;
  He pines and starves who never roves
  Beyond the holy eucharist,
  To gather of the fields and groves.

  And he who seeks to fill his heart
  With solace of a single friend,
  Will find refreshment but in part,
  Or, sadder still, will find the end
  Of all his reach of thought and art.

  They who love best need friendship most;
  Hearts only thrive on varied good;
  And he who gathers from a host
  Of friendly hearts his daily food,
  Is the best friend that we can boast.

  She left her husband with his friends;
  She called them round him at her board;
  And found their culture made amends
  For all the time that, from her hoard,
  She spared him for these nobler ends.

  He was her lover; that sufficed:
  His home was in the Holy Place
  With that of the Beloved Christ;
  And friendship had no subtle grace
  By which his love could be enticed.

  Of all his friends, she was but one:
  She held with them a common field.
  Exclusive right, with love begun,
  Ended with love, and stood repealed,
  Leaving his friendship free to run

  Toward man or woman, all unmissed.
  She knew she had no right to bind
  His friendship to her single wrist,
  So long as love was true and kind,
  And made her its monopolist,

  No time was grudged with jealous greed
  Which either books or friendship claimed.
  He was her friend, and she had need
  Of all--unhindered and unblamed
  That he could win, through word or deed.

  Her friend waxed great as grew the man;
  Her temple swelled as rose her priest--
  With power to bless and right to ban--
  And all who served him, most or least,--
  From chorister and sacristan

  To those whose frankincense and myrrh
  Perfumed the sacred courts with alms,--
  Were gracious ministers to her,
  Who found the largess in her palms,
  And him the friendly almoner.




  LOVE'S CONSUMMATIONS.

  The summer passed, the autumn came;
  The world swung over toward the night;
  The forests robed themselves in flame,
  Then faded slowly into white;
  And set within a crystal frame

  Of frozen streams, the shaggy boles
  Of oak and elm, with leafless crowns,
  Were painted stark upon the knolls;
  And cots and villages and towns
  On virgin canvas glowed like coals

  In tawny-red, or strove in vain
  To shame the white in which they stood.
  The fairest tint was but a stain
  Upon the snow, that quenched the wood,
  And paved the street, and draped the plain!



  II.

  Oh!  Southern cheeks are quick to feel
  The magic finger of the frost;
  And Mildred heard but one long peal
  From the fierce Arctic, which embossed
  Her window-panes, and set the seal

  Of cold on all her eye beheld,
  When through her veins there swept new fire,
  And, in her answering bosom, swelled
  New purposes and new desire,
  And force to higher deeds impelled.

  Ah! well for her the languor cast
  That followed from her Southern clime!
  The time would come--was coming fast,--
  Love's consummated, crowning time--
  Of which her heart had antepast!

  A strange new life was in her breast;
  Her eyes were full of wondrous dreams;
  She sailed all whiles from crest to crest
  Of a broad ocean, through whose gleams
  She saw an island wrapped in rest!

  And as she drove across the sea,
  Toward the fair port that fixed her gaze,
  Her life was like a rosary,
  Whose slowly counted beads were days
  Of prayer for one that was to be!



  III.

  Oh roses, roses!  Who shall sing
  The beauty of the flowers of God!
  Or thank the angel from whose wing
  The seeds are scattered on the sod
  From which such bloom and perfume spring!

  Sure they have heavenly genesis
  Which make a heaven of every place;
  Which company our bale and bliss,
  And never to our sinning race
  Speak aught unhallowed, or amiss!

  When love is grieved, their buds atone;
  When love is wed, their forms are near;
  They blend their breathing with the moan
  Of love when dying, and the bier
  Is white with them in every zone.

  No spot is mean that they begem;
  No nosegay fair that holds them not;
  They melt the pride and stir the phlegm
  Of lord and churl, in court and cot,
  And weave a common diadem

  For human brows where'er they grow.
  They write all languages of red,
  They speak all dialects of snow,
  And all the words of gold are said
  With fragrant meanings where they blow!

  Oh sweetest flowers!  Oh flowers divine!
  In which God comes so closely down,
  We gather from his chosen sign
  The tints that cluster in his crown--
  The perfume of his breath benign!

  Oh sweetest flowers!  Oh flowers that hold
  The fragrant life of Paradise
  For a brief day, shut told in fold,
  That we may drink it in a trice,
  And drop the empty pink and gold!

  Oh sweetest flowers, that have a breath
  For every passion that we feel!
  That tell us what the Master saith
  Of blessing, in our woe and weal,
  And all events of life and death!



  IV.

  The time of roses came again;
  And one had bloomed within the manse,
  Bloomed in a burst of midnight pain,
  And plumed its life in fair expanse,
  Beneath love's nursing sun and rain.

  In calyx fair of lilied lawn,
  Wrapped in the mosses of the lamb,
  Long days it lightened toward the dawn
  Of the bright-blushing oriflamme,
  That on two happy faces shone.

  Such tendance ne'er had flower before!
  Such beauty ne'er had flower returned!
  Found on that distant island-shore,
  Whose secret she at last had learned,
  And made her own for evermore,

  Mildred consigned it to her breast;
  And though she knew it took its hue
  From her, it seemed the Lord's bequest,--
  Still sparkling with the heavenly dew,
  And still with heavenly beauty dressed.

  Oh roses! ye were wondrous fair
  That summer by the river side!
  For hearts were blooming everywhere,
  In sympathy of love and pride,
  With that which came to Mildred's care.

  And rose as red as rose could be
  Filled Philip's breast with largest bloom,
  And cast its fragrance far and free,
  And filled his lonely, silent room
  With rapture of paternity!



  V.

  The evening fell on field and street;
  The glow-worm lit his phosphor lamp,
  For fairy forms and fairy feet,
  That gathered for their nightly tramp
  Where grass was green and flowers were sweet.

  In devious circles, round and round,
  The night-hawk coursed the twilight sky,
  Or shot like lightning the profound,
  With breezy thunder in the cry
  That marked his furious rebound!

  The zephyrs breathed through elm and ash
  From new-mown hay and heliotrope,
  And came through Philip's open sash
  With sheen of stars that lit the cope,
  And twinkling of the fire-fly's flash.

  He thought of Mildred and his boy;
  And something moved him more than pride,
  And purer than his manly joy;
  For while these swelled with turbid tide,
  His gratitude had no alloy.

  He heard the baby's weary plaint;
  He heard the mother's soothing words;
  And sitting in his hushed restraint,
  One voice was murmur of the birds,
  And one the hymning of a saint!

  And as he sat alone, immersed
  In the fond fancies of the time,
  Her voice in mellow music burst,
  And by a rhythmic stair of rhyme
  Led down to sleep the child she nursed.


  "Rockaby, lullaby, bees in the clover!--
  Crooning so drowsily, crying so low--
  Rockaby, lullaby, dear little rover!
    Down into wonderland--
    Down to the under-land--
    Go, oh go!
  Down into wonderland go!

  "Rockaby, lullaby, rain on the clover!
  Tears on the eyelids that waver and weep!
  Rockaby, lullaby--bending it over!
    Down on the mother-world,
    Down on the other world!
    Sleep, oh sleep!
  Down on the mother-world sleep!

  "Rockaby, lullaby, dew on the clover!
  Dew on the eyes that will sparkle at dawn!
  Rockaby, lullaby, dear little rover!
    Into the stilly world--
    Into the lily world,
    Gone! oh gone!
  Into the lily-world, gone!"



  VI.

  They sprouted like the prophet's gourd;
  They grew within a single night;
  So swift his busy years were scored
  That, ere he knew, his hope was white
  With harvest bending round his board!

  And eyes were black, and eyes were blue,
  And blood of mother and of sire,
  Each to its native humor true,
  Blent Northern force with Southern fire
  In strength and beauty, strange and new.

  The Gallic brown, the Saxon snow,
  The raven locks, the flaxen curls,
  Were so commingled in the now
  Of the new blood of boys and girls,
  That Puritan and Huguenot

  In love's alembic were advanced
  To higher types and finer forms;
  And ardent humors thrilled and danced
  Through veins, that tempered all their storms,
  Or held them in restraint entranced.

  Oh! many times, as flew the years,
  The dainty cradle-song was sung;
  And bore its balm to restless ears,
  As one by one the nested young
  Slept in their willows and their tears.

  To each within the reedy glade,
  Hid from some tyrant's cruel schemes,
  It was a princess, or her maid,
  Who bore him to the realm of dreams,
  And made him seer by accolade

  Of flaming bush and parted deep,
  Of gushing rocks and raining corn,
  And fire and cloud, and lengthened sweep
  Of thousands toward the promised morn,
  Across the wilderness of sleep!



  VII.

  The years rolled on in grand routine
  Of useful toil and chastening care,
  Till Philip, grown to heights, serene
  Of conscious power, and ripe with prayer,
  Took on the strong and stately mien

  Of one on whom had been conferred
  The doing of a knightly deed;
  And waited till it bade him gird
  The harness on him and his steed,
  For man and for his Master's word.

  His name was spoken far and near,
  And sounded sweet on every tongue;
  Men knew him only to revere,
  And those who knew him nearest, flung
  Their hearts before his grand career,

  And paved his way with loyal trust.
  He was their strongest, noblest man,--
  Sworn foe of every selfish lust,
  And brave to do as wise to plan,
  And swift to judge as pure and just.



    VIII.

    Against such foil the mistress stood--
    A pearl upon a cross of gold--
    White with consistent womanhood,
    And fixed with unrelaxing hold
    Upon the centre of the rood!

    Through all those years of loving thrift,
    Nor blame nor discord marred their lot;
    Each to the lover-life was gift;
    And each was free from blur or blot
    That called for silence or for shrift.

    Each bore the burden that it held
    With patient hands along the road;
    And though, with passing years, it swelled
    Until it grew a weary load,
    Nor tongue complained, nor heart rebelled.

    At length the time of trial came,
    And they were tried as gold is tried.
    Their peace of life went up in flame,
    And what was good was vilified,
    And what was blameless came to blame.



  IX.

  The Southern sky was dun with cloud;
  And looming lurid o'er its edge
  The brows of awful forms were bowed,
  That forged in flame the fateful wedge
  Which waited in the angry shroud

  The banner of the storm unfurled,
  And all the powers of death arrayed
  In black battalions, to be hurled
  Down through the rack--a blazing blade--
  To cleave the realm, and shake the world!

  The North was full of nameless dread;
  Wild portents flamed from out the pole;
  Old scars on Freedom's bosom bled,
  And sick at heart and vexed of soul
  She tossed in fever on her bed!

  Pale Commerce hid her face and whined;
  The arms of Toil were paralyzed;
  The wise were of divided mind,
  And those who counselled and advised
  Were sightless leaders of the blind.

  Men lost their faith in good and great;
  No captain sprang, or prophet bard,
  To win their trust, and save the state
  From the wild storm that, like a pard,
  On quivering haunches lay in wait!

  The loyal only were not brave;
  E'en peace became a cringing dog;
  The patriot paltered like a knave,
  And partisan anti demagogue
  Quarrelled o'er Freedom's waiting grave.



  X.

  Amid the turmoil and disgrace,
  The voice was clear from first to last,
  Of one who, in the desert place
  Of barren counsels, held him fast
  His shepherd's crook, and made it mace

  To bear before the Great Event
  Whose harbinger he chose to be,
  And called on all men to repent,
  And build a way from sea to sea,
  For Freedom's full enfranchisement.

  For Philip, to his conscience leal,
  Conceived that God had chosen him
  With Treason's sophistries to deal,
  And grapple with the Anakim
  Whose menace shook the common weal.

  His pulpit smoked beneath his blows;
  His voice was heard in hall and street;
  A thousand friends became his foes,
  And pews were empty or replete,
  With passion's ebbs and overflows.

  They trailed his good name in the mire;
  They spat their venom in his eyes;
  They taunted him with mad desire
  For power, and gathered his replies
  In braver words and fiercer fire,

  He was a wolf, disguised in wool;
  He was a viper in the breast;
  He was a villain, or the tool
  Of greater villains; at the best,
  A blind enthusiast and fool!

  As swelled the tempest, rose the man;
  He turned to sport their brutal spleen;
  And none could choose be slow to span
  The difference that lay between
  A Prospero and a Caliban!



  XI.

  She would not move him otherwise,
  Although her heart was sad and sore.
  That which was venal in his eyes
  To her a lovely aspect wore,
  And helped to weave the thousand ties

  Which bound her to her youth, and all
  The loves that she had left behind
  When, from her father's stately hall,
  She came, her Northern home to find,
  With him who held her heart in thrall.

  In the dark pictures which he drew
  Of instituted shame and wrong,
  She saw no figures that she knew,
  But a confused and hateful throng
  Of forms that in his fancy grew.

  Her father's rule, benign and mild,
  Was all of slavery she had known;
  To her, an Afric was a child--
  A charge in other ages thrown
  On Christian honor, from the wild

  Of savagery in which the Fates
  Had given him birth and dwelling-place--
  And so, descending through estates
  Of gentle vassalage, his race
  Had come to those of later dates.

  Black hands her baby form had dressed;
  Black hands her blacker hair had curled;
  And she had found a dusky breast
  The sweetest breast in all the world
  When she was thirsty or at rest.

  Her playmates, in her native bowers,
  Were Darkest children of the sun,
  Who built the palaces and towers
  In which her reign, in love begun,
  Gave foretaste of love's later hours.

  Her memory was full of song
  That she had learned in house and field,
  From those whose days seemed never long,
  And those who could not hold concealed
  The consciousness of shame and wrong.

  A loving ear heard their complaints;
  A faithful tongue advised and warned;
  And grave corrections and restraints
  Were rendered by a heart adorned
  By all the graces of the saints.

  There was no touch of memory's chords--
  No picture on her blooming wall,--
  Of life upon the sunny swards
  They reproduced,--but brought recall
  Of happy slaves and gentle lords.

  And Philip charged a deadly sin
  Upon that beautiful domain,
  Condemning all who dwelt therein,
  And branding with the awful stain
  Her friends, and all her dearest kin.



  XII.

  Yet still she knew his conscience clear,--
  That he believed his voice was God's;
  And listened with a voiceless fear
  To the portentous periods
  In which he preached the chosen year

  Of expiation and release,
  And prophesied that Slavery's power,
  Grown great apace with crime's increase,
  Before the front of Right should cower,
  And bid God's people go in peace!

  The fierce invectives of his tongue
  Frayed every day her wounds afresh,
  And with new pain her bosom wrung,
  For they envenomed kindred flesh,
  To which in sympathy she clung.

  Yet not a finger did she lift
  To hold him from his fateful task,
  Though Satan oft essayed to sift
  Her soul as wheat, and bade her ask
  Somewhat from conscience as a gift.

  And when a serpent in his slime
  Crept to her ear with phrase polite,
  Prating of duty to her time
  And to her people, swift and white
  She turned and cursed him for his crime!

  She would have naught of all the brood
  Of temporizing, driveling shows
  Of men who Philip's words withstood:
  Against them all her love uprose,
  And all her pride of womanhood.



  XIII.

  She loved her kindred none the less,
  She loved her husband still the more,
  For well she knew that with distress
  He saw the heavy cross she bore
  With steadfast faith and tenderness.

  She kept her love intact, because
  She would not be a partisan;
  Not hers the voice that made the laws,
  Nor hers prerogative to ban,
  Or bolster them with her applause.

  No strife of jarring policies,
  No conflict of embittered states,
  No chart, defining by degrees
  Of latitude her country's hates,
  Could change her friends to enemies.

  The motives ranged on either hand,
  Behind the war of word and will,
  Were such as she could understand
  And, with respect to all, fulfil
  Love's broad and beautiful command.

  So, with all questions hushed to sleep,
  And all opinions put aside,
  She gave her loved ones to the keep
  Of God, whatever should betide,
  To bear her joy or bid her weep!



  XIV.

  Though Philip knew he wounded her,
  His faith to God and faith to man
  Bade him go forward, and incur
  Such cost as, since the world began,
  Has burdened Freedom's harbinger.

  No heart or hand was his to flinch
  From ease or reputation lost;
  Nor waste of gold, nor hunger-pinch,
  Nor e'en his home's black holocaust,
  Could stay his arm, though inch by inch,

  The maddened hosts of scorn and scath
  Should crowd him backward to defeat.
  He would but strive with sterner wrath,
  And bless the hand that, soft and sweet,
  Withheld its hinderance from his path!



  XV.

  Still darker loomed the Southern cloud,
  While o'er its black and billowed face
  In furrowed fire the lightning ploughed,
  And ramping from its hiding-place
  Roared the wild thunder, fierce and loud!

  And still men chattered of their trade,
  And strove to banish their alarms;
  And some were puzzled, some afraid,
  And some held up their feeble arms
  In indignation while they prayed!

  And others weakly talked of schism
  As boon of God in place of war,
  And bared their foreheads for its chrism!
  While direr than the mace of Thor,
  In mid-air hung the cataclysm

  Which waited but some chance, or act,
  To shiver the electric spell,
  And pour in one fierce cataract
  A rain of blood and fire of hell
  On Freedom's temple spoiled and sacked.

  The politician plied his craft;
  The demagogue still schemed and lied;
  The patriot wept, the traitor laughed;
  The coward to his covert hied,
  And statesmen went distract or daft.

  Contention raged in Senate halls;
  Confusion reigned in field and town;
  High conclaves flattened into brawls,
  And till and hammer, smock and gown,
  Nor duty knew nor heard its calls!



  XVI.

  At last, incontinent of fire,
  The cloud of menace belched its brand;
  And every state and every shire,
  And town and hamlet in the land,
  Shook with the smiting of its ire!

  Men looked each other in the eyes,
  And beat their burning breasts and cursed!
  At last the silliest were wise;
  And swift to flash and thunder-burst
  Fashioned in anger their replies.

  The smoke of Sumter filled the air.
  Men breathed it in in one long breath;
  And straight upspringing everywhere,
  Life burgeoned on the mounds of death,
  And bloomed in valleys of despair.

  The fire of Sumter, fierce and hot,
  Welded their purpose into one;
  And discord hushed, and strife forgot,
  They swore that what had thus begun
  With sacrilegious cannon-shot,

  Should find in analogue of flame
  Such answer of the nation's host,
  That the old flag, washed clean from shame
  In blood, should wave from coast to coast,
  Over one realm in heart and name!

  Pale doubters, scourged by countless whips,
  Fled to their refuge, or obeyed
  The motives and the masterships
  That time and circumstance betrayed
  Through Patriotism's apocalypse,

  And, sympathetic with the spasm
  Of loyal life that thrilled the clime,
  Lost in the swift enthusiasm
  The loose intention of their crime,
  And leaped in swarms the awful chasm

  That held them parted from the mass.
  The North was one in heart and thought;
  And that which could not come to pass
  Through loyal eloquence, was wrought
  By one hot word from lips of brass!



  XVII.

  The cry sprang upward and sped on:
  "To arms! for freedom and the flag!"
  And swift, from Maine to Oregon,
  O'er glebe and lake and mountain-crag,
  Hurtled the fierce Euroclydon,

  Men dropped their mallets on the bench,
  Forsook their ploughs on hill and plain,
  And tore themselves, with piteous wrench
  Of heart and hope, from love and gain,
  And trooped in throngs to tent and trench.

  "To arms!" and Philip heard the cry.
  Not his the valor cheap and small
  To bluster with brave phrase, and fly
  When trumpet-blare and rifle-ball
  Proclaimed the time for words gone by!

  Men knew their chieftain.  He had borne
  Their insolence through struggling years,
  And they---the dastards, the forsworn--
  Who had ransacked the hemispheres
  For instruments to wreak their scorn

  On him and all of kindred speech,
  Gathered around him with his friends,
  And with stern plaudits heard him preach
  A gospel whose stupendous ends
  Their martyred blood could only reach.

  They gave him honor far and wide,
  As one who backed his word by deed;
  And he whose task had been to guide,
  Was chosen by reclaim to lead
  The men who gathered at his side.

  The crook was banished for the glave;
  The churchman's black for soldier-blue;
  The man of peace became a brave;
  And, in the dawn of conflict, drew
  His sword his country's life to save.



  XIX.

  They came from mead and mountain-top;
  They came from factory and forge;
  And one by one, from farm and shop--
  Still gravel to the Northman's gorge--
  Followed the servile Ethiop.

  Gaunt, grimy men, whose ways had been
  Among the shadows and the slums,
  With pedagogue and paladin,
  Rushed, at the rolling of the drums,
  To Philip, and were mustered in!

  The beat of drum and scream of fife,
  Commingling with the thundering tramp
  Of trooping throngs, so changed the life
  Of the calm village that the camp,
  And what it prophesied of strife,

  And hap of loss and hap of gain,
  Became of every tongue the theme;
  Till burning heart and throbbing brain
  Could waking think, and sleeping dream,
  Of naught but battles and the slain.



  XX.

  With eager eyes and helpful hands
  The women met in solemn crowds,
  And shred the linen into bands
  That had been better saved for shrouds,
  Or want's imperious demands.

  And with them all sad Mildred walked,
  The bearer of a heavy cross;
  For at her side the phantom stalked--
  Nor left her for an hour--of loss
  Which by no fortune might be balked.

  For one or all she loved must fall;
  One cause must perish in defeat;
  Success of either would appall,
  And victory, however sweet
  To others, would to her be gall.

  To each, with equal heart allied,
  Her love was like the love of God,
  That wraps the country in its tide,
  And o'er its hosts, benign and broad,
  Broods with its pity and its pride!

  A thousand chances of the feud
  She wove and raveled one by one,--
  Of hands in kindred blood imbrued,--
  Of father, face to face with son,
  And friends turned foemen fierce and rude.

  And in her dreams two forms were met,
  Of friends as leal as ever breathed---
  Her husband and her brother--wet
  With priceless blood from swords ensheathed
  In hearts that loved each other yet!

  But itching ears her language scanned,
  And jealous eyes were on her steps;
  And fancies into rumors fanned
  By loyal shrews and demireps
  Proclaimed her traitress to the land.

  They knew her blood, but could not know
  That mighty passion of her heart
  Which, reaching widely in its woe,
  Grasped all she loved on either part,
  And could not, would not let it go!



  XXI.

  The time of gathering came and went--
  Of noisy zeal and hasty drill--
  And every where, in field and tent,--
  A constant presence,--Philip's will
  Moulded the callow regiment.

  And then there fell a gala day,
  When all the mighty, motley swarm
  Appeared in beautiful display
  Of burnished arms and uniform,
  And gloried in their brave array!--

  And, later still, the hour of dread
  To all the simple country round,
  When forth, with Philip at their head,
  They marched from the familiar ground,
  And drained its life, and left it dead;--

  Dead but for those who pined with grief;
  Dead but for fears that could not die;
  Dead as the world when flower and leaf
  Are still beneath a gathering sky,
  And ocean sleeps on reach and reef.

  The weary waiting time had come,
  When only apprehension waked;
  And lonely wives sat chill and dumb
  Among their broods, with hearts that ached
  And echoed the retreating drum.

  Teachers forgot to preach their creeds,
  And trade forsook its merchandise;
  The fallow fields grew rank with weeds,
  And none had interest or eyes
  For aught but war's ensanguined deeds.

  As one who lingered by a bier
  Where all she loved lay dead and cold,
  Sad Mildred sat without a tear,
  Living again the days of old,
  Or, with the vision of a seer,

  Forecasting the disastrous end.
  Whatever might come, she did not dare
  Believe that fortune would defend
  The noble life she could not spare,
  And save her lover and her friend.

  Her blooming girls and stalwart boys
  Could never comprehend the woe
  Which dropped its measure of their joys,
  And felt but horror in the show,
  And heard but murder in the noise,

  And dreamed of death when stillness fell
  Behind the gay and shouting corps.
  They saw her haunted by the spell
  Of a great sorrow, and forebore
  To question what they could not quell.

  Small time she gave to vain regret;
  Brief space to thought of that adieu
  Which crushed her breast, when last they met,
  And in love's baptism bathed anew
  Cheeks, lips, and eyes, and left them wet!

  In deeds of sympathy and grace,
  She moved among the homes forlorn,
  Alike to beautiful and base
  And, to the stricken and the shorn,
  The guardian angel of the place.



  XXII.

  Oh piteous waste of hopes and fears!
  Oh cruel stretch of long delay!
  Oh homes bereft!  Oh useless tears!
  Oh war! that ravened on its prey
  Through pain's immeasurable years!

  The town was mourning for its dead;
  The streets were black with widowhood;
  While orphaned children begged for bread,
  And Rachel, for the brave and good,
  Mourned, and would not be comforted.

  The regiment that, straight and crisp,
  Shone like a wheat-field in the sun,
  Its swift voice deafened to a lisp,
  Fell, ere the war was well begun,
  And waned and withered to a wisp.

  And Philip, grown to higher rank,
  Crowned with the bays of splendid deeds,
  Of the full cup of glory drank,
  And lived, though all his reeking steeds
  In the red front of conflict sank.

  The star of conquest waxed or waned,
  Yet still the call came back for men;
  Still the lamenting town was drained,
  And still again, and still again,
  Till only impotence remained!



  XXIII.

  There came at length an eve of gloom--
  Dread Gettysburg's eventful eve--
  When all the gathering clouds of doom
  Hung low, the breathless air to cleave
  With scream of shell and cannon-boom!

  Man knew too well; and woman felt,
  That when the next-wild morn should rise,
  A blow of battle would, be dealt
  Before whose fire ten thousand eyes--
  As in a furnace flame--would melt.

  And on this eve--her flock asleep--
  Knelt Mildred at her lonely bed.
  She could not pray, she did not weep,
  But only moaned, and moaning, said:
  "Oh God! he sows what I must reap!

  "He will not live: he must not die!
  But oh, my poor, prophetic heart!
  It warns me that there lingers nigh
  The hour when love and I must part!"
  And then she startled with a cry,

  For, from beneath her lattice, came
  A low and once repeated call!
  She knew the voice that spoke her name,
  And swiftly, through the midnight hall
  She fluttered noiseless as a flame,

  And on its unresisting hinge
  Threw wide her hospitable door,
  To one whose spirit did not cringe
  Though he was weak, and knew he bore
  No right her freedom to infringe.

  She wildly clasped his neck of bronze;
  She rained her kisses; on his face,
  Grown tawny with a thousand suns,
  And holding him in her embrace,
  She led him to her little ones,

  Who, reckless of his coming, slept.
  Then down the stair with silent feet,
  And through the shadowy hall she swept,
  And saw, between her and the street,
  A form that into darkness crept.

  She closed the door with speechless dread;
  She fixed the bolt with trembling hand;
  Then led the rebel to his bed,
  Whom love and safety had unmanned,
  And left him less alive than dead.

  Through nights and days of fear and grief,
  She kept her faithful watch and ward,
  But love and rest brought no relief;
  And all he begged for of his Lord
  Was death, with passion faint and brief.



  XXIV.

  Around the house were prying eyes,
  And gossips hiding under trees;
  And Mildred heard the steps of spies
  At midnight, when, upon her knees,
  She sought the comfort of the skies.

  Strange voices rose upon the night;
  Strange errands entered at the gate;
  Her hours were months of pale affright;
  But still her prisoner of state
  Was shielded from their eager sight.

  They did not dare to force the lock
  Of one whose deeds had been divine,
  Or carry to her heart the shock
  Of violence, although condign
  Toward one who dared the laws to mock.

  But there were hirelings in pursuit,
  Who thirsted for his golden price;
  And, swift allied with pimp and brute,
  And quick to purchase and entice,
  They found the tree that held their fruit.




  XXV.

  The day of Gettysburg had set;
  The smoke had drifted from the scene,
  And burnished sword and bayonet
  Lay rusting where, but yestere'en,
  They dropped with life-blood red and wet!

  The swift invader had retraced
  His march, and left his fallen braves,
  Covered at night in voiceless haste,
  To, sleep, in memorable graves,
  But knew that all his loss was waste.

  The nation's legions, stretching wide,
  Too sore to chase, too weak to cheer,
  Gave sepulture to those who died,
  And saw their foemen disappear
  Without the loss of power or pride.

  And then, swift-sweeping like a gale,
  Through all the land, from end to end,
  Grief poured its wild, untempered wail,
  And father, mother, wife, and friend
  Forgot their country in their bale.

  And Philip, with his fatal wound,
  Was borne beyond the battle's blaze,
  Across the torn and quaking ground,--
  His ear too dull to heed the praise,
  That spoke him hero, robed and crowned.

  They bent above his blackened face,
  And questioned of his last desire;
  And with his old, familiar grace,
  And smiling mouth, and eye of fire,
  He answered them: "My wife's embrace!"

  They wiped his forehead of its stain,
  They bore him tenderly away,
  Through teeming mart and wide champaign,
  Till on a twilighty cool and gray,
  And wet with weeping of the rain,

  They gave him to a silent crowd
  That waited at the river's marge,
  Of men with age and sorrow bowed,
  Who raised and bore their precious charge,
  Through groups that watched and wailed aloud.



  XXVI.

  The hounds of power were at her gate;
  And at their heels, a yelping pack
  Of graceless mongrels stood in wait,
  To mark the issue of attack,
  With lips that slavered with their hate.

  With window raised and portal barred,
  The mistress scanned the darkening space,
  And with a visage hot and hard--
  At bay before the cruel chase--
  She held them in her fierce regard.

  "What would ye--spies and hirelings--what?"
  She asked with accent, stern and brave;
  "Why come ye to this sacred spot,
  Led by the counsel of a knave,
  And flanked by slanderer and sot?

  "You have my husband: has he earned
  No meed of courtesy for me?
  Is this the recompense returned,
  That she he loved the best should be
  Suspected, persecuted, spurned?

  "My home is wrecked: what would ye more?
  My life is ruined--what new boon?
  My children's hearts are sad and sore
  With weeping for the wounds that soon
  Will plead for healing at my door!

  "I hold your prisoner--stand assured:
  Safe from his foes: aye, safe from you!
  Safe in a sister's love immured,
  And by a warden kept as true
  As e'er the test of faith endured,

  "Why, men, he was my brother born!
  My hero, all my youthful years!
  My counsellor, to guide and warn!
  My shield alike from foes and fears!
  And when he came to me, forlorn,

  "What could I do but hail him guest,
  And bind his cruel wounds with balm,
  And give him on his sister's breast
  That which he asked, the humble alm
  Of a safe pillow where to rest?

  "Come, then, and dare the wrath of fate!
  Come, if you must, or if you will!
  But know that I am desperate;
  And shafts that wound, and wounds that kill
  Your deed of dastardy await!"

  A murmur swept through all the mob;
  The base informer slunk afar;
  And lusty cheer and stifled sob
  Rose to her at the window-bar,
  While those whose hands were come to rob

  Her dwelling of its treasure, cursed;
  For round their heads the menace flew
  That he who dared adventure first,
  Or first an arm of murder drew,
  Should taste of vengeance at its worst.



  XXVII.

  A heavy tramp, a murmuring sound,
  Low mingling with the murmuring rain,--
  Heard in the wind and in the ground,--
  Came up the street--a tide of pain,
  In which the angry din was drowned.

  The leaders of the tumult fled;
  The door flew open with a crash;
  And down the street wild Mildred sped,
  Piercing the darkness like a flash,
  And walked beside her husband's bed.

  Slowly the solemn train advanced;
  The crowd fell back with parted ranks;
  And like a giant, half entranced,
  Sailing between strange, spectral banks,
  From side to side the soldier glanced.

  The sobbing rain, the evening dim,
  The dusky forms that pushed and peered,
  The swaying couch, the aching limb,
  The lights and shadows, sharp and weird,
  Were but a troubled dream to him.

  He knew his love--all else unknown,
  Or seen through reason's sad eclipse--
  And with her, hand within his own,
  Or fondly pressed upon his lips,
  He clung to it, as if alone

  It had the power to stay, his feet
  Still longer on the verge of life;
  And thus they vanished from the street--
  The shepherd-warrior and his wife--
  Within the manse's closed retreat.



  XXVIII.

  Embraced by home, his soul grew light;
  And though he moaned: "My head! my head!"
  His life turned back its outward flight,
  Like his, who, from the prophet's bed,
  Startled the wondering Shunammite.

  He greeted all with tender speech;
  He told his children he should die;
  He gave his fond farewell to each,
  With messages, and fond good-by
  To all he loved beyond his reach.

  And then he spoke her brother's name:
  "Tell him," he said, "that, in my death,
  I cherished his untarnished fame,
  And, to my life's expiring breath,
  Held his brave spirit free from blame.

  "We strove alike for truth's behoof,
  With honest faith and love sincere,--
  For God and-country, right and roof,
  And issues that do not appear;
  But wait with Heaven the awful proof."

  A tottering figure reached the door;
  The brother fell upon the bed,
  And, in each other's arms once more,
  With breast to breast, and head to head,--
  Twin barks, they drifted from the shore;

  And backward on the sobbing air
  Came the same words from warring lips:
  "God save my country!" and the prayer
  Still wailing from the drifting ships,
  Returned in measures of despair;

  Till far, at the horizon's verge,
  They passed beyond the tearful eyes
  That could not know if in the surge
  They sank at last, or in the skies
  Forgot the burden of their dirge!



  XXIX.

  In Northern blue and Southern brown,
  Twin coffins and a single grave,
  They laid the weary warriors down;
  And hands that strove to slay and save
  Had equal rest and like renown.

  For in the graveyard's hallowed close
  A woman's love made neutral soil,
  Where it might lay the forms of those
  Who, resting from their fateful broil,
  Had ceased forever to be foes.

  To her and those who clung to her--
  From manly eldest down to least--
  The obsequies, the sepulchre,
  The chanting choir, the weeping priest,
  And all the throng and all the stir

  Of sympathetic country-folk,
  And all the signs of death and dole,
  Were but a dream that beat and broke
  In chilling waves on heart and soul,
  Till in the silence they awoke.

  She was a widow, and she wept;
  She was a mother, and she smiled;
  Her faith with those she loved was kept,
  Though still the war-cry, fierce and wild,
  Around the harried country swept.

  No more with this had she to do;
  God and her little ones were left;
  And unto these, serene and true,
  She gave the life so soon bereft
  Of its first gifts, and rose anew

  At duty's call to make amends
  For all her loss of loves and lands;
  And found, to speed her noble ends,
  The succor of uplifting hands,
  And solace of a thousand friends.

  And o'er her precious graves she built
  A stone whereon the yellow boss
  Of sword on sword with naked hilt
  Lay as the symbol of her cross,
  In mournful meaning, carved and gilt.

  And underneath were graved the lines:--

  "THEY DID THE DUTY THAT THEY SAW;
  BOTH WROUGHT AT GOD'S SUPREME DESIGNS
  AND, UNDER LOVE'S ETERNAL LAW,
  EACH LIFE WITH EQUAL BEAUTY SHINES."



  XXX.

  Peace, with its large and lilied calms,
  Like moonlight sleeps on land and lake,
  With healing in its dewy balms,
  For pride that pines and hearts that ache,
  From Huron to the land of palms!

  From rock-bound Massachusetts Bay
  To San Francisco's Golden Gate;
  From where Itasca's waters play,
  To those which plunge or palpitate
  A thousand happy leagues away,

  And drink, among her dunes and bars,
  The Mississippi's boiling tide,
  Still floating from a million spars,
  The nation's ensign, undefied,
  Blazons its galaxy of stars.

  No more to party strife the slave,
  And freed from Hate's infernal spells,
  Love pays her tribute to the brave,
  And snows her holy immortelles
  O'er friend and foe, where'er his grave.

  On every Decoration Day
  The white-haired Mildred finds her mounds
  Decked with the garnered bloom of May--
  Flowers planted first within her wounds,
  And fed by love as white as they.

  And Philip's first-born, strong and sage,
  Through Heaven's design or happy chance
  Finds the old church his heritage,
  And still, The Mistress of the Manse,
  Sits Mildred, in her silver age!











End of Project Gutenberg's The Mistress of the Manse, by J. G. Holland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MISTRESS OF THE MANSE ***

***** This file should be named 13052.txt or 13052.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/0/5/13052/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

