The Project Gutenberg EBook of A General History and Collection of Voyages
and Travels, Volume IX., by Robert Kerr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A General History and Collection of Voyages and Travels, Volume IX.

Author: Robert Kerr

Release Date: July 30, 2004 [EBook #13055]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGES AND TRAVELS, VOL. IX. ***




Produced by Robert Connal, Graeme Mackreth and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions.






A GENERAL HISTORY AND COLLECTION OF VOYAGES AND TRAVELS,

ARRANGED IN SYSTEMATIC ORDER:

FORMING A COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF NAVIGATION,
DISCOVERY, AND COMMERCE, BY SEA AND LAND, FROM THE EARLIEST AGES TO THE
PRESENT TIME.

BY

ROBERT KERR, F.R.S. & F.A.S. EDIN.

ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS AND CHARTS.

VOL. IX.

MDCCCXXIV. CONTENTS

OF

VOL. IX.

PART II. BOOK III. CONTINUED.

CHAP. X. (_Continued_.)

Early Voyages of the English to India, after the Establishment of the
East India Company

SECT. XV. (_Continued_)--Eighth Voyage of the English East-India
Company, in 1611, by Captain John Saris

Sec.5. Further Observations respecting the Moluccas, and the Completion of
the Voyage to Japan

Sec.6. Arrival at Brando, and some Account of the Habits, Manners, and
Customs of the Japanese

Sec.7. Journey of Captain Saris to the Court of the Emperor, with his
Observations there and by the Way

Sec.8. Occurrences at Firando during the Absence of Captain Saris

Sec.9. Continuation of these Occurrences

Sec.10. Conclusion of these

Sec.11. Occurrences at Firando, after the return of Captain Saris

Sec.12. Voyage from Japan to Bantam, and thence to England

Sec.I3. Intelligence concerning Yedso or Jesso, received from a Japanese at
Jedo, who had been twice there

Sec.14. Note of Commodities vendible in Japan

Sec.15. Supplementary Notices of Occurrences in Japan, after the departure
of Captain Saris

SECT. XVI. Ninth Voyage of the East-India Company, in 1612, by Captain
Edward Marlow

SECT. XVII. Tenth Voyage of the East-India Company, in 1612, written by
Mr Thomas Best, Chief Commander

Sec.1. Observations during the Voyage from England to Surat

Sec.2. Transactions with the Subjects of the Mogul, Fights with the
Portuguese, Settlement of a Factory and Departure for Acheen

Sec.3. Occurrences at Acheen in Sumatra

Sec.4. Trade at Tecoo and Passaman, with the Voyage to Bantam, and thence
to England

SECT. XVIII. Observations made during the foregoing Voyage, by Mr
Copland, Chaplain, Mr Robert Boner, Master, and Mr Nicholas Whittington,
Merchant

Sec.1. Notes extracted from the Journal of Mr Copland, Chaplain of the
Voyage

Sec.2. Notes extracted from the Journal of Mr Robert Boner, who was Master
of the Dragon

Sec.3. Extract from a Treatise by Mr Nicholas Whittington, who was left as
Factor in the Mogul Country by Captain Best, containing some of his
Travels and Adventures

SECT. XIX. Eleventh Voyage of the East-India Company, in 1612, in the
Salomon

SECT. XX. Twelfth Voyage of the East-India Company, in 1613, by Captain
Christopher Newport

Sec.1. Observations at St Augustine, Mohelia, and divers Parts of Arabia

Sec.2. Proceedings on the Coast of Persia, and Treachery of the Baloches

Sec.3. Arrival at Diul-ginde, and landing of the Ambassador: Seeking Trade
there, are crossed by the slanderous Portuguese: Go to Sumatra and
Bantam; and thence to England

CHAP XI. Continuation of the Early Voyages of the English East India
Company to India

Introduction

SECT. I. Voyage of Captain Nicholas Downton to India, in 1614

Sec.1. Incidents at Saldanha, Socotora, and Swally; with an Account of the
Disagreements between the Moguls and Portuguese, and between the Nabob
and the English

Sec.2. Account of the Forces of the Portuguese, their hostile Attempts and
Fight with the English, in which they are disgracefully repulsed

Sec.3. Supplies received by the Portuguese, who vainly endeavour to use
Fire-boats. They seek Peace, which is refused, and depart. Interview
between the Nabob and Captain Downton, and Departure of the English

SECT. II. Relations by Mr Elkington and Mr Dodsworth, in Supplement to
preceding Voyage

Sec.1. Continuation of the Voyage from Surat to Bantam, by Captain Thomas
Elkington

Sec.2. Brief Observations by Mr Edward Dodsworth, who returned to England
in the Hope

SECT. III. Journey of Richard Steel and John Crowther, from Agimere, in
India, to Ispahan, in Persia, in the Years 1615, and 1616

SECT. IV. Voyage of Captain Walter Peyton to India, in 1615

Sec.1. Occurrences during the Voyage from England to Surat

Sec.2. Occurrences at Calicut and Sumatra. Miscarriage of the English
Ships, Abuses of the Dutch, and Factories in India

Sec.3. Brief Notice of the Ports, Cities, and Towns, inhabited by, and
traded with, by the Portuguese, between the Cape of Good Hope and Japan,
in the Year 1616

SECT. V. Notes, concerning the Proceedings of the Factory at Cranganore,
from the Journal of Roger Hawes

SECT. VI. Journal of Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador from James I. to Shah
Jehanguire, Mogul Emperor of Hindoostan

Introduction

Sec.1. Journey from Surat to the Court of the Mogul, and Entertainment
there, with some Account of the Customs of the Country

Sec.2. Occurrences in June, July, and August, 1616, from which the
Character and Dispositions of the Mogul and his Subjects may be observed

Sec.3. Of the Celebration of the King's Birth-day, with other Occurrences,
in September, 1616

Sec.4. Broils about Abdala Khan, and Khan-Khannan: Ambitious Projects of
Sultan Churrum to subvert his eldest Brother: Sea-fight with a
Portuguese Carrack; and various other Occurrences

Sec.5. Continuation of Occurrences at Court, till leaving Agimere, in
November, 1616

Sec.6. Sir Thomas Roe follows the Progress of the Court, and describes the
King's Leskar, &c.

Sec.7. A New-year's Gift--Suspicion entertained of the
English--Dissatisfaction of the Persian Ambassador--English Ships of War
in the Indian Seas

Sec.8 Asaph Khan and Noormahal protect the English from Hope of
Gain.--Arrival of Mr Steel.--Danger to the Public from private
Trade--Stirs about a Fort

SECT. VII. Relation of a Voyage to India in 1616, with Observations
respecting the Dominions of the Great Mogul, by Mr Edward Terry

Sec.1. Occurrences during the Voyage from England to Surat

Sec.2. Description of the Mogul Empire

Sec.3. Of the People of Hindoostan, and their Manners and Customs

Sec.4. Of the Sects, Opinions, Rites Priests, &c. of the Hindoos; with
other Observations

SECT. VIII. Journey of Thomas Coryat by Land, from Jerusalem to the
Court of the Great Mogul

Sec.1. Letter from Agimere to Mr L. Whitaker, in 1615

Sec.2. Do. from Agra to his Mother, in 1616

Sec.3. Some Observations concerning India, by Coryat

SECT. IX. Account of the Wrongs done to the English at Banda by the
Dutch, in 1617 and 1618

SECT. X. Fifth Voyage of the Joint-stock by the English East India
Company, in 1617, under the Command of Captain Martin Pring

Sec.1. Occurrences on the Voyage out, and at Surat, Bantam, and Jacatra

Sec.2. Dutch Injustice, and Sea-fight between them and Sir Thomas Dale

Sec.3. Departure for Coromandel, with Occurrences there, and Death of Sir
Thomas Dale.--Capture of English Ships by the Dutch; and Occurrences at
Tecoo

Sec.4. News of Peace between the English and Dutch

Sec.5. Voyage of Captain Pring from Bantam to Patania and Japan

Sec.6. Voyage from Japan to Bantam, and thence to England

SECT. XI. Voyage of the Ann-royal, from Surat to Mokha, in 1618

SECT. XII. Journal of a Voyage to Surat and Jasques in 1620

Sec.1. Voyage from England to Surat

Sec.2. Voyage from Surat towards Jasques

Sec.3. Account of a Sea-fight with the Portuguese

Sec.4. Second Sea-fight with the Portuguese

Sec.5. Sequel of the Voyage

SECT. XIII. Relation of the War of Ormus, and the Capture of that Place
by the English and Persians, in 1622

SECT. XIV. Account of the Massacre of Amboina, in 1623

SECT. XV. Observations during a Residence in the Island of Chusan, in
1701, by Dr James Cunningham; with some early Notices respecting China

Sec.1. Voyage to Chusan, and short Notices of that Island

Sec.2. Ancient and modern State of the Country, and coming of the English
to reside there

Sec.3. Manner of cultivating Tea in Chusan

Sec.4. Of the famous Medicinal Root called H-tchu-u

Sec.5. Removal of Dr Cunningham to Pulo-Condore, with an Account of the
Rise, Progress, and Ruin of that Factory

Sec.6. Some Account of the Factory at Pulo-Laut, with the Overthrow of that
Factory, and of the English Trade in Borneo

       *       *       *       *       *
[Illustration: CHART OF
NORTH EASTERN
AFRICA]

Published 1st July 1813

A GENERAL HISTORY AND COLLECTION OF VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II. BOOK III.

(CONTINUED.)

       *       *       *       *       *





CHAPTER X.--_Continued_.

EARLY VOYAGES OF THE ENGLISH TO INDIA, AFTER THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
EAST INDIA COMPANY.


SECTION XV.--_Continued_.

_Eighth Voyage of the English East India Company, in 1611, by Captain
John Saris_.

Sec.5. _Farther Observations respecting the Moluccas, and the Completion of
the Voyage to Japan_.

The 10th of April, 1613, the Spanish commandant sent me a message,
requesting me to stop till the next morning, when he would visit me
along with the sergeant-major of Ternate, who had arrived with a letter
from Don Jeronimo de Sylva, allowing them to trade with me for different
things of which they were in want, and to satisfy me in what I had
requested; wherefore I resolved to stop a while longer, to see if we
could do any good. Expecting Don Fernando next day, according to
promise, and hearing nine guns from their fort, we supposed he was
coming: But it proved to be for the arrival of the prince of Tidore from
the wars, who was returned with the heads of 100 Ternatans. His force in
the expedition in which he had been engaged, consisted of sixty men
armed with matchlocks, two brass _bases_ and three or four _fowlers_. He
had over-thrown _Key Chilly Sadang_, the son of the king of Ternate,
whom the Dutch had brought over from Ternate to prevent the natives of
Machian from supplying us with cloves. While on his return to Ternate
after our departure, he was drawn into an ambush by the son of the king
of Tidore, who lay in wait for the purpose, and slew him, together with
160 men who were along with him, not one of the whole being spared. The
prince of Ternate brought home the head of Key Chilly Sadang to his
wife, who was sister to the slain prince. Key Chilly Sadang in a great
measure owed this discomfiture to a barrel of powder he had bought from
us at Machian, as it exploded at the commencement of the rencounter, and
threw his whole party into confusion. Along with the prince of Ternate,
one of his younger brothers and the king of Gilolo were both slain.
Towards evening, the sergeant-major of Ternate, who was also secretary
of the government, came aboard, and made many compliments, requesting me
to come to Ternate, where they would do for me every thing in their
power. I consented to do this the more readily, as Ternate was in my
way.

I received a message on the 12th from the prince of Tidore, apologising
for not having yet visited me, and saying that he had a quantity of
cloves which I might have, for which I thanked him, and requested they
might be sent soon. They promised to send the cloves before next
morning; wherefore, to guard against treachery, I kept double watch,
with match in cock, and every thing in readiness: For this prince of
Tidore was a most resolute and valiant soldier, and had performed many
desperate exploits against the Dutch, having shortly before surprised
one of their ships of war when at anchor not far from where we then lay.
Before day, a galley, which the Spaniards told us they expected, came
over from _Batta China_, and were very near us in the dark before we
were aware. On hailing, they answered us that they were Spaniards and
our friends, and then made towards the shore in all haste. She was but
small, having only fourteen oars of a side. We this day found our
latitude to be 0 deg. 50' N.

We weighed on the 13th with the wind at N. and a current setting to the
S. In passing the fort we saluted with five guns, which they returned.
Several Spaniards came off with complimentary messages, and among these
a messenger from the prince, saying we should have had plenty of cloves
if we had waited twenty-four hours longer. But we rather suspected that
some treachery was intended, by means of their gallies, frigates, and
curracurras, which we thus avoided by our sudden departure. On rounding
the western point of Tidore, we saw four Dutch ships at anchor before
their fort of Marieca; one of which, on our appearance, fired a gun,
which we supposed was to call their people aboard to follow us. We
steered directly for the Spanish fort on Ternate, and shortened sail on
coming near, and fired a gun without shot, which was immediately
answered. They sent us off a soldier of good fashion, but to as little
purpose as those of Tidore had done. Having little wind, our ship sagged
in, but we found no anchorage. Having a gale of wind at south in the
evening, we stood out to sea, but lost as much ground by the current as
we had gained by the wind. The 14th, with the wind at S.S.W. we steered
N.N.W. being at noon directly under the equinoctial. We had sight of a
galley this day, on which we put about to speak with her; but finding
she went away from us, we shaped our course for Japan.

Before leaving the Moluccas, it may be proper to acquaint the reader
with some circumstances respecting the trade and state of these islands.
Through the whole of the Moluccas, a _bahar_ of cloves consists of 200
_cattees_, the _cattee_ being three pounds five ounces _haberdepoiz_, so
that the bahar is 662 pounds eight ounces English averdupois weight. For
this bahar of cloves, the Dutch give fifty dollars, pursuant to what
they term their perpetual contract; but, for the more readily obtaining
some loading, I agreed to pay them sixty dollars. This increase of price
made the natives very desirous of furnishing me, so that I certainly had
procured a full lading in a month, had not the Dutch overawed the
natives, imprisoning them, and threatening to put them to death, keeping
strict guard on all the coasts. Most of these islands produce abundance
of cloves; and those that are inhabited of any note, yield the following
quantities, one year with another. Ternate 1000 bahars, Machian 1090,
Tidore 900, Bachian 300, Moteer 600, Mean 50, Batta China 35; in all
3975 bahars, or 2,633,437 1/2 English pounds, being 1175 _tons_, twelve
_cwts._ three _qrs._ and nine and a half _libs._ Every third year is far
more fruitful than the two former, and is therefore termed the great
monsoon.

It is lamentable to see the destruction which has been brought upon
these islands by civil wars, which, as I learnt while there, began and
continued in the following manner: At the discovery of these islands by
the Portuguese, they found fierce war subsisting between the kings of
Ternate and Tidore, to which two all the other islands were either
subjected, or were confederated, with one or other of them. The
Portuguese, the better to establish themselves, took no part with
either, but politically kept friends with both, and fortified themselves
in the two principal islands of Ternate and Tidore, engrossing the whole
trade of cloves into their own hands. In this way they domineered till
the year 1605, when the Dutch dispossessed them by force, and took
possession for themselves. Yet so weakly did they provide for defending
the acquisition, that the Spaniards drove them out next year from both
islands, by a force sent from the Philippine islands, took the king of
Ternate prisoner, and sent him to the Philippines, and kept both Ternate
and Tidore for some time in their hands. Since then the Dutch have
recovered some footing in these, islands, and, at the time of my being
there, were in possession of the following forts.

On the island of Ternate they have a fort named: _Malayou_, having three
bulwarks or bastions, _Tolouco_ having two bastions and a round tower,
and _Tacome_ with four bastions. On Tidore they have a fort called
_Marieka_, with four bastions. On Machian, _Tufasoa_, the chief town of
the island, having four large bastions with sixteen pieces of cannon,
and inhabited by about 1000 natives: At _Nofakia_, another town on that
island, they have two forts or redoubts, and a third on the top of a
high hill with five or six guns, which commands the road on the other
side. Likewise at _Tabalola_, another town in Machian, they have two
forts with eight cannons, this place being very strongly situated by
nature. The natives of all these places are under their command. Those
of _Nofakia_ are not esteemed good soldiers, and are said always to side
with the strongest; but those of Tabalola, who formerly resided at
_Cayoa_, are accounted the best soldiers in the Moluccas, being deadly
enemies to the Portuguese and Spaniards, and as weary now of the Dutch
dominion. In these fortified stations in Machian, when I was there, the
Dutch had 120 European soldiers; of whom eighty were at _Tafasoa_,
thirty at _Nofakia_, and ten at _Tabalola_. The isle of Machian is the
richest in cloves of all the Molucca islands; and, according to report,
yields 1800 bahars in the great monsoon. The Dutch have one large fort
in the island of Bachian, and four redoubts in the isle of Moteer. The
civil wars have so wasted the population of these islands, that vast
quantities of cloves perish yearly for want of hands to gather them;
neither is there any likelihood of peace till one party or the other be
utterly extirpated.

Leaving them to their wars, I now return to our traffic, and shall shew
how we traded with the natives, which was mostly by exchanging or
bartering the cotton cloths of Cambaya and Coromandel for cloves. The
sorts in request and the prices we obtained being as follows:
_Candakeens_ of Baroach six _cattees_ of cloves; candakeens of _Papang_,
which are flat, three cattees; _Selas_, or small _bastas_, seven and
eight cattees; _Patta chere Malayo_ sixteen cattees; five _cassas_
twelve cattees; coarse of that kind eight cattees; red _Batellias_, or
_Tancoulas_, forty-four and forty-eight cattees; _Sarassas chere Malayo_
forty-eight and fifty cattees; _Sarampouri_ thirty cattees; _Chelles,
Tapsiels_, and _Matafons_, twenty and twenty-four cattees; white
_Cassas_, or _Tancoulos_, forty and forty-four cattees; the finest
_Donjerijus_ twelve, and coarser eight and ten cattees; _Pouti Castella_
ten cattees; the finest _Ballachios_ thirty cattees; _Pata chere Malayo_
of two fathoms eight and ten cattees; great _Potas_, or long four
fathoms, sixteen cattees; white _Parcallas_ twelve cattees; _Salalos
Ytam_ twelve and fourteen cattees; _Turias_ and _Tape Turias_ one and
two cattees; _Patola_ of two fathoms, fifty and sixty cattees; those of
four fathoms and of one fathom at proportional prices; for twenty-eight
pounds of rice, a dollar; _Sago_, which is a _root_ of which the natives
make their bread, is sold in bunches, and was worth a quarter of a
dollar the bunch; velvets, sattins, taffetics, and other silk goods of
China were much in request. This may suffice for the trade of the
Moluccas.

Proceeding on our voyage, it was calm all day on the 16th of April, but
we, had a good breeze at night from the west, when we steered N.N.W. In
the morning of the 17th, we steered north, with the wind at E. by S. but
it afterwards became very variable, shifting to all points of the
compass, and towards night we had sight of land to the northwards. On
the 18th we had calms, with much rain, and contrary winds at intervals,
for which reason I resolved to go for the island of _Saiom_, which was
to the westward, and to remain there and refresh the crew, till the
change of the monsoon might permit me to proceed on my intended voyage.
But almost immediately the wind came round to the west, and we stood N.
and N. by E. On the 19th, with little wind at W. we continued our course
N. by E. the weather being extremely hot, with much rain. It was quite
calm in the morning of the 20th, but we had a constant current setting
us to the eastwards, which indeed had been the case ever since we left
Ternate. In the afternoon, the wind came round to the northward, a brisk
gale, and we stood west to stem the current, bearing for a large island
called _Doy_, where we proposed to rest and refresh.

In the morning of the 21st, we were fairly before that island, near its
northern extremity, which was a low point stretching southwards. We
stood in E. by S. with the wind at N. by E. and at noon sent our skiff
in search of a convenient place for anchoring; but the current set so
strong to the eastwards, that we were unable to stem it, and could
merely see at a distance a very large bay, having a great shoal off its
northern point half a league out to sea, while we had sixty fathoms
water off the shore upon a bottom of sand. As night approached, we stood
off till morning; and next day, about sun-set, we came to anchor in the
large bay, having on standing in fifty-six, thirty-five, twenty-six, and
twenty-four fathoms water.

I sent some people ashore in the skiff on the 23d, to look out for a
convenient watering-place, and for a proper situation in which to set up
a tent to defend our men from the rain when on shore. They accordingly
found a fit place right over against the ship, and saw many tracks of
deer and wild swine, but no appearance of any inhabitants. The country
was full of trees, and, in particular, there were abundance of
_cokers_,[1] _penang, serie_, and _palmitos_, among which were plenty of
poultry, pheasants, and wood-cocks. I went ashore along with our
merchants, and had a tent set up. Our carpenter made several very
ingenious pitfalls for catching the wild-hogs. We took some fish among
the rocks with much labour, and got one pheasant and two wood-Pigeons,
which last were as large in the body as ordinary hens. Some of our
company staid all night ashore to look for the wild-hogs coming into the
traps, and some very large ones were seen on the 24th, but none were
caught. This morning, about half past seven, the moon, being at the
full, was eclipsed in a more extraordinary manner than any of us had
ever seen, being three hours and a half obscured before she recovered
her entire light, _which was very fearful_.

[Footnote 1: Cocoa-nut trees.--E.]

The 25th, our people searching about the woods, brought great store of
_cokers_ to the ship, together with some fowls, and the heads of the
palmito trees, which we boiled with our beef, and found them to eat like
cabbages. The 28th, the company were busily employed in taking in wood
and water. The skiff was sent out to sound the shoal, and found ten and
twelve fathoms at the northern point of the bar, near the shoal. All
this time we had prodigious rain both day and night. The 29th and 30th
were employed in bringing wood aboard, which we found as good as our
English billets. The skiff was sent on the 1st of May to sound the
western point of the bay, where the water was found very deep. On
landing at that part of the coast our people found the ruins of several
huts, among which were some brass pans, which shewed the place had been
lately inhabited, but, as we supposed, the inhabitants had been hunted
from their houses by the wars.

We set sail on the 12th May, 1613, from this island of _Doy_, being the
north-eastmost island of _Batta-China_, or Gilolo, in the Moluccas, in
latitude 2 deg. 35' N.[2] The variation here was 5 deg. 20' easterly. By noon of
this day we were fourteen leagues N. by E. from the place where we had
been at anchor for twenty days.[3] The 1st June, passed the tropic of
Cancer. The 2d, being in lat 25 deg. 44' N. we laid our account with seeing
the islands of _Dos Reys Magos._[4] Accordingly, about four p.m. we had
sight of a very low island, and soon afterwards of the high land over
the low, there being many little islands, to the number of ten or
eleven, connected by broken grounds and ledges, so that we could not
discern any passage to the westward. At night we stood off and took in
our top-sails, and lay close by in our courses till morning. The islands
stretch from S.W. to N.E. The 3d, we stood in for the land, which
appeared to us a most pleasant and fertile soil, as much so as any we
had seen from leaving England, well peopled, and having great store of
cattle. We proposed to have come to anchor about its north-east point,
and on sounding, had sixty fathoms. We saw two boats coming off to us,
and used every means to get speech of them, wishing for a pilot, and
desiring to know the name of the island, but the wind was so strong that
we could not get in, wherefore we stood away N.W. and had sight of
another island bearing N.N.W. for which we steered, and thence descried
another, N.E. half E. about seven or eight leagues off. Coming under the
western island, we observed certain rocks about two miles offshore, one
of which was above water, and the other, to the north, under water, a
great way without the other, and the sea breaking on it.

[Footnote 2: The latitude in the text, which we have reason to believe
accurate, as Captain Saris was so long at this place, indicates the
northern end of the island of _Morty_, east and a little northerly of
the northern peninsula or leg of Gilolo.--E.]

[Footnote 3: We have omitted in the text the naked journal of daily
winds, courses, and distances, as tending to no useful information
whatever.--E.]

[Footnote 4: The indicated latitude, considering the direction of the
voyage between Morty and Japan, nearly coincides with the small islands
of Kumi and Matchi, west from the south end of the great Liqueo.--E.]

On the 7th, we supposed ourselves about twenty-eight or thirty leagues
from _Tonan_.[5] In the morning of the 8th, we had sight of a high round
island, bearing E. six leagues off, with various other islands, in six
or seven directions westwards, five or six leagues off.[6] In the
morning of the 8th we had sight of land bearing N.N.E. and of six great
islands in a row N.E. from the island we descried the preceding evening;
and at the northern end of all were many small rocks and hummocks. In a
bay to the eastwards of these, we saw a high land bearing E. and E. by
S. and E.S.E. which is the island called _Xima_ in the charts, but named
_Maihma_ by the natives, while the former island is called _Segue_, or
_Amaxay_.[7] The 10th, four great fishing-boats came aboard, about five
tons burden each, having one large sail, like that of a skiff. They had
each four oars of a side, resting on pins fastened to the gunwales, the
heads of the pins being let into the middle of the oars, so that they
hung in just equipoise, saving much labour to the rowers. These people
make much more speed in rowing than our men, and perform their work
standing, by which they take up less room. They told us we were just
before the entrance to _Nangasaki_, which bore N.N.E.; the straits of
_Arima_ being N.E. by N. and that the high hill we saw yesterday was
upon the island called _Uszideke_,[8] making the straits of _Arima_, at
the north end of which is good anchorage, and at the south end is the
entrance to _Cahinoch_.[9] We agreed with two of the masters of these
fishing-boats for thirty dollars each, and rice for their food, to pilot
us to _Firando_, on which agreement their people came aboard our ship,
and voluntarily performed its duty as readily as any of our own
mariners. We steered N. by W. the pilots reckoning that we were thirty
leagues from Firando. One of the boats which came to us at this time
belonged to the Portuguese who dwelt at Nangasaki, being Christian
converts, and thought our ship had been the Portuguese ship from Makao;
but, on finding we were not, made all haste back again to advise them,
refusing every entreaty to remain with us.

[Footnote 5: The island of Tanao-sima is probably here meant, being the
most southerly of the Japanese islands. It may be proper to remark, that
the termination _sima_, in the names of islands belonging to Japan,
obviously means _island_, like the prefix _pula_ in the names of islands
in the Malay Archipelago.--E.]

[Footnote 6: There is a considerable cluster of small islands south from
Tanaosima, between the latitudes of 29 deg. 30' and 30 deg. N.--E.]

[Footnote 7: Xima, or sima, only means island. Perhaps Mashama may be
that named Kaba-sima in modern maps, and Amaxay may possibly be Amacusa,
these islands being in the way towards Nangasaki.--E.]

[Footnote 8: This seems the same island called before Amaxay, or
Amacusa.--E.]

[Footnote 9: Cochinotzu is the name of a town on the south-west
peninsula of the island of Kiusiu; but Cochinoch in the text seems the
sound leading to Nangasaki, and the straits of Arima appear to be the
passage between the north side of Amacusa and Kiusiu.--E.]

Sec.6. _Arrival at Firando, and some Account of the Habits, Manners, and
Customs of the Japanese_.

We came to anchor about half a league short of Firando, about three
p.m. of the 11th June, 1613, the tide being then so much spent that we
could not get nearer. I was soon afterwards visited by _Foyne Sama_, the
old king of Firando, accompanied by his nephew, _Tone Sama_, who
governed the island under the old king.[10] They were attended by forty
boats or gallies, some having ten, and others fifteen oars of a side. On
coming near our ship, the king ordered all the boats to fall astern,
except the two which carried him and his nephew, who only came on deck,
both dressed in silk gowns, under which were linen shirts and breeches.
Each of them wore two _cattans_, or Japanese swords, one of which was
half a yard long in the blade, and the other only a quarter of a yard.
They wore neither turbans nor hats, the fore part of their heads being
shaven to the crowns, and the rest of their hair very long, and gathered
into a knot behind. The king seemed about seventy-two years of age, and
his nephew, or grandchild, twenty-two, who governed under him, and each
was attended by an officer, who commanded over their slaves as they
directed.

[Footnote 10: As the Portuguese, who first visited Japan, chose to
designate the sovereign of that country by the title of emperor, they
denominated all its provinces kingdoms, and their governors kings.--E.]

Their manner of salutation was thus: On coming into the presence of him
they mean to salute, they put off their shoes, so that they are
barefooted, for they wear no stockings. Then putting their right hand
within the left, they hold them down to their knees, bending their
bodies, then wag or swing their joined hands a little to and fro, making
some small steps to one side from the person they salute, and say _augh!
augh!_ I immediately led them into my cabin, where I had prepared a
banquet for them, and entertained them with a good concert of music, to
their great delight. I then delivered the letters from our king to the
king of Firando, which he received very joyfully, saying he would not
open it till _Ange_ came, who would interpret it. _Ange_, in their
language, signifies a pilot, and by this name was meant one _William
Adams_, an Englishman. He had come this way in a Dutch ship from the
South Seas, about twelve years ago; and, in consequence of a mutiny
among the people, the ship was seized by the emperor, and Adams had
remained in the country ever since. After staying about an hour and a
half, the king took his leave, bidding us welcome to the country, and
promising me kind entertainment.

He was no sooner ashore than all his nobility came to see the ship,
attended by a vast number of soldiers, every person of any note bringing
a present; some of venison, some of wild-fowl, and some of wild-boar,
the largest and fattest we had ever seen, while others brought us fish,
fruits, and various things. They greatly admired the ship, and seemed
never to be satisfied with looking at her; and as we were much pestered
by the number of these visitors, I sent to the king, requesting he would
order them to remove, to prevent any inconveniences that might arise.
The king immediately sent a principal officer of his guard, with orders
to remain aboard, to see that no injury was done to us, and ordered a
proclamation to that effect to be made in the town. The same night,
Hendrik Brewer, who was chief of the Dutch factory at Firando, came to
visit me, or rather to see what had passed between the king and us. I
wrote this day to Mr Adams, who was then at _Jedo_,[11] nearly 300
leagues from Firando, to inform him of our arrival. King _Foyne_ sent my
letter next day by his admiral, to _Osackay_ (_Osaka_,) the nearest port
of importance on the principal island, whence it would go by post to
Jedo, and he sent notice to the emperor by the same conveyance, of our
arrival and purposes.

[Footnote 11: Called _Edoo_, in Purchas.]

In the morning of the 12th, we had fish brought to us in abundance, and
as cheap as we could desire. We this day weighed to make sail for the
road; and, on this occasion, the king sent at the least threescore large
boats, or gallies, well manned, to tow us into the harbour. On seeing
this multitude of boats, I was in some doubts of their intentions, and
sent my skiff to warn them not to come near the ship. But the king was
in the headmost boat, and observing my suspicions, waved his
handkerchief for all the boats to wait, and came aboard himself, telling
me that he had ordered all these boats to assist in bringing me round a
point which was somewhat dangerous, on account of the strength of the
tide, and could not be stemmed by even a good breeze of wind, and if the
ship fell into the eddy, we should be driven upon the rocks. Having got
this explanation, we sent our hawsers to the Japanese boats, on which
they fell stiffly to work, and towed us into the harbour. In the mean
time, the king breakfasted with me, and when I proposed rewarding his
people for towing me in, after we were at anchor, he would not allow
them to accept of any thing.

We now anchored in five fathoms, on soft ooze, so near the shore that we
could have talked with the people in their houses. We saluted the town
with nine guns, but had no return, as there are no cannon at this place,
neither any fortifications, except barricades for small arms. Several
nobles came off to bid me welcome, two of whom were men of high rank,
named _Nobusane_ and _Simmadone_. I entertained them well, and, at
their departing, they used extraordinary state, one remaining on board till
the other was landed, their children and chief followers using the like
ceremony. There came continually such numbers of people on board, both
men and women, that we were not able to go about the decks. The ship
likewise was quite surrounded by boats full of people, greatly admiring
her head and stern. I permitted several women of the better sort to come
into my cabin, where the picture of Venus and Cupid was hung, rather
wantonly executed. Some of these ladies, thinking it to be Our Lady and
her blessed Son, fell down to worship with appearance of much devotion,
whispering our men, so that their companions might not hear, that they
were Christians, having been converted by the Portuguese jesuits.

The king came aboard again, bringing four principal women along with
him, who were attired in silken gowns, overlapped in front, and girt
round them. Their legs were bare, except that they had half buskins
bound about their insteps with silk ribbon. Their hair was very black
and long, tied up in a knot on the crown, in a very comely manner, no
part of their heads being shaven, like the men. They had comely faces,
hands, and feet, with clear white complexions, but wanting colour, which
they supplied by art. Their stature was low, but they were very fat, and
their behaviour was very courteous, and not ignorant of the respect due
according to their fashions. The king requested that no person might
remain in the cabin except myself and my linguist, who was a native of
Japan, brought along with me from Bantam. He was well skilled in the
Malay language, in which he explained to me what was said by the king,
in Japanese. The women were at first somewhat bashful, but the king
desired them to be frolicsome. They sung several songs, and played on
certain instruments, one of which resembled our lute, being bellied like
it, but longer in the neck, and fretted like ours, but had only four gut
strings. They fingered with their left hands, as is done with us, and
very nimbly; but they struck the strings with a piece of ivory held in
the right hand, as we are in use to play with a quill on the citern.
They seemed to delight much in their music, beating time with their
hands, and both playing and singing by book, prickt on lines and spaces
much like our own. I feasted them, and gave them several English
commodities, and after two hours stay, they returned on shore. At this
interview I requested the king to let us have a house in the town, which
he readily granted, taking two of my merchants ashore with him, to whom
he pointed out three or four houses, desiring them to make their choice,
paying the owners as we could agree.

On the 13th I went ashore, attended by the merchants and principal
officers, and delivered our presents to the king, to the value of about
L140, which he received with great satisfaction, feasting me and my
whole company with several kinds of _powdered_ wild-fowl and fruits.
He called for a standing cup, which was one of the presents, and ordering
it to be filled with their country wine, which is distilled from rice,
and as strong as brandy, he told me he would drink it all off to the
health of the king of England, which he did, though it held about a pint
and a half, in which he was followed by myself and all his nobles. As
only myself and the Cape merchant sat in the same room with the king,
all the rest of my company being in another room, he commanded his
secretary to go and see that they all pledged the health. The king and
his nobles sat at meat cross-legged, on mats, after the fashion of the
Turks, the mats being richly edged with cloths of gold, velvet, sattin,
or damask. The 14th and 15th were spent in giving presents; and on the
16th I agreed with _Audassee_, captain of the Chinese quarter, for
his house, paying ninety-five dollars for the monsoon of six months; he to
put it into repair, and to furnish all the rooms conveniently with mats,
according to the fashion of the country, and we to keep it in repair,
with leave to alter as we thought fit.

This day our ship was so pestered with numbers of people coming on
board, that I had to send to the king for a guardian to clear them out,
many things being stolen, though I more suspected my own people than the
natives. There came this day a Dutchman in one of the country boats, who
had been at the island of _Mashma_, where he sold good store of pepper,
broad-cloth, and elephants teeth, though he would not acknowledge to us
that he had sold any thing, or brought any thing back with him in the
boat; but the Japanese boatmen told us he had sold a great quantity of
goods at a mart in that place, and had brought his returns in bars of
silver, which he kept very secret.

The 21st the old king came aboard again, bringing with him several women
to make a frolic. These women were actors of comedies, who go about from
island to island, and from town, to town, to act plays, which are mostly
about love and war, and have several shifts of apparel for the better
grace of their interludes. These women were the slaves of a man who
fixes a price that every man must pay who has to do with them. He must
not take a higher price than that affixed, on pain of death, if
complained against. At the first, he is allowed to fix upon each woman
what price he pleases, which price he can never afterwards raise, but
may lower it as he likes; neither doth the party bargain with the women
for their favours, but with the master. Even the highest of the Japanese
nobility, when travelling, hold it no disgrace to send for these panders
to their inn, and bargain with them for their girls, either to fill out
their drink for them at table, as is the custom with all men of rank, or
for other uses. When any of these panders die, although in their life
they were received into the best company, they are now held unworthy to
rest among the worst. A straw rope is put round their neck, and they are
dragged through the streets into the fields, and cast on a dung-hill to
be devoured by dogs and fowls.

The 23d, there arrived two Chinese junks at Nangasaki, laden with sugar.
By them it was understood that the emperor of China had lately put, to
death about 5000 persons for trading out of the country contrary to his
edict. Yet the hope of profit had induced these men to hazard their
lives and properties, having bribed the _Pungavas_, or officers of
the sea-ports, who had succeeded those recently put to death for the same
offence.

The 29th, a _soma_, or junk, belonging to the Dutch, arrived at
Nangasaki from Siam, laden with Brazil wood and skins of all kinds. On
their arrival, they were said to be Englishmen, as, before our coming,
the Dutch used generally to pass by the name of English, our nation
being long known by report in Japan, but much scandalised by the
Portuguese jesuits, who represent us as pirates and rovers on the sea.
In consequence of this report, the Japanese have a song, which they call
_English Crofonio_, shewing how the English take the Spanish and
Portuguese ships, which, while singing, they act likewise with catans,
and so scare their children, as the French used to do theirs with the
name of Lord Talbot.

The 1st July two of our company happened to quarrel, and had nearly gone
out to the field to fight, which had greatly endangered us all, as it is
the law here, that whoever draws a weapon in anger, although no harm be
done, is presently cut in pieces; and if they do even but small hurt,
not only they are so executed themselves, but all their relations are
put to death. The 2d, I went ashore to keep house at Firando, my
household consisting of twenty-six persons. At our first coming, we
found that the Dutch sold broad-cloths of L15 or 16 a-cloth, for forty
dollars, or L8 sterling the _mat_, which is a measure of two yards
and a quarter. Being desirous to keep up the price of our cloth, and hearing
that the Dutch had a great quantity, I had a conference with Brower, the
chief of their factory, proposing that we should mutually fix prices
upon such cloths as we both had, and neither of us, in any respect, sell
below the prices agreed upon; for performance of which, I offered to
enter into mutual bonds. In the morning, he seemed to approve of this
proposal, but ere night he sent me word that he disliked it, alleging
that he had no authority from his masters to make any such agreement.
Next morning he shipped away a great store of cloth to different
islands, rating them at low prices, as at twenty, eighteen, and sixteen
dollars the _mat_, that he might the more speedily sell off his own, and
glut the market before ours came forwards.

Pepper, ungarbled, which cost 1 3/4 dollars at Bantam the sack, was
worth at our coming ten _tayes_ the _pecul_, which is 100
_cattea_ of Japan, or 130 pounds English. A _taye_ is worth
five shillings sterling. A rial of eight, or Spanish dollar, is worth
there in ordinary payment only seven _mas_, or three shillings and
sixpence sterling, one mas being equal to a single rial. The _pecul_
of tin was worth thirty _tayes_; the _pecul_ of elephants teeth
eighty _tayes_: Cast iron six tayes the pecul: Gunpowder twenty-three
tayes the pecul: Socotrine aloes the cattee, six _tayes_: Fowling-pieces
twenty tayes each: Calicos and such little commodities, of Guzerat or
Coromandel, were at various prices, according to their qualities.

On the 7th of July the king of the Gotto islands, which are not far from
Firando to the S.W. came upon a visit to king _Foyne_, saying he had
heard of an excellent English ship being arrived in his dominions, which
he greatly desired to go aboard of. King Foyne requested of me that this
might be allowed, the king of Gotto being an especial friend of his;
wherefore he was banqueted on board, and several cannon were fired at
his departure, which he was much pleased with, and told me he would be
glad to see some of our nation at his islands, where they should meet a
hearty welcome. Three Japanese, two men and a woman, were put to death
for the following cause: The woman, in the absence of her husband, had
made separate assignations with both the men. He who was appointed
latest, not knowing of the other, and weary of waiting, came too soon,
and enraged at finding her engaged with another man, drew his _cattan_
and wounded both very severely, almost cutting the man's back in two.
Yet the wounded man, getting hold of his _cattan_, wounded the
aggressor. This fray alarming the street, word was sent to king Foyne
and to know his pleasure, who accordingly gave orders to cut off all
their heads. After their execution, all who thought proper, as many did,
came to try the temper of their weapons upon the dead bodies, which they
soon hewed in small pieces, which were left to be devoured by the
ravens.

The 10th three others were executed in the same way with the former,
being beheaded and afterwards cut in pieces, for stealing a woman long
since from Firando and selling her at Nangasaki. When any are to be
executed, they are led out of town in the following manner: First there
go two men, one having a mattock and the other a shovel, to dig the
grave, if that be allowed to the criminal. Then a third person carrying
a small table or board, on which is written the crime of the party,
which is afterwards affixed to a post on the grave in which he is
buried. Next comes the party to be executed, having his hands bound
behind him by a silken cord, and having a small paper banner, much like
one of our wind-vanes, on which the offence is written. The criminal is
followed by the executioner, having his _cattan_ or Japanese sword by
his side, and holding in his hand the cord with which the hands of the
criminal are bound. On each hand of the executioner walks a soldier
armed with a pike, the head of which rests on the criminal's shoulder,
to intimidate him from attempting to escape. In this manner I saw one
man led out to execution, who went forwards with a most wonderful
resolution, and apparently without fear of death, such as I had never
seen the like in Europe. He was condemned for stealing a sack of rice
from a neighbour, whose house was burning.

The 11th there arrived three Chinese junks at Nangasaki, laden with
silks. The 19th the old king begged a piece of _poldavy_ from me; and
though a king, and famed as the bravest soldier in Japan for his conduct
in the wars of Corea, he had it made into coats, which he wore next his
skin, some part of it being made into handkerchiefs. The 20th, a _soma_
or junk arrived at Nangasaki from Cochinchina, laden with silk and
benzoin, which last was exceedingly clear and good. The 29th Mr Adams
arrived at Firando, having been seventeen days in coming from Sorongo,
while we had waited no less than forty-eight days for his coming.[12]
After receiving him in a friendly manner, I conferred with him in the
presence of our merchants, as to our hopes of trade in this country. He
said the trade was variable, but doubted not we might do as well as the
Dutch, and gave great commendations of the country, to which he seemed
to be much attached.

[Footnote 12: The first messenger, for not making haste with the letters
to Adams, was banished by the angry king.--_Purch._]

On the morning of the 30th, an officer of the young king was cut to
pieces in the street, as it was thought for being too intimate with the
young king's mother; and one of the officer's slaves was slain along
with him, for endeavouring to defend his master. This day there came two
Spaniards to Firando, who were acquainted with Mr Adams, to request a
passage in our ship for Bantam. They had belonged to the crew of a
Spanish ship, sent from New Spain about a year before to make
discoveries to the north of Japan, and coming to Jedo to wait the
monsoon which serves for going to the northward, which begins in the end
of May, the crew mutinied against their captain, and every one went
away whither he listed, leaving the ship entirely unmanned. On receiving
this account of the Spaniards, I thought it best not to let them enter
my ship.

On the 3d of August, king _Foyne_ sent to know what was the size of the
present from our king to the emperor, as also the number of people I
meant to take along with me to the court, that he might provide
accordingly for my going up in good order, in regard to barks, horses,
and palanquins. This day likewise I caused the presents to be assorted,
for the emperor and those of chief consideration about him, of which
presents respectively the values were as follow:--

   For _Ogoshosama_, the emperor, ---------------------L87  7  6
       _Shongosama_, the emperor's son, ----------------43 15  0
       _Codskedona_, the emperor's secretary, ----------15 17  6
        _Saddadona_, secretary to the emperor's son,----14  3  4
        _Iccocora Juga_, judge of _Meaco_, ---------4 10  6
        _Fongodona_, admiral of _Orungo_,-----------3 10  0
        _Goto Shozavero_, the mint-master, -------------11  0  0
                                                             ________
                                                   Total,  L180  3 10


Sec.7. _Journey of Captain Saris to the Court of the Emperor, with his
Observations there and by the Way_.

The 7th August, 1613, being furnished by king _Foyne_ with a proper
galley, and having taken leave of him, I went aboard ship to put all
things in order for my departure.[13] This galley rowed twenty-five-oars
of a side, and was manned by sixty Japanese; and I fitted her out
handsomely in our fashion, with waste cloths, ensigns, and all other
necessaries. Leaving instructions with the master of the Clove and the
cape merchant, for the proper regulation of the ship and the house on
shore during my absence, and taking with me ten Englishmen and nine
other attendants, as the before-mentioned sixty were only to take charge
of the galley, I departed from Firando on my voyage and journey for the
court of the Japanese emperor. We rowed through among various islands,
all or most of which were well inhabited, and had several handsome towns
upon them, one of which, called _Facata_, has a very strong castle built
of freestone, but without any cannon or garrison. The ditch of this
castle is five fathoms deep and ten broad, all round about the walls,
and is passed by means of a drawbridge, and the whole is kept in good
repair. The tide and wind were here so strong against us that we could
not proceed, for which reason I landed and dined at this town, which was
very well built, and seemed to be as large as London is within the
walls. All its streets are so even, that one may see from one end to the
other. This place is exceedingly populous, and the people very civil and
courteous; only that at our first landing, and indeed at all places to
which we came in the whole country, the children and low idle people
used to gather about and follow us a long way, calling _core, core,
cocore, Ware_ that is to say, _You Coreans with false hearts_; all the
while whooping and hallooing, and making such a noise that we could not
hear ourselves speak; and sometimes throwing stones at us, though seldom
in any of the towns, yet the clamour and shouting was every where the
same, as nobody reproved them for it. The best advice I can give to
those who may come after me, is to pass on without attending to these
idle rabblements, by which their ears only will be disturbed by the
noise. All along this coast, and indeed the whole way to Osaka, we found
various women who lived continually with their families in boats upon
the water, as is done in Holland. These women catch fish by diving even
in the depth of eight fathoms, that are missed by the nets and lines;
and by the habit of frequent diving their eyes become excessively red
and bloodshot, by which mark these divers may be readily distinguished
from all other women.

[Footnote 13: The old king sent 200 tayes, worth five shillings each, to
Captain Saris, for his expences in the journey.--_Purch._]

In two days we rowed from Firando to Facata. When eight or ten leagues
short of the straits of _Xemina-seque_,[14] we came to a great town,
where there lay in a dock a junk of 800 or 1000 tons burden, _all
sheathed with iron_,[15] and having a guard appointed to keep her from
being set on fire or otherwise destroyed. She was built in a very homely
fashion, much like the descriptions we have of Noah's ark; and the
natives told us she served to transport troops to any of the islands in
case of rebellion or war.

[Footnote 14: The editor of Astley's Collection has altered the
orthography of this name to _Shemina seki_. In modern maps, we find a
town named _Sunono sequi_, on one side of these straits, which divide
the island of Kiusiu from the south-west end of the great island of
Niphon.--E.]

[Footnote 15: It is not a little singular, that metallic sheathing
should have been observed by English mariners in Japan so long ago as
1613, and yet never attempted in the British or any other European navy
till more than 150 years afterwards, and then brought forwards as a new
invention.--E.]

We met with nothing extraordinary after passing through the straits of
Xemina-seque till we came to Osaka, where we arrived on the 27th of
August. Our galley could not get nearer the town than six miles;
wherefore we were met by a smaller vessel, in which came the _goodman or
host_ of the house where we were to lodge in Osaka, and who brought with
him a banquet of wine and _salt fruits_ to entertain me. A rope being
made fast to the mast-head of our boat, she was drawn forwards by men,
as our west country barges are at London. We found Osaka a very large
town, as large as London within the walls, having many very high and
handsome timber bridges which serve to cross the river _Jodo_, which is
as wide as the Thames at London. Some of the houses here were handsome,
but not many. It is one of the chiefest sea-ports in all Japan, and has
a castle of great size and strength, with very deep ditches all round,
crossed by drawbridges, and its gates plated with iron. This castle is
all of freestone, strengthened by bulwarks and battlements, having
loop-holes for small arms and arrows, and various passages for throwing
down stones upon the assailants. The walls are at least six or seven
yards thick, all built of freestone throughout, having no packing with
trumpery within, as I was told, but all solid. The stones are large and
of excellent quality, and are so exactly cut to fit the places where
they are laid, that no mortar is used, only a little earth being
occasionally thrown in to fill up any void spaces.

In the castle of Osaka, when I was there, dwelt the son of _Tiquasama_,
who was the true heir of Japan; but being an infant at the death of his
father, he was left under the guardianship of four chiefs or great men,
of whom Ogoshosama, the present emperor, was the principal. The other
three guardians were each desirous of acquiring the sovereignty, and
being opposed by Ogoshosama, levied armies against him; but Ogoshosama
defeated them in battle, in which two of them were slain, and the other
saved himself by flight. After this great victory, Ogoshosama attempted
what he is said not to have thought of before. Seizing the true heir of
the throne, he married the young prince to his own daughter, and
confined them in the castle of Osaka, under the charge of such persons
only as had been brought up from their childhood under the roof of the
usurper, so that by their means he has regular intelligence of every
thing they do.

Right opposite to Osaka, on the other side of the river Jodo, there is
another town called _Sakay_, not so large as Osaka, but of considerable
extent, and having great trade to all the neighbouring country. Having
left samples and lists of prices of all our commodities with our host at
Osaka, we departed from that place on the night of the 29th of August in
a bark, and arrived at _Fusima_ next night, where we found a garrison of
3000 men, maintained there by the emperor, to keep Miaco and Osaka under
subjection. This garrison is shifted every third year, and the relief
took place while we were there, so that we saw the old bands march away
and the new enter, which they did in a most soldier-like manner. They
marched five abreast, and to every ten files or fifty men there was a
captain, who kept his men in excellent order. Their shot marched first,
being _calivers_, for they have no muskets and will not use any, then
followed pikes, next swords or _cattans_ and targets, these were
followed by bows and arrows, and then a band armed with weapons called
_waggadashes_, resembling Welsh hooks: These were succeeded by calivers,
and so on as before; but without any ensigns or colours; neither had
they any drums or other warlike instruments of music. The first file of
the band armed with cattans had silver scabbards, and the last file
which marched next the captain had their scabbards of gold. The
companies or bands were of various numbers, some 500, some 300, and some
only of 150 men. In the middle of every band there were three horses
very richly caparisoned, their saddles being covered by costly furs, or
velvet, or stammel broad-cloths. Every horse was attended by three
slaves, who led them in silken halters, and their eyes were hoodwinked
by means of leathern covers.

After each troop or band, the captain followed on horseback, his bed and
all his necessaries being laid upon his own horse equally poised on both
sides, and over all was spread a covering of red felt of China, on the
top of which sat the captain crosslegged, like a huckster between two
paniers. Such as were old or weak in the back had a staff artificially
fixed on the pannel, on which he could lean back and rest himself as if
sitting in a choir. We met the captain-general of this new garrison two
days after meeting his first band, having in the mean time met several
of these bands in the course of our journey, some a league, and others
two leagues from each other. The general travelled in great state, much
beyond the other bands, yet the second band had their arms much more
richly decorated than the first, and the third than the second, and so
every successive band more sumptuous than another. The captain-general
hunted and hawked all the way, having his own hounds and hawks along
with him, the hawks being hooded and lured as ours in England. The
horses that accompanied him for his own riding were six in number, and
were all richly caparisoned. These horses were not tall, but of the size
of our middling nags, short and well knit, small-headed, and very
mettlesome, and in my opinion far excelling the Spanish jennet in spirit
and action. His palanquin was carried before him, being lined with
crimson velvet, and having six bearers, two and two to carry at a time.

Such excellent order was taken for the passing and providing of these
soldiers, that no person either inhabiting or travelling in the road by
which they passed and lodged, was in any way injured by them, but all of
them were as cheerfully entertained as any other guests, because they
paid for what they had as regularly as any other travellers. Every town
and village on the way being well provided with cooks-shops and
victualling houses, where they could get every thing they had a mind
for, and diet themselves at any sum they pleased, between the value of
an English penny and two shillings. The most generally used article of
food in Japan is rice of different qualities, as with our wheats and
other kinds of grain, the whitest being reckoned the best, and is used
instead of bread, to which they add fresh or salted fish, some pickled
herbs, beans, radishes, and other roots, salted or pickled; wild-fowl,
such as duck, mallard, teal, geese, pheasants, partridges, quails, and
various others, powdered or put up in pickle. They have great abundance
of poultry, as likewise of red and fallow deer, with wild boars, hares,
goats, and kine. They have plenty of cheese, but have no butter, and use
no milk, because they consider it to be of the nature of blood.

They have great abundance of swine. Their wheat is all of the red kind,
and is as good as ours in England, and they plough both with oxen and
horses, as we do. During our residence in Japan, we bought the best hens
and pheasants at three-pence each, large fat pigs for twelve-pence, a
fat hog for five shillings, a good ox, like our Welsh runts, at sixteen
shillings, a goat for three shillings, and rice for a halfpenny the
pound. The ordinary drink of the common people is water, which they
drink warm with their meat, holding it to be a sovereign remedy against
worms in the _maw_. They have no other drink but what is distilled from
rice, as strong as our brandy, like Canary wine in colour, and not dear:
Yet, after drawing off the best and strongest, they still wring out a
smaller drink, which serves the poorer people who cannot reach the
stronger.

The 30th of August we were furnished with nineteen horses at the charge
of the emperor, to carry up my attendants and the presents going in our
king's name to _Surunga_. I had a palanquin appointed for my use, and a
led horse, well caparisoned, to ride when I pleased, six men being
appointed to carry my palanquin on plain ground, but where the road grew
hilly, ten were allowed. The officer appointed by king _Foyne_ to
accompany me, took up these men and horses by warrants, from time to
time, and from place to place, just as post-horses are taken up in
England, and also procured us lodgings at night; and, according to the
custom of the country, I had a slave to run before me, carrying a pike.
We thus travelled every day fifteen or sixteen leagues, which we
estimated at three miles the league, and arrived on the 6th of September
at _Surunga_,[16] where the emperor resided. The road for the most part
is wonderfully even, and where it meets with mountains, a passage is cut
through. This is the main road of the whole country, and, is mostly
covered with sand and gravel. It is regularly measured off into leagues,
and at every league there is a small hillock of earth on each side of
the road, upon each of which is set a fair pine-tree, trimmed round like
an arbour. These are placed at the end of every league, that the
hackney-men and horse-hirers may not exact more than their due, which is
about three-pence for each league.

[Footnote 16: Suruga, Surunga, or Sununnaga, is a town in the province
of that name, at the head of the gulf of Totomina, about 50 miles S.W.
from Jedo.--E.]

The road is much frequented, and very full of people. Every where, at
short distances, we came to farms and country-houses, with numerous
villages, and frequent large towns. We had often likewise to ferry over
rivers, and we saw many _Futtakeasse_ or _Fotoquis_, being the
temples of the Japanese, which are situated in groves, and in the
pleasantest places of the country, having the priests that attend
upon the idols dwelling around the temples, as our friars in old time
used to do here in England. On approaching any of the towns, we saw
sundry crosses, having the dead bodies of persons who had been crucified
affixed to them, such being the ordinary mode of punishment for most
malefactors. On coming near Surunga, where the emperor keeps his court,
we saw a scaffold, on which lay the heads of several malefactors that had
been recently executed, with the dead bodies of some stretched on crosses,
while those of others had been all hewn in pieces by the natives, trying
the tempers of their _cattans_, as formerly mentioned when at Firando.
This was a most unpleasant sight for us, who had necessarily to pass
them on our way to Surunga.

The city of Surunga is fully as large as London, with all its
suburbs.[17] We found all the handicraft tradesmen dwelling in the
outward parts and skirts of the town, while those of the better sort
resided in the heart of the city, not choosing to be annoyed by the
continual knocking, hammering, and other noise made by the artisans in
their several callings. As soon as we were settled in the lodgings
appointed for us in the city of Surunga, I sent Mr Adams to the imperial
residence, to inform the secretary of our arrival, and to request as
speedy dispatch as possible. He sent me back for answer, that I was
welcome, and that after resting myself for a day for two, I should be
admitted to an audience of the emperor. The 7th of September we were
occupied in arranging the presents, and providing little tables of
sweet-smelling wood on which to carry them, according to the custom of
the country.

[Footnote 17: It is hardly necessary to remark, that this applies to
London in the year 1613, then vastly smaller than now, when Westminster
was a separate city, at some miles distance from London; the Strand,
Piccadilly, and Oxford Street, country roads; Whitehall a country
palace; and the whole _west end_ of the town, fields, farms, or country
villas.--E.]

On the 8th of September I was carried in my palanquin to the castle of
Surunga, in which the emperor resides, and was attended by my merchants
and others, the presents being carried before me. In entering the
castle, we had to pass three draw-bridges, at each of which there was a
guard of soldiers. The approach to the presence was by means of a fair
and wide flight of stone stairs, where I was met and received by two
grave and comely personages; one of whom was _Codske dona_, the
emperor's secretary, and the other named _Fongo dona_, the admiral. By
these officers I was led into a handsome room, the floor of which was
covered by mats, on which we sat down cross-legged. Shortly after, they
led me into the presence-chamber, in which stood the chair of state, to
which they wished me to do reverence. This chair was about five feet
high, covered with cloth of gold, and very richly adorned on its back
and sides, but had no canopy. We then returned to the former room, and
in about a quarter of an hour word was brought that the emperor was in
the presence-chamber. They then led me to the door of the room where the
emperor was, making signs for me to go in, but dared not even to look up
themselves. The presents sent from our king to the emperor, and those
which I offered as from myself according to the custom of the country,
had all been placed in a very orderly manner upon mats in the
presence-chamber, before the emperor came there.

Going into the chamber, of presence, I made my compliments to the
emperor according to our English fashion, and delivered our king's
letter to the emperor, who took it in his hand and raised it towards his
forehead, and commanded his interpreter, who sat at a good distance
behind, to desire Mr Adams to tell me that I was welcome from a long and
wearisome journey, that I might therefore rest me for a day or two, and
then his answer should be ready for our king. He then asked me if I did
not intend to visit his son at _Jedo_.[18] Answering, that I proposed
to do so, the emperor said, that orders should be given to provide me with
men and horses for the journey, and that the letters for our king should
be ready against my return. Then, taking leave respectfully of the
emperor, and coming to the door of the presence-chamber, I found the
secretary and admiral waiting to conduct me down the stairs where they
formerly met me, when I went into my palanquin and returned with my
attendants to our lodgings.

[Footnote 18: Always called _Edoo_ in Purchas, but we have thought it
better to use the form of the name now universally adopted in
geography; but which name, from the orthography used by Captain Saris,
is probably pronounced in Japan, _Idu_, or _Eedoo_.--E.]

On the 9th I sent the present intended for the secretary to be delivered
to him, for which he heartily thanked me, but would in no wise receive
it, saying, the emperor had so commanded, and that it was as much as his
life was worth to accept of any gift. He took, however, five pounds of
Socotorine aloes, to use for his health's sake. I this day delivered to
him the articles of privilege for trade, being _fourteen_ in number,
which we wished to have granted. These he desired to have abbreviated
into as few words as possible, as in all things the Japanese are fond of
brevity. Next day, being the 10th September, the articles so abridged
were sent to the secretary by Mr Adams; and on being shown by the
secretary to the emperor, they were all approved except one, by which,
as the Chinese had refused to trade with the English, we required
permission, in case of taking any Chinese vessels by force, that we
might freely bring them into the ports of Japan, and there make sale of
the goods. At the first, the emperor said we might take them, since they
refused to trade with us; but, after conference with the Chinese
resident, he altered his mind, and would not allow of that article. All
the rest were granted and confirmed under his great seal, which is not
impressed in wax as with us in England, but is stamped in print with red
ink. These articles of privilege were as follow:--

_Privileges granted by OGOSHOSAMA, Emperor of Japan, to the Governor and
Company of the London East India Company_.[19]

[Footnote 19: This copy Captain Saris brought home and gave
me--_Purch._]

1. We give free licence to the subjects of the king of Great Britain,
viz. To Sir Thomas Smith, governor, and the Company of the East Indian
Merchants Adventurers, for ever, safely to come into any of the ports of
our empire of Japan, with their ships and merchandize, without any
hinderance to them or their goods; and to abide, buy, sell, and barter,
according to their own manner, with all nations; to remain here as long
as they think good, and to depart at their pleasure.

2. We grant to them freedom from custom for all such goods as they have
brought now, or may hereafter bring into our empire, or may export from
thence to any foreign part. And we authorise all ships that may
hereafter arrive from England, to proceed immediately to sell their
commodities, without any farther coming or sending to our court.

3. If any of their ships shall happen to be in danger of shipwreck, we
command our subjects not only to assist them, but that such parts of the
ship or goods as may be saved, shall be returned to the captain, or the
cape merchant, or their assigns. That they may build one house, or more,
for themselves, in any part of our empire that they think fittest for
their purpose; and, at their departure, may sell the same at their
pleasure.

4. If any English merchant, or others, shall die in our dominions, the
goods of the deceased shall remain at the disposal of the cape merchant;
and all offences committed by them shall be punished by the said cape
merchant at his discretion, our laws to take no hold of their persons or
goods.

5. We command all our subjects trading with them for any of their
commodities, to pay them for the same without delay, or to return their
wares.

6. For such commodities as they have now brought, or may bring
hereafter, that are fitting for our proper use and service, we command
that no arrest be made thereof, but that a fair price be agreed with the
cape merchant, according as they may sell to others, and that prompt
payment be made on the delivery of the goods.

7. If, in the discovery of other countries for trade, and the return of
their ships, they shall need men or victuals, we command that our
subjects shall furnish them, for their money, according as their needs
may require.

8. Without other passport, they shall and may set out upon the discovery
of _Yeadso_, or _Jesso_, or any other part in or about our empire.

   From our castle in Surunga, this first day of the ninth
   month, in the eighteenth year of our _dary_, or reign.
   Sealed with our broad seal, &c.
   (_Underwritten_)


MINNA MOTTONO.

_Yei. Ye. Yeas_.[20]

[Footnote 20: Kempper writes this other name of _Ongosio Sama_, as he
calls him, _Ijejas_; which, according to the English orthography, is
_Iyeyas_.--Astl. I. 489. b.]

On the 11th of September, the present intended for the mint-master was
delivered to him, which he received very thankfully, and sent me in
return two Japanese gowns of taffeta, quilted with silk cotton. The 12th
Mr Adams was sent to the mint-master, who is the emperor's merchant,
having charge of the mint and all the ready money, being in great
estimation with the emperor, as he had made a vow, whenever the emperor
dies, to cut out his own bowels and die with him. The purpose of Mr
Adams waiting upon him at this time, was to carry a list of the prices
of our English commodities. About noon of this same day, being furnished
with horses and men by the emperor, as formerly specified, we set out
for Jedo. The country between Surunga and Jedo we found well peopled,
with many _Fotoquis_, or idol temples. Among others which we passed, was
one having an image of great reputation, called _Dabis_, made of copper,
hollow within, but of substantial thickness. We estimated its height to
be twenty-one or twenty-two feet, being in the form of a man kneeling on
the ground, and sitting on his heels; the whole of wonderful size, and
well proportioned, and being dressed in a gown cast along with the
figure. Some of our men went into the inside of this idol, and hooped
and hallooed, which made an exceeding great noise. It is highly
reverenced by all native travellers who pass that way. We found many
characters and marks made upon it by its visitors, which some of my
followers imitated, making their marks in like manner. This temple and
idol stand in the main road of pilgrimage to _Tencheday_, which is much
frequented for devotion, as both night and day people of all ranks and
conditions are continually going or returning from that place.

Mr Adams told me that he had been at the _Fotoqui_, or temple dedicated
to Tencheday, to which image they make this devout pilgrimage. According
to his report, one of the fairest virgins of the country is brought
monthly into that _Fotoqui_, and there sits alone in a room neatly
fitted up, in a sober manner; and, at certain times, this _Tencheday_,
who is thought to be the devil, appears unto her, and having carnally
known her, leaves with her at his departure certain scales, like unto
the scales of fishes. Whatever questions she is desired by the _bonzes_,
or priests of the _Fotoqui_, to ask, _Tencheday_ resolves. Every
month a fresh virgin is provided for the temple, but Mr Adams did not know
what became of the former.[21]

[Footnote 21: The editor of Astley's Collection, vol. I. p. 487, note b.
very gravely informs his readers what they certainly are aware of, that
the gallant must have been one of the _bonzes_, or priests.--E.]

We arrived at _Jedo_ on the 14th September. This city is much larger
than _Surunga_, and much better and more sumptuously built, and made a
very glorious appearance to us on our approach; all the ridge-tiles and
corner-tiles of the roofs being richly gilded and varnished, as also the
door-posts of the houses. They have no glass in their windows, but have
large windows of board, opening in leaves, and well adorned with
paintings, as in Holland. In the chief street of the town there is a
great _cawsay_ all through from end to end, underneath which flows a
river, or large stream of water; and at every fifty paces there is a
well-head, or pit, substantially built of free-stone, having buckets
with which the inhabitants draw water, both for their ordinary uses and
in case of fire. This street is as broad as any of our best streets in
England.

On the 15th I gave notice of my arrival to _Sadda-dona_, the secretary
of the young king, or son of the emperor, requesting him to inform the
king. I had access to the king on the 17th, and delivered to him the
presents sent by our king, as also some from myself, as is the custom of
the country. The king holds his court in the castle of Jedo, which is
much stronger and more sumptuous than that of Surunga; and the king was
besides better guarded and attended than his father the emperor.
_Saddadona_, his secretary, is father to _Codskedona_ the emperor's
secretary, his years and experience fitting him to have the government
and direction of the king or prince successor, who appeared to us to be
about forty-two years of age.

My entertainment and access to the king here at Jedo was much like that
formerly mentioned with the emperor his father at Surunga. He accepted
very kindly the letters and presents from our king, bidding me welcome,
and desiring me to rest and refresh myself, and that his letters and
presents in return should be made ready with all speed. On the 19th I
delivered the presents to _Saddadona_. This day, thirty-two men being
committed prisoners to a certain house, for not paying their debts, and
being in the stocks within the same, it took fire in the night by some
casualty, and they were all burnt to death. Towards evening, the king
of Jedo sent me two suits of varnished armour, as a present to our king;
and sent likewise for myself a _tatch_ and a _waggadash_, the
former being a long sword which is only worn in Japan by soldiers of the
highest rank, and the latter being a singular weapon resembling a Welsh
hook. I was informed that the distance from Jedo to the norther-most
part of Japan, was estimated at twenty-two days journey on horseback.

I left Jedo on the 21st September by boat, and came to _Oringgaw_,[22]
a town upon the sea-side, where is an excellent harbour, in which ships
may ride with as much safety as in the river Thames, and the passage
from which by sea to Jedo is very safe and good; so that it would be
much better for our ships to sail to this port than to Firando, as
Oringgaw is on the main island of Japan or _Niphon_, and is only
fourteen or fifteen leagues from Jedo, the capital and greatest city of
the empire. Its only inconvenience is, that it is not so well supplied
with flesh and other victuals as Firando, but is in all other respects
much preferable. From thence we proceeded on the 29th to Surunga, where
we remained in waiting for the letters and presents from the emperor. On
the 8th of October I received the emperor's letter, of which a
translation is subjoined, and I then also received the privileges of
trade, formerly quoted, the original of which I left with Mr Cocks.[23]

[Footnote 22: No such place as Oringgaw is to be found in modern maps of
Japan. Jedo is situated at the head of a deep gulf of the same name, in
the south-east corner of Japan. About the distance indicated in the
text, there is a town and bay named _Odavara_, on the western side of
the gulf, and in the direct way back to Surunga, which may possibly be
the _Oringgaw_ of the text.--E.]

[Footnote 23: The characters have by some been thought to be those of
China, but I compared them with Chinese books, and they seemed to me
quite different, yet not _letters_ to compound words by spelling, as
ours, but _words_ expressed in their several characters, such as are
used by the _Chinais_ and as the brevity manifesteth. I take them to be
characters peculiar to Japan.--_Purch._

In a marginal reference in the plate given by Purchas, the lines are
said to read downwards, beginning at the right hand. It may possibly be
so: But they appear _letters_, or literal characters, to _compound words
by spelling_, and to be read like those used in Europe, from left to
right horizontally. In a future portion of our work, the subject of the
Japanese language and writing will be farther elucidated; when, we
believe, it will appear that they have two modes of writing, one by
_verbal_ or _ideal_ characters like the Chinese, and the other by
_literal_ signs like all the rest of the world.--E.]

_Letter from the Emperor of Japan to the King of Great Britain_.

Your majesty's kind letter, sent me by your servant Captain Saris, who
is the first of your subjects that I have known to arrive in any part of
my dominions, I heartily embrace, being not a little glad to understand
of your great wisdom and power, as having three plentiful and mighty
kingdoms under your powerful command. I acknowledge your majesty's great
bounty, in sending me so undeserved a present of many rare things, such
as my land affordeth not, neither have I ever before seen: Which I
receive, not as from a stranger, but as from your majesty, whom I esteem
as myself, desiring the continuance of friendship with your highness:
And that it may consist with your good pleasure to send your subjects to
any part or port of my dominions, where they shall be most heartily
welcome, applauding much their worthiness in the admirable knowledge of
navigation, as having with much facility discovered a country so remote,
not being amazed by the distance of so mighty a gulf, nor the greatness
of such infinite clouds and storms, from prosecuting the honourable
enterprises of discovery and merchandising, in which they shall find me
to encourage them as they desire. By your said subject, I return to your
majesty a small token of my love, desiring you to accept the same as
from one who much rejoices in your friendship. And, whereas your
majesty's subjects have desired certain privileges for trade and the
settlement of a factory in my dominions, I have not only granted what
they desired, but have confirmed the same to them under my broad seal,
for the better establishment thereof. Given from my castle of _Surunga_,
this fourth day of the ninth month, in the eighteenth year of our reign,
according to our computation; resting your majesty's friend, the highest
commander in the kingdom of Japan.

Subscribed

Minna Muttono_[24]. _Yei. Ye. Yeas_.

[Footnote 24: In the copy of the privileges, Purchas gives this name
_Mottono_ while the editor of Astley's Collection has altered it to
_Monttono_. In the privileges formerly inserted, the date is made in the
_nineteenth_ month, perhaps an error of the press in the Pilgrims, which
we have therefore corrected to _ninth_.--E.]

At my return to Surunga, I found a Spanish ambassador from the
Philippine islands, who had only been once introduced to the emperor,
and delivered his presents, being certain Chinese damasks, and five jars
of European sweet wine, and could not obtain any farther access to the
emperor. The purpose of his embassy was, to require that such Portuguese
and Spaniards as were then in Japan, not authorised by the king of
Spain, might be delivered up to him, that he might carry them to the
Philippines. This the emperor refused, saying his country was free, and
none should be forced out of it: But, if the ambassador could persuade
any to go with him, they should not be detained. The cause of the
ambassador making this request was on account of the great want of men
to defend the Molucca islands against the Dutch, who were then making
great preparations for the entire conquest of these islands. After the
ambassador had waited for an answer till the time limited by his
commission was expired, and receiving none, he went away much
dissatisfied: And when at the sea side, an answer was returned, as
mentioned above, together with a slender present of five Japanese gowns,
and two _cattans_ or swords.

About a month before I came to Surunga, being displeased with the
Christians, the emperor issued a proclamation commanding that they
should all remove immediately, and carry their churches to Nangasaki, a
maritime town about eight leagues from Firando, and that no Christian
church should be permitted, neither any mass be sung, within ten leagues
of his court, on pain of death. Some time after, twenty-seven natives,
men of good fashion, being assembled in an hospital or Christian
Leper-house, where they had mass performed, and this coming to the
knowledge of the emperor, they were all commanded to be shut up in a
house for a night, and to be led to execution next day. That same
evening, another man was committed to the same house for debt, who at
his coming was a heathen and quite ignorant of Christ or his holy
religion; but, next morning, when the officer called at the door for the
Christians to come forth for execution, and those who renounced it to
remain behind, this man had been so instructed during the night by the
others, that he came resolutely forth along with the rest, and was
crucified with them.

We departed from Surunga on the 9th of October, and during our journey
towards _Miaco_ we had for the most part much rain, by which the rivers
were greatly swelled, and we were forced to stop by the way, so that it
was the 16th of October before we got there. _Miaco_ is the largest city
in Japan, depending mostly upon trade, and having the chief _Fotoqui_
or temple of the whole empire, which is all built of freestone, and is
as long as the western end of St Paul's in London from the choir; being
also as high, arched in the roof and borne upon pillars as that is. Many
_bonzes_ are here in attendance for their maintenance, as priests are
among the papists. They have here an altar, on which the votaries offer
rice and small money, called _cundrijus_, twenty of which are equal to
an English shilling, which offerings are applied to the use of the
bonzes. Near this altar is an idol, called _Mannada_, much resembling
that of _Dabis_ formerly mentioned, and like it made of copper, but much
higher, as it reaches up to the arched roof. This _Fotoqui_ was begun to
be built by _Taicosama_, and has since been finished by his son, having
been ended only while we were there. According to report, there were
buried within its enclosure the ears and noses of 3000 Coreans, who were
massacred at one time; and upon their grave a mount is raised, having a
pyramid on its summit, the mount being grown over with grass, and very
neatly kept. The horse that Taicosama last rode upon is kept near this
_Fotoqui_, having never been ridden since, and his hoofs have grown
extraordinarily long by age.

This _Fotoqui_ stands on the top of a high hill, and on either side, as
you ascend the hill, there are fifty pillars of freestone, at ten paces
each from the other, having a lantern on the top of each, which are all
lighted up with oil every night. There are many other Fotoquis in this
city. In Miaco the Portuguese jesuits have a very stately college, in
which there are several native Japanese jesuits, who preach, and have
the New Testament printed in the Japanese language. Many of the native
children are bred up in this college, where they are instructed in the
Christian religion, according to the doctrines of the Romish church; and
there are not less than five or six thousand natives professing
Christianity in this city. The tradesmen and artificers of all kinds in
this city are all distributed by themselves, every trade and occupation
having its own particular streets, and not mingled together as with us.
We remained some time in Miaco, waiting for the emperor's present, which
was at length delivered, being ten _beobs_, or large pictures, for being
hung up in a chamber.

The 20th of October we departed from Miaco, and came that night to
_Fushimi_.[25] We arrived about noon of the next day at Osaka, where the
common people behaved very rudely to us, some calling after us _Tosin!
Tosin!_ that is, Chinese, while others called us _Core! Core!_ or
Coreans, and flung stones at us; even the greatest people of the city
animating and setting on the rabble to abuse us. We here found the
galley waiting for us which had brought us from Firando, having waited
for us all the time of our absence at the expence of king _Foyne_. We
embarked in this galley on the 24th of October, and arrived at Firando
on the 6th November, where we were kindly welcomed by old _Foyne_.
During the time of my absence, our people had sold very little goods, as
according to the customs of Japan no stranger can offer goods for sale
without the express permission of the emperor. Besides, as our chiefest
commodity intended for this country was broad cloth, which had latterly
been sold there at the rate of forty Spanish dollars the _matte_, which
is two yards and a quarter as formerly mentioned, and as the natives saw
that we were not much in the habit of wearing it ourselves, they were
more backward in buying it than they used to be. They said to us, "You
commend your cloth to us, while you yourselves wear little of it; your
better sort of people wearing silken garments, while the meanest are
clothed in fustians, &c." Wherefore, that good counsel, though late, may
come to some good purpose, I wish that our nation would be more inclined
to use this our native manufacture of our own country, by which we may
better encourage and allure others to its use and expenditure.

[Footnote 25: Fusimo, a town about ten miles from Miaco, on a river that
runs into the head of the bay of Osaka.--E.]


Sec.8. _Occurrences at Firando, during the Absence of Captain Saris_.[26]

The 7th August, 1613, all things being in readiness, our general Captain
Saris departed from Firando in company with Mr Adams, for the court of
the emperor of Japan, taking along with him Mr Tempest Peacock, Mr
Richard Wickham, Edward Saris, Walter Carwarden, Diego Fernandos, John
Williams a tailor, John Head a cook, Edward Bartan the surgeon's mate,
John Japan _Jurebasso_,[27] Richard Dale coxswain, and Anthony Ferry a
sailor; having a cavalier or gentleman belonging to king Foyne as their
protector, with two of his servants, and two native servants belonging
to Mr Adams. They embarked in a barge or galley belonging to the king,
which rowed twenty oars of a side, and we fired thirteen pieces of
ordnance at their departure. The old king sent 100 _tayes_ of Japanese
money to our general before his departure, for his expenditure on the
way, which I placed to account, by our general's order, as money lent.

[Footnote 26: This subdivision is taken from observations written by
Richard Cockes, Cape merchant, or chief factor at Firando. These
observations are a separate article in the Pilgrims of Purchas, vol.
I. pp. 395--405, and in Astley's Collection, vol. I. pp. 509--517; but
are inserted in this place as calculated to render this first account of
the English trade in Japan a complete and unbroken narrative.--E.]

[Footnote 27: John Japan seems a fabricated name; perhaps a Japanese
Christian named John, and the addition of _Jurebasso_ may signify that
he acted as interpreter.--E.]

Next day, I went to wait upon the two kings, as from our general, to
thank them for having so well provided for his journey, which they took
in good part. I suspect the old king had notice that some of our men had
behaved ill last night; as he desired me to remind the master to look
well to the people on board, and that I should look carefully to the
behaviour of those on shore, that all things might go on as well in the
absence of the general as when he was present, otherwise the shame would
be ours, but the dishonour his. On the 9th, a Japanese boy named Juan,
who spoke good Spanish, came and offered to serve me for nine or ten
years, and even to go with me to England if I pleased, asking no wages
but what I was pleased to give. I took him into my service, and that the
rather, because I found Miguel, the _jurebasso_ left with me by Mr
Adams, was somewhat stubborn, and loved to run about at his pleasure,
leaving me often without any person who could speak a word of the
Japanese language. This Juan is a Christian, most of his kindred
dwelling at Nangasaki, only one living here at Firando, who came along
with him and passed his word for his honesty and fidelity. Juan had
served a Spaniard at Manilla for three years, where he had acquired the
Spanish language. I engaged him, and bought for him two Japanese
garments, which cost me fourteen _mas_.

The 13th I shewed our commodities to some merchants of _Maioco_, [Miaco]
but they bought nothing, and seemed chiefly to desire to have gunpowder.
This day _Semidono_ went to visit our ship, accompanied by several
stranger gentlemen, and came afterwards to see our English house, where
I gave them the best entertainment in my power. The 19th at night began
the great feast of the pagans, when they banquet and make merry all
night by candle-light at the graves of their deceased kindred, whom
they invite to partake.[28] It lasts three nights and the intermediate
days; when, by command of the king, every house must new gravel the
street before its door, and hang out candles all night. I was not slack
in obeying this order, and I was informed that a poor man was put to
death and his house shut up, for neglecting to comply with the order. On
this occasion, the China captain furnished me with two very decent paper
lanthorns. Being informed that the kings intended to ride about the
streets, and to make me a visit, I provided a banquet for them, and
waited till after midnight, but they came not. The 20th, 21st, and 22d,
I sent presents to both the kings, being informed that such was the
custom of the country, sending them wine and confections; as likewise to
_Nobesane_ the young king's brother; to _Semidono_, the old king's
governor, and to _Unagense_, which were all very thankfully accepted.
Some _cavalliers_, or Japanese gentlemen, came to visit me during the
festival, to whom I gave the best entertainment I could procure.

[Footnote 28: This pagan feast is a kind of Candlemas or
Allsouls.--_Purchas_.]

The 23d we made an end of landing our gunpowder, being in all
ninety-nine barrels, of which I advised our general by letter,
requesting him to reserve a sufficiency for the ship, in case he sold it
to the emperor. We landed several other things, which the master thought
had best be sent ashore, as our men began to filch and steal, that they
might go to taverns and brothels. This day Mr Melsham the purser and I
dined with Semidono, who used us kindly. The master and Mr Eaton were
likewise invited, but did not go. The great festival ended this day,
when three troops of dancers went about the town, with flags or banners,
their music being drums and _pans_,[29] to the sound of which they
danced at the doors of all the great men, as also at their pagodas and
at the sepulchres.

[Footnote 29: Probably _gongs_, which very much resemble a brass
frying-pan.--E.]

The 24th at night, all the streets were hung with candles, as the young
king and his brother, with _Semidono, Nabesone_, and many others, went
in masquerade to dance at the house of the old king. The young king and
his brother were on horseback, having canopies carried over them, all
the rest being a-foot, and they were accompanied by drums and _kettles_,
as the before-mentioned dancers, _Nabesone_ playing on a fife. I was
informed they meant to visit our house on their return, wherefore I
provided a banquet and sat up for them till after midnight; but they
returned in disorder, I think owing to some discontent, and none of them
entered our house. Captain _Brower_ likewise passed our door, but would
not look at us, and we made as little account of him. The 27th we landed
three pieces of ordnance, having three landed formerly, all whole
_culverins_ of iron. The old king came down to the shore while our men
were about this job, and seeing only twenty men, offered seventy or a
100 Japanese to help them; but our people landed them all very quickly
in his sight, at which he expressed much astonishment, saying that an
hundred of his men could not have done it so soon. He was so much
pleased with the activity of our men on this occasion, that he sent for
a barrel of wine and some fish, which he gave among them as a reward for
their labouring so lustily.

The 28th, I received two letters from our general, dated the 19th and
20th of the month, as also two others from Mr Peacock and Mr Wickham,
which were brought me by the governor of _Shimonoseke_.[30] This
governor did not land at Firando, but delivered these letters on board
our ship to the master, proceeding directly for Nangasaki, and promising
to return hither shortly. I also carried a letter for the old king
_Foyne_, which was brought by the same governor, being accompanied on
the occasion by Mr Melsham and _Hernando_. Foyne at this visit made a
present of a _cattan_ or Japanese sword to Mr Melsham, and another with
a Spanish dagger to Hernando, giving likewise both to them and me
several bunches of garlic. He also gave us leave to dry our gunpowder on
the top of the fortress, offering some of his own people to help ours,
if we had need of them. This day I brought on shore to our house
twenty-two bars of lead, together with 125 culverin shot, round and
langridge. When we were about to sit down to supper, the old king came
to visit us, and being very merry he sat down to supper with us, and
took such fare as we had in good part.

[Footnote 30: Simonosequi is a town on the north side of the straits
between the island of Kiusiua and the north-western end of Niphon.--E.]

The 1st September, the old king and all his nobles made a masquerade,
and went next night to visit the young king his grandson, accompanied by
music, as formerly mentioned, all the streets being hung with lanterns.
As I was told he meant to visit our house on his return, I made ready
for him and waited till after midnight; but he passed by with all his
company without coming in. I reckoned he had more than 3000 persons in
his train, for which, as I think, he passed by, not wishing to trouble
us with so great a multitude. On the 2d _Semidono_ and others who were
appointed by the king, measured all the houses in the street, ours among
the rest; which I understood was for the purpose of a general taxation,
to be levied by appointment of the emperor, for the construction of
fortresses. I entertained them to their satisfaction. The 4th we had
news that the queen of Spain was dead, and that the king was a suitor
for the princess Elizabeth of England. The 6th, a nobleman came to visit
our English house, and brought me a present of two great bottles of wine
and a basket of pears. I entertained him as well as I could, and he went
away contented.

We had much rain in the morning of the 7th September, accompanied by
wind, which increased in force all day, varying between the east and
south. In the night between the 7th and 8th, the wind rose to a
_tuffoon_ or storm of such extreme violence as I had never witnessed,
neither had the like been experienced in this country during the memory
of man. It overturned above an hundred houses in Firando, and unroofed
many others, among which was the house of old king Foyne. An extensive
wall surrounding the house of the young king was blown down, and the
boughs and branches of trees were broken off and tossed about with
wonderful violence. The sea raged with such fury, that it undermined a
great wharf or quay at the Dutch factory, broke down the stone wall,
carried away the landing stairs, sunk and broke to pieces two barks
belonging to the Dutch, and forty or fifty other barks, then in the
roads, were broken and sunk. At our house, the newly built wall of our
kitchen was broken down by the sea, which likewise flowed into and threw
down our oven. The tiles likewise were blown off from the roofs of our
house and kitchen, both of which were partly unroofed. Our house rocked
as if shaken by an earthquake, and we spent the night in extreme fear,
either of being buried under the ruins of our factory, or of perishing
along with it by fire; for all night long, the barbarous unruly common
people ran up and down the streets with lighted firebrands, while the
wind carried large pieces of burning wood quite over the tops of the
houses, as it whirled up the burning timbers of the several houses
previously thrown down, hurling fire through the air in great flakes,
very fearful to behold, and threatening an entire conflagration of the
town; and I verily believe, if it had not been for the extreme quantity
of rain, contrary to the usual nature of tuffoons, that the whole town
had been consumed. This terrible wind and prodigious rain were
accompanied the whole night by incessant flashes of lightning and
tremendous peals of thunder. Our ship rode out the gale in the roads,
having out five cables and anchors, of which one old cable gave way,
but, thanks be to God, no other injury was sustained, except that our
long boat and skiff both broke adrift, but were both afterwards
recovered. We afterwards learnt that this tuffoon did more damage at
Nangasaki than here at Firando; for it destroyed above twenty Chinese
junks, together with the Spanish ship which brought the ambassador from
Manilla.

On the 12th, two merchants from Miaco came to our English house, to whom
I shewed all our commodities. They laid aside two pieces of broad cloth,
one black and the other _stammel_, the best they could find, for which
they offered seven _tayes_ the yard. They also offered for out _Priaman_
gold eleven tayes of silver for one of gold. But they went away without
concluding any bargain. This day, one of our men named Francis Williams,
being drunk ashore, struck one of the servants of king Foyne with a
cudgel, although the man had given him no offence, and had not even
spoken to him. The Japanese came to our house making great complaints,
and was very angry, not without cause, and told me he would complain to
his king of the bad usage he had received. He had three or four others
along with him, who had seen him abused, and who said the aggressor was
just gone off to the ship. I gave them fair words, desiring them to go
on board and find out the man who had committed the offence, and they
should be sure of having him punished, and for that purpose I sent
Miguel, our _jurebasso_, on board along with them. He did so, and
pointed out Williams as the culprit, who stoutly denied the accusation
with many oaths, but the affair was too notorious, and the master
ordered him to be seized to the capstan in presence of the complainants,
upon which even they entreated for his pardon, knowing that he was
drunk. But the fellow was so unruly, that he took up an iron crow to
strike the Japanese in the master's presence, and even abused the master
in the grossest terms.[31]

[Footnote 31: Of many misdemeanours, I permit some to pass the press,
that the cause of so many deaths in the Indies might be seen, rather to
be imputed to their own misconduct, than the intemperature of the
climate, and for a caveat to others, who may send or be sent into
_ethnicke_ regions: Yet do I conceal the most and worst.--_Purch._]

Learning, on the 13th, that old king Foyne was sick, I sent our
jurebasso Miguel to visit him, carrying as a present a great bottle of
our general's sweet wine, and two boxes of conserves, comfits, and
sugar-bread. Miguel was likewise directed to offer my best service, and
to say that I was sorry for his sickness, and would have waited on him
myself, but that I supposed company was not agreeable to a sick man.
Foyne accepted my present in very good part, returning many thanks, and
desiring me to ask for any thing we were in need of, either for the use
of the ship or our factory, which he would take care we should be
provided with.

The master came to the factory on the 14th early in the morning, telling
me that most of the ship's company had lain ashore all night without
leave, although the ship was aground, and there had been a heavy wind
all night. He wished therefore, that I would allow our jurebasso,
Miguel, to accompany him in seeking them out. He went accordingly
accompanied by Miguel and Mr Melsham our purser, and found several of
the men drinking and domineering, among whom he bestowed a few blows,
ordering them aboard. Two of the men, named Lambert and Colphax, though
ordered aboard, remained ashore all day, notwithstanding the great need
of hands in the ship, where it had been necessary to hire several
Japanese to assist. Lambert and Colphax being drunk, went out into the
fields and fought, on which occasion Lambert was hurt in the arm, and
remained drunk ashore all night; as did Boles and Christopher Evans, who
had done so for two or three nights before, and had a violent quarrel
about a girl.

On the 17th, being informed that _Bastian_, the keeper of the brothel
frequented by our men, had threatened to kill me and such as came along
with me, if I came any more to his house to seek for our men, I went and
complained to the young king, the old one being sick. At my request, he
issued a proclamation, that no Japanese should admit our people into
their houses after day-light, under severe penalties; and that it should
be lawful for me, or any other in my company, to enter any of the native
houses in search of our men, not only without molestation or hinderance,
but that the native inhabitants should aid and assist me; and if the
doors were not opened at my desire, I was authorised to break them open.
A soldier was sent to inform _Bastian_ to be careful not to molest or
disturb me, as he might expect to be the first that should pay for it.
This gave much offence to our people, insomuch that some of them swore
they would have drink in the fields if they were not suffered to have it
in the town, for drink they would.

The 26th, _Novasco-dono_ came to visit me at the factory, bringing me a
present of two bottles of wine, seven loaves of fresh bread, and a dish
of flying-fish. While he was with me, the old king came past our door,
where he stopt, saying he had met two men in the street whom he thought
strangers, and not belonging to us; he therefore desired that Swinton
and our jurebasso might go with one of his attendants to see who they
were. They turned out to be John Lambert and Jacob Charke, who were
drinking water at a door in the street through which the king had gone.
I was glad the king looked so narrowly after them, as it caused our men
to be more careful of their proceedings.

Mr William Pauling, our master's mate, who had been long ill of a
consumption, died at the English house upon the 27th of September, of
which circumstance I apprised the king, requesting permission to bury
him among the Christians, which was granted. We accordingly put the body
in a winding-sheet, and coffined it up, waiting to carry it to the grave
next morning. Our master, and several others of the ship's company, came
ashore in the morning to attend the funeral, when we were given to
understand that the body must be transported by water as far as the
Dutch house, because the _bonzes_, or priests, would not suffer us to
pass with the corpse through the street before their pagoda, or idol
temple. Accordingly the master sent for the skiff, in which the coffin
was transported by water to the place appointed, while we went there by
land, and carried it thence to the burial-place; the purser walking
before, and all the rest following after the coffin, which was covered
by a Holland sheet, above which was a silk quilt. We were attended by a
vast number of the natives, both young and old, curious to see our
manner of burial. After the corpse was interred, we all returned to the
factory, where we had a collation, and then our people returned to the
ship. I had almost forgotten to remark, that we had much ado to get any
native to dig the grave in which a Christian was to be buried, neither
would they permit the body to be conveyed by water in any of their
boats.

At this time the king commanded that all the streets in Firando should
be cleaned, and that gutters should be made on each side to convey the
water from them, all the streets to be new gravelled, and the
water-channels to be covered with flat stones. This work was all done in
one day, every one performing so much of it as was in front of his own
house, and it was admirable to see the diligence every person used on
this occasion. Our house was not the last in having this task performed,
as our landlord, the Chinese captain, set a sufficient number of men to
do the work.

The 30th, some other merchants of Miaco came to look at our commodities,
who offered twelve tayes the fathom for our best _stammel_, or red
cloth; but they went away without making any bargain. At this time we
had very heavy winds, both by day and night, so that we were in fear of
another tuffoon, on which account all the fishers hauled their boats
ashore, and every one endeavoured to secure the roofings of their
houses. A week before this, a _bose_, bonze or conjurer, had predicted
to the king that this tempest was to come. About this time our surgeon,
being in his cups, came into a house where a _bose_ was conjuring for a
woman who wanted to know if her husband or friends would return from
sea. So when the _bose_ was done, the surgeon gave him three-pence to
conjure again, and to tell him when our general would return to Firando.
In the end, the _bose_ told him that the general would return within
eighteen days, pretending that he heard a voice answer from behind a
wall, both when he conjured for the woman, and now when he conjured for
the surgeon.

On the 2d of October, the master sent me word that some of the men had
run away with the skiff. These were John Bowles, John Saris, John
Tottie, Christopher Evans, Clement Locke, Jasper Malconty, and James the
Dutchman. While in the way to the king to get boats to send after them,
our Dutch _jurebasso_ came running after me, and told me our people were
on the other side making merry at a tippling-house. On this information
I returned to the English house to get a boat for the master to go and
look them out, but they proved to be three others, William Marinell,
Simeon Colphax, and John Dench, who had hired a boat and gone to another
island, not being allowed to walk by night in Firando. By this mistake
our deserters had the more time to get away. This night, about eleven,
the old king's house, on the other side of the water, took fire, and
was burnt to the ground in about an hour. I never saw a more vehement
fire for the time it lasted, and it is thought his loss is very great.
The old king is said to have set it on fire himself, by going about in
the night with lighted canes, some sparks from which had fallen among
the mats and set them on fire.

I went next day to visit the old king, giving him to understand, by
means of his governor, that I was extremely sorry for the misfortune
that had befallen him, and would have come in person to give all the
assistance in my power, but was doubtful if my presence would have been
acceptable, being a stranger; and begged leave to assure him, that he
should find me ready at all times, even with the hazard of my life, to
do him every service in my power. He gave me many thanks for my good
will, saying, that the loss he had sustained was as nothing in his
estimation. On my return to our house, I was met by the young king going
to visit his grandfather. Before noon, we had word that our runaways
were upon a desert island about two leagues from Firando, of which I
gave notice to both kings, requesting their aid and council how we might
best bring them back. They answered, that they would fetch them back
dead or alive, yet would be loth to kill them, lest we might want hands
to navigate the ship back to England. I returned many thanks for the
care they had of us, yet sent them word we still had a sufficiency of
honest men to carry our ship to England, even although we should lose
these knaves. In fine, the king fitted out two boats full of soldiers to
go after them, with positive orders to bring them back dead or alive,
which I made known to our master, who wished much to go along with them,
and did so accordingly.


9. _Continuation of Occurrences at Firando, during the Absence of the
General_.

On the 4th of October, a report was current in Firando that the _Devil_
had revealed to the _bose_, [bonzes] or conjurers, that the town was to
be burned to ashes that night, on which criers went about the streets
the whole night, making so much noise that I could hardly get any rest,
giving warning to all the inhabitants to extinguish their fires. But the
devil turned out a liar, for no such thing happened. The 5th, old king
_Foyne-same_ came to our house, and was entertained to the best of our
ability, when he told me our runaway seamen could not escape being
taken, as he had sent two other armed boats after them, besides the two
formerly mentioned. While I was talking with him, there came a gentleman
from the emperor's court with a letter, and told me that our general
would be back to Firando in eight or ten days, as he had received his
dispatches from the emperor before this gentleman left the court. At
this time king Foyne told me that _Bon-diu_, the king or governor of
Nangasaki, who is brother to the empress, was to be at Firando next day,
and that it would be proper for our ship to fire off three or four
pieces of cannon as he passed. He told me likewise, that the king or
governor of a town called _Seam_, was then in Firando.

The master of our ship, Mr James Foster, returned from Nangasaki on the
7th, bringing our skiff with him, but all the deserters had got
sanctuary in that town, so that he had not been able to see or speak
with any of them. I was informed that Miguel, our jurebasso, whom I had
sent along with the master as linguist, had dealt fraudulently both with
the master and me, for several Japanese told me that he had spoken to
our people and advised them to absent themselves. Knowing this, and
being doubtful of ever recovering our people unless _Bondiu_ were
extraordinarily dealt with, I resolved to give that personage a present
to secure him in our interest. In the afternoon, as he was passing on
foot along the street in which was our house, along with the young king
who gave him the post of honour, attended by about five hundred
followers, I went out into the street and saluted them. Bon-diu stopped
at our door and thanked me for the salute given him in passing our ship.
I requested he would excuse me if I had hitherto neglected any part of
my duty towards him, which was owing to my small acquaintance with the
country and its customs, but that I meant to wait upon him either at his
lodgings or aboard his junk, before he left Firando. He answered, that I
should be heartily welcome, and remained so long in conversation, that
it was quite dark before he got to his lodgings. At this time I carried
the present to him, which he accepted in good part, offering to do our
nation all the good in his power at court, whither he was now bound, or
to serve us all he could any where else. Of his own accord, he began now
to speak about the deserters, asking me if they should all be pardoned
for his sake, if he brought them back to us? I answered, that the power
of pardon belonged to our general, not to me, and that I had no doubt
they might easily get free, except one or two of the chiefs in this and
other disorders, who richly deserved punishment. He then said that he
wished them all pardoned, without any exception: to which I answered,
that I was sure our general would most willingly do any thing desired by
his highness, or the two kings of Firando. In conclusion, he said, if I
would give it under my hand on the faith of a Christian, that all should
be pardoned for this time, and that I would procure the general to
confirm this at his return, he would then send to Nangasaki for the
deserters, and deliver them into my custody, otherwise he would not
meddle in the matter, lest he might occasion any of their deaths. I
answered, I was contented with any thing his highness was pleased to
command, and so gave him the desired writing under my hand, conditioning
that they were all to be sent back. I then returned to our house after
which the Dutch waited upon him with their present, but we were before
hand with them.

On the 8th _Semidono_ passed our house, and told me that king _Bon-diu_
had a brother along with him, to whom it would be proper that we should
give a present, but not so large as that given to Bon-diu. On this,
advising with the other gentlemen, I laid out a present for him, and on
going to deliver it, I found the Dutch before me with theirs, Captain
Brower going with it himself. He accepted it very kindly, promising his
interest and assistance to our nation, both at court and any where else.
He came soon afterwards to our house, accompanied by many gentlemen,
when they looked over all our commodities, yet went away without making
any purchases. On this occasion he gave me a small _cattan_, and I gave
him two glass bottles, two gally-pots, and about half a _cattee_ of
picked cloves, which he said he wanted for medicinal purposes. I
likewise gave him and his followers a collation, with which they all
seemed contented.

Soon afterwards, _Bon-diu_ sent a gentleman to me, desiring to have my
written promise for pardon to our deserters, to which I consented, after
consulting with the other gentlemen. If I had not done this, we
certainly had never got them back, and the Spaniards would have sent
them to Manilla or the Moluccas. Immediately after this, I got notice
that _Bon-diu_ and his brother meant to visit our ship, wherefore I sent
some banqueting stuff aboard, and went myself to meet them, when they
were entertained as we best could. Bon-diu gave two _cattans_, and we
saluted them with seven guns at their departure. The brother returned
soon after, and requested to have one of the little monkeys for his
brother's children; so I bought one for five dollars from our
master-gunner, and sent it to _Bon-diu_. He being ready to go on shore,
desired to have me along with him in his boat, which I complied with,
and he was saluted with three guns at his departure, which, as I learnt
afterwards, was much esteemed by both brothers. When ashore, he insisted
to accompany me to our factory, much against my inclination, as I was
again forced to give him a collation in Mr Adamses chamber, after which
he and his companions went away seemingly satisfied. Late at night, old
king Foyne sent a man to me to enquire the particulars of the presents I
had given to both brothers, all of which he set down in writing, but I
could never know the reason of this. I forgot to mention that Bon-diu,
just before going aboard our ship, went to bathe in a new warm-bath at
the Dutch factory. The 9th Bon-diu sent one of his men to give me thanks
for the kind entertainment he had on board, and sent me by the messenger
two barrels of Miaco wine. Soon after, his brother sent me a similar
message and present. They were both very earnest to have a
perspective-glass, wherefore I sent them an old one belonging to Mr
Eaton; but it was soon after returned with thanks, as not suiting them.

On the 10th, two sons of another governor of Nangasaki who dwells in the
town, came to see our house, both of them being Christians. After
shewing them our commodities, I gave them a collation, accompanied with
music, Mr Hownsell and the carpenter happening both by chance to be at
the factory. While we were at table, old king Foyne came in upon us
quite unexpectedly, and sat down to partake. I then desired our
jurebasso to request the speedy sending back of our runaways, which they
all promised, provided they should be pardoned, as I had formerly
promised, and which promise I now renewed. Old Foyne desired that I
would send him next day a piece of English beef; and another of pork,
sodden with onions. I accordingly sent our jurebasso next day with the
beef and pork, together with a bottle of wine, and six loaves of white
bread, all of which he very kindly accepted. He had at table with him
his grandson the young king, _Nabison_, his brother, and _Semidono_, his
kinsman.

On the 12th I went to visit both kings, and found the old one asleep,
but spoke with his governor, after which I went to the young king, who
received me.[32] He gave me thanks for the kind entertainment I had
given the strangers, which he said his grandfather and he took in as
good part as if done to themselves. Towards night, Foyne sent to say
that he understood the strangers, who were now departed, had taken away
various commodities from me, paying only as they thought good
themselves, and not the prices I required. I answered, that they had
certainly done so, but I knew not whether it were the custom of the
country, being given to understand that they were in use to do so at
Nangasaki both with the Chinese and Portuguese, and that in reality what
they had taken from me was not worth the speaking of. I was answered,
that although this was done at Nangasaki with the Chinese, who were
forbidden to trade at Japan, they had not authority to do so with those
strangers who had the privilege of trade, more especially here at
Firando, where these people had no authority. I sent back my humble
thanks to the king for the care he used to see justice done both to
strangers and natives, saying, I would wait upon his highness myself to
inform him of the whole truth. Captain Brower sent me word that they had
taken various commodities from him, paying him just as they pleased; he
also sent an empty bottle, desiring to have it filled with Spanish wine,
as he had invited certain strangers, and had none of his own.

[Footnote 32: It was now a great festival among the pagans, which began
on this day, said to be like the Lent of the papists.--_Purch._]

I heard three or four guns or chambers discharged on the 13th, which I
supposed had been done at the Dutch house, in honour of the king; but I
afterwards learnt that they were shot by a Chinese junk which was
passing for Nangasaki. Shortly after, the old king sent for me to come
to dinner at the Dutch house, and to bring Mr Eaton with me, and a
bottle of wine.[33] Mr Eaton had taken medicine, and could not go out,
but I went. We had an excellent dinner, the dishes being dressed partly
in the Japanese fashion, and partly according to the Dutch way, but no
great drinking. The old king sat at one table, accompanied by his eldest
son and two brothers of the young king, as the young king had sent to
say he was not well. At the other table there sat, first, _Nabesone_,
the old king's brother, then myself, next me _Semidono_, then the old
king's governor, and below him _Zanzebar's_ father-in-law, and various
other Japanese gentlemen on the other side of the table. Captain Brower
did not sit down, but carved at table, all his own people attending and
serving on their knees. Captain Brower even gave drink to every one of
his guests with his own hands, and upon his knees, which seemed very
strange to me. When they had dined, Foyne and all his nobles went away,
and Captain Brower accompanied me to our house. I asked him why he
served these people on his knees, when he told me it was the custom of
the country, even the king serving his guests on his knees when he made
a feast, to do them the more honour. Before night the old king came to
the English house, and visited all its apartments. I gave him a
collation, and after staying an hour, and taking one thing and another,
he went his way.

[Footnote 33: These things are mentioned to shew how poor Cockes was
imposed upon among them; as, taking advantage of his weak side, they
seem all to have wished to get from him all they could, without any
design of serving him in return.--Astl. I. 518. b.]

On the 16th, learning that two Christians were arrived from Nangasaki, I
went to visit them, and to enquire about our runaways. One was George
Peterson, a Dutchman, born in Flushing; the other was Daman Maryn, a
native of Venice. They told me that our runaways had been conveyed away
in a small bark for _Macoro_,[34] and that they two had deserted in hope
of procuring a passage in our ship to return to their own countries;
they said they were well known to Mr Adams, and were desirous to have
gone immediately on board, being both seafaring men. The Dutchman had
served three or four and twenty years with the Spaniards, and came
master's mate in one of their ships from _Agua-pulca_ [Acapulco.] for
Manilla in the Philippine islands. They had plenty of money, and would
have sent it to our ship or to our factory; but I told them that I durst
not presume to entertain them in the absence of our general, yet would
do them all the service in my power at his return. I accordingly sent
Miguel to inform the king that these two strangers were come to seek a
passage in our ship, not being Spaniards nor subjects of Spain. The king
sent me back for answer, that they were welcome, if they were such as
they reported themselves; but, if Spaniards or Portuguese, he could not
allow them to remain in Firando, as the Spanish ambassador had procured
an order from the emperor that all Spaniards should retire to Manilla.

[Footnote 34: Called in the sequel Macow, or Macao, the Portuguese
settlement on the coast of China, at the mouth of the _Bocca-tigris_, or
river of Canton.--E]

The two strangers came to me early on the 17th, requesting me to
accompany them to wait upon the king, to give them the better
countenance, which I agreed to. On the way, they told me that our
fugitives had given out at Nangasaki that more of our people would
follow them, as none of any account would stay to navigate the ship
home, because their officers used them more like dogs than men. They
alleged also, that twenty resolute Spaniards might easily get possession
of our ship in one or two small boats. The old king received us very
kindly, and asked the strangers many questions about the wars in the
Molucca islands between the Spaniards and Dutch. They said the Spaniards
were resolved to prosecute this war with much vigour, having prepared a
strong force for that purpose. They also told the king that all our
fugitives had, as they believed, been secretly conveyed away from
Nangasaki seven days before, in a _soma_ that went from thence for
_Macow_.[35] The king would not believe them, saying it was impossible
such a man as Bon-diu, having given his word to restore them, should be
found false to his promise. In the end, he agreed to allow these men to
remain, and to go along with our ship, if our general pleased to take
them. So the poor men returned much contented to their lodgings,
assuring me they would prove faithful to us, and that we need not wish
any worse punishment to our fugitives than the bad treatment they would
receive from the Spaniards.

[Footnote 35: Macow, or Macao, a town of the Portuguese near the
continent of China. Miguel, the jurebasso, servant to Mr Adams, was
suspected of double-dealing in this affair of the fugitives: the
circumstances I omit.--_Purch._]

The 18th we had a total eclipse of the moon, which began about eleven
p.m. The 19th, about the same hour, a fire began in Firando, near the
young king's house, by which forty houses were burnt down; and, had not
the wind fallen calm, most of the town had been destroyed. Had not our
Englishmen bestirred themselves lustily, many more houses had gone to
wreck, for the fire took hold three or four times on the opposite side
of the street to our house, which they as often extinguished, for which
they were very much commended by the king and other principal people.
Old Foyne came to our door on horseback, and advised us to put all our
things into the _godown_, and daub up the door with wet clay, which
would place them in safety. Captain Brower likewise, and some of his
people, came very kindly to our house, offering to assist us either by
land or water, if needful. It could not be known how this fire began,
but there were reports among the Japanese that there would soon be a
still greater fire, which had been predicted by the devil and his
conjurers. I pray God it may not be done purposely by some villainous
people, on purpose to rob and steal what they can lay hold of during the
trouble and confusion.

The 20th I went to visit Captain Brower at the Dutch house, to return
thanks for his friendly assistance the night before. Towards night,
Hernando the Spaniard and Edward Markes returned from Nangasaki, where
they could not procure sight of any of our fugitives, though they were
still at that place. A Portuguese or Spaniard at Nangasaki, in high
authority about sea affairs, told Markes we should never have our men
back; but that if all the rest of our people would come, leaving the
ship empty, they would be well received, and would be still more welcome
if they brought the ship with them. The Japanese, who had been sent by
king Foyne along with our people to look for our runaways, would not
allow Markes to stir out of doors for a night and half a day after their
arrival at Nangasaki, he going abroad himself, and Hernando lodging at a
different place, whence I suspect there was some fraudulent
understanding between the Japanese and Hernando, and have now lost hope
of ever getting our men back. I blamed the jesuits, and the old king
agreed with me, and told me he would take care that no more of our
people should be carried to Nangasaki, except they stole the ship's
boats, as the others had done, of which I gave notice to Mr James
Foster, our master. Foyne at this time issued an edict, strictly
forbidding any of the Japanese from carrying away any of our people,
without previously making it known to him and me.

The 23d I was informed of a great pagan festival to be celebrated this
day, both kings and all the nobles being to meet at a summer-house
erected before the great pagoda, to see a horse-race. I think there must
have been above 3000 people assembled together on this occasion. All the
nobles went on horseback, each being accompanied by a retinue of slaves,
some armed with pikes, some with fire-arms, and others with bows and
arrows. The pikemen drew up on one side of the street, and the shot and
archers on the other, the middle being left open for the race. Right
before the summer-house, where the king and nobles were seated, was a
large round target of straw, hung against the wall, at which the
archers running at full career on horseback discharged their arrows.
The street was so crowded, that neither the present we sent, nor we
ourselves, could get admission, so we passed along the street and
returned by another way to our house. Late at night, the brother of
Zanzibar's wife came to our house, bringing me a present of a haunch of
venison and a basket of oranges, being accompanied by Zanzibar himself.
About ten at night, the Chinese captain, our landlord, came to inform us
that the king had ordered a tub of water to be kept ready on the top of
every house, as the devil had given out that the town was to be burnt
down that night: Yet the devil proved a liar: We got however a large tub
on the top of our house, which held twenty buckets of water; and all
night long people ran about the streets calling out for every one to
look well to their fires, so that it was strange and fearful to hear
them.

This report of burning the town was still current on the 24th, and every
one was making preparations to prevent it. I made ready fifteen buckets,
which cost six _condrines_ each, which I filled with water and hung up
in our yard, setting a large tub beside them full of water, besides that
on the house top. I gave orders likewise to get two ladders ready for
carrying water to the roof, and provided nine wine casks filled with
tempered clay, ready for daubing up the doors of the _gadonge_, [godown
or fire-proof warehouse,] if need should require in consequence of a
conflagration, from which dire necessity may God defend us. All night
long, three or four men ran continually backwards and forwards in the
streets, calling out for every one to have a care of fire, and making so
horrible a noise, that it was both strange and fearful to hear them.

On the 25th, the Chinese captain, our landlord, was taken sick, and sent
for a piece of pork, which I sent him, and immediately afterwards I went
to visit him, carrying a small bottle of Spanish wine. While I was
there, Semidono and our guardian's father-in-law came likewise to visit
him. The king sent me word, by Miguel, our jurebasso, that he had a bad
opinion of Hernando Ximenes our Spaniard, and that he meant to have run
away when lately at Nangasaki. But I knew this to be false, as he had
then free liberty to go where he pleased, and did not run away. I had
another complaint made against him, that he was a notorious gambler, and
had enticed several to play, from whom he won their money, which I
believe rather than the other accusation. I find by experience, that the
Japanese are not friendly to the Spaniards and Portuguese, and love them
at Nangasaki the worse, because they love them so well.[36] In the night
between the 24th and 25th, some evil-disposed persons endeavoured to
have set the town of Firando on fire in three several places, but it was
soon extinguished, and no harm done; but the incendiaries were not
discovered, though doubtless owing to the conjurers and other base
people, who expected an opportunity of making spoil when the town was on
fire.

[Footnote 36: This is quite obscure, and may perhaps allude to the
efforts of the Jesuits at Nangasaki, to convert the Japanese to a new
idol worship, under the name of Christianity.--E.]

The 26th of October, Mr Melsham being very sick, _Zanzibar_ came to
visit him, and urged him to use the physic of the country, bringing with
him a _bonze_, or doctor, to administer the cure. Mr Melsham was very
desirous to use it, but wished our surgeon to see it in the first place.
So the bonze gave him two pills yesterday, two in the night, and two
this morning, together with certain seeds; but, for what I can see,
these things did him no good. God restore his health! At this time, all
our waste-cloths, pennants, brass sheaves, and other matters, were sent
aboard, and our ship was put into order to receive our general, whose
return was soon expected. Last night another house was set on fire by
some villains, but was soon extinguished with very little harm; yet our
nightly criers of fire continue to make such horrible noises, that it is
impossible for any one to get rest. The Chinese captain still continued
sick, and sent to beg some spiced cakes and two wax-candles, which I
sent him, as I had done before. Mr Melsham now grew weary of his
Japanese doctor and his prescriptions, and returned to our surgeon Mr
Warner, to the great displeasure of Zanzibar and the bonze.

Sec.10. _Conclusion of Observations by Mr Cockes_.

Our Chinese landlord came to our house on the 30th October, to inform me
of a general collection of provisions of all kinds, then making at every
house in Firando, to be sent to the two kings, in honour of a great
feast they were to give next day, together with a comedy or play. By his
advice, and after consulting with the other gentlemen of the factory, I
directed two bottles of Spanish wine, two roasted hens, a roasted pig, a
small quantity of rusk, and three boxes of confections and preserves to
be sent, as a contribution towards their feast. Before night the young
king sent one of his men to me, requesting me to furnish him with some
English apparel, for the better setting out their comedy, and
particularly to let him have a pair of red cloth breeches. I answered,
that I had nonesuch, and knew not any of our people who had; but any
clothes I had that could gratify his highness were much at his service.
At night the old king sent to invite me to be a spectator of their
comedy on the morrow, and to bring Mr Foster, our master, along with me.

Next day, being the 31st, I sent our present, formerly mentioned, to the
kings by our jurebasso before dinner, desiring their highnesses to
excuse the master and myself, and that we would wait upon them some
other time, when they had not so much company. This however did not
satisfy them, and they insisted on our company, and that of Mr Eaton; so
we went and had a place appointed for us, where we sat at our ease and
saw every thing. The old king himself brought us a collation in sight of
all the people; Semidono afterwards did the like in the name of both
kings, and a third was brought us in the sequel by several of their
principal nobles or attendants. But that which we most noted was their
play or comedy, in which the two kings, with their greatest nobles and
princes, were the actors. The subject was a representation of the
valiant deeds of their ancestors, from the commencement of their kingdom
or commonwealth to the present time, which was mixed with much mirth to
please the common people. The audience was very numerous, as every house
in the town of Firando, and every village, place, or hamlet in their
dominions brought a present, and all their subjects were spectators. The
kings themselves took especial care that every one, both high and low,
should eat and drink before they departed. Their acting, music, singing,
and poetry, were very harsh to our ears, yet the natives kept time to
it, both with hands and feet. Their musical instruments were small drums
or tabors, wide at both ends and small in the middle, resembling an
hour-glass, on one end of which they beat with one hand, while with the
other they strained the cords which surround it, making it to sound soft
or loud at their pleasure, and tuning their voices to its sound, while
others played on a fife or flute; but all was harsh and unpleasant to
our ears. I never saw a play of which I took such notice, as it was
wonderfully well represented, yet quite different from ours in
Christendom, which are only dumb-shews, while this was as truth itself,
and acted by the kings themselves, to preserve a continual remembrance
of their affairs.

On this occasion, the king did not invite the Dutch, which made our
being present seem the greater compliment. When I returned to our house,
I found three or four of the Dutchmen there, one of whom was in a
Japanese habit, and came from a place called _Cushma_,[37] which is
within sight of Corea. I understood they had sold pepper there and other
goods, and suspect they have some secret trade thence with Corea, or are
likely soon to have, and I trust if they do well that we shall not miss,
as Mr Adams was the man who put them upon this trade, and I have no
doubt he will be as diligent for the good of his own countrymen as he
has been for strangers. Hernando Ximenes was with Captain Brower when
the two men came from Cushma, and asked them whence they came, at which
Brower was very angry, telling him he should have no account of that
matter.

[Footnote 37: Key-sima, an island considerably to the N.E. of Firando,
and nearly midway between Niphon and Corea, from which it may be about
forty miles distant.--E.]

Towards night, I was informed that two Spaniards were arrived from
Nangasaki, and were lodged with _Zanzibar_. They sent for our jurebasso
to come to them, but I did not allow him, on which they and Zanzibar
came to our house. One of them was _Andres Bulgaryn_, a Genoese, who had
passed Firando only a few days before, and the other _Benito de Palais_,
pilot-major of the Spanish ship lately cast away on the coast of Japan,
the same person who came here formerly from Nangasaki to visit Captain
Adams. They said they had come to visit their friends, me in the first
place; and used many words of compliment, after which they entered into
conversation respecting our fugitives. They pretended that it was not
the fathers, as they called the jesuits, who kept our people from being
seen and spoken with, but the natives of Nangasaki, who they said were
very bad people. In fine, I shrewdly suspected these fellows of having
come a-purpose to inveigle more of our people to desert, as the others
did, wherefore I advised our master to have a watchful eye both to the
ship and boats, and to take special notice who kept company with our
men, as it was best to doubt the worst, for the best will save itself.

On the night of the 1st November, two houses were set a-fire on the
other side of the water, which were soon extinguished, but the villains
could not be found out. This day I sent word to Mr Foster on board, to
look well to the ship and the boats, and to the behaviour of our people,
as I strongly suspected the two Spaniards of being spies, come to entice
away our men. I sent him word likewise, that I understood the Spaniards
meant to invite him that day to dinner, but wished him to beware they
did not give him a _higo_.[38] He answered, that he had the same opinion
of them I had, and should therefore be mainly on his guard. He came soon
after on shore, and the Spaniards came to our house, where by much
entreaty they prevailed on Mr Foster and Mr William Eaton to go with
them to dinner at Zanzibar's house, along with Hernando and the other
two Spaniards. But these two Spaniards came to me, and desired me to
tell Mr Foster and those who went with him, to take heed they did not
eat or drink of any thing they did not see tasted by others, as they
were not to be trusted, which I communicated to Mr Foster and Mr Eaton.
Ximenes told me that Mr Adams had goods in his hands belonging to the
pilot-major, who had come in the hope of finding Mr Adams here, and
meant to wait his return. He said they had likewise brought letters from
the bishop and other fathers to the other two Spaniards, advising them
to return to Nangasaki, but which I think they will not do. I this day
sent our jurebasso to both kings and the other nobles, to give them
thanks for the kind entertainment we had received the day before.

[Footnote 38: From the sequel, this unexplained term seems to imply
treachery.--E.]

The 2d, some villains set fire to a house in the fish street, which was
soon put out, and the incendiaries escaped. It is generally thought
these fires were raised by some base renegados who lurk about the town,
and who came from Miaco: Yet, though much suspected, no proof has
hitherto been brought against them. There has, however, been orders
given to construct gates and barriers in different parts of all the
streets, with watches at each, and no person to be allowed to go about
in the night, unless he be found to have very urgent business. Another
villain got this night into the house of a poor widow, meaning to have
robbed her; but on her making an outcry, he fled into the wood opposite
our house, where the Pagoda stands.[39] The wood was soon after beset
all around by above 500 men, but the robber could not be found. At
night, when we were going to bed, there was a sudden alarm given that
there were thieves on the top of our house, endeavouring to set it on
fire. Our ladders being ready, I and others went up immediately, but
found nobody, yet all the houses of our neighbours were peopled on the
top like ours on similar alarms. This was judged to be a false alarm,
risen on purpose to see whether any one would be found in readiness. At
this very time there was a house set on fire, a good way from our house,
but the fire was soon quenched. The night before, three houses were set
a-fire in different parts of the town, but the fires were all
extinguished at the beginning, so that no hurt was done. At this time,
an order was issued to give notice of all the inhabitants dwelling in
every house, whether strangers or others; and that all who were liable
to suspicion should be banished from the dominions of the two kings of
Firando. Bars or gates were erected to shut up the passages at the ends
of all the streets, and watches were appointed in different places, with
orders not to go about crying and making a noise, as had been done
hitherto without either form or fashion. Yet, notwithstanding these
precautions, a villain set fire about ten o'clock this night to a house
near the Pagoda, opposite our house. He was noticed by the watch, who
pursued him in all haste, but he escaped into the wood above the Pagoda.
The wood was immediately beset by more than 500 armed men, and old king
Foyne came in person with many of his nobles to assist in the pursuit;
yet the incendiary escaped, and I verily believe he ran about among the
rest, crying _stop thief_ as, well as the best.

[Footnote 39: This word signifies either the idol, or the idol temple,
or both.--_Purch._]

On the night of the 4th, fire was set to several houses, both in the
town and country round. An order was now given, to have secret watches
in various parts of the town every night, and that no person should go
out during the night except upon important occasions, and then to have a
light carried before them, that it might be seen who they were. If this
rule be duly enforced, our house-burners will be put to their wits end.
I proposed these measures to the king and others above a week before,
and now they are put in execution.

On the 5th I received a letter from Domingo Francisco, the Spanish
ambassador, dated five days before from _Ximenaseque_, [Simonoseki,] and
another from George the Portuguese. The ambassador went over land from
that place to Nangasaki, and sent the letter by his servant, to whom I
shewed the commodities he enquired after, referring him for others till
the return of our general, but gave him an answer, of which I kept a
copy. The man chose two pieces of fine _Semian chowters_ and eight
pieces of white _bastas_, paying seven _tayes_ each for the _chowters,_
and two _tayes_ each for the _bastas_. A Spanish friar or Jesuit came in
the boat along with the ambassador's servant, and asked to see our ship,
which the master allowed him at my request, and used him kindly; for the
old saw has it, That it is sometimes good to hold a candle to the devil.
This day Mr Eaton, Hernando, and I dined with Unagense, and were kindly
entertained.

About ten o'clock of the 6th November, 1613, our general and all his
attendants arrived at Firando from the emperor's court, accompanied by
Mr Adams. Immediately after his arrival, he sent me, with John Japan,
our jurebasso, to visit both the kings, and to thank them for their
kindness, for having so well accommodated him with a barge or galley,
and for the care they had taken of the ship and every thing else during
his absence. They took this message in good part, saying they would be
glad to see our general at their houses. At this time certain merchants
of Miaco came from Nangasaki to our house to look at our commodities,
and among the rest took liking to ten pieces of _cassedy nill_, for
which they agreed to give three _tayes_ each. As had been done by other
merchants, I sent the goods to their lodging, expecting to receive the
money as usual; but they only sent me a paper, consigning me to receive
payment from _Semidono_, who was newly gone from Firando on a voyage,
and was met by our general. I sent back word to the merchants that I
must either have payment or the goods returned, to which they answered,
I should have neither one nor the other; and as the person with whom
they lodged refused to pass his word for payment, I was forced to apply
to both the kings for justice; but I first sent word aboard our ship, if
the boat of Miaco weighed anchor to go away, that they should send the
skiff to make her stay, which they did, and made her come to anchor
again. In the mean time I went to the kings. The younger king said that
_Semidono_ was able enough to pay me; but when I asked him if Semidono
refused to pay, whether he would, he answered no. While we were talking
about the matter, the old king came in, and told me he would take order
that I should be satisfied; so in the end the person with whom the
merchants lodged passed his word for payment of the thirty _tayes_; yet
the orders of old _Foyne Same_ had come too late, if our skiff had not
stopt the Miaco merchants. This day Captain Brower and all the
merchants of the Dutch factory came to visit our general, and
_Nobisone_ sent him a young porker as a present, with a message saying
he would come to visit him in a day or two.

Sec.11. _Occurrences at Firando after the Return of Captain Saris_.[40]

The 7th of November, 1613, I sent in the first place some presents to
the two kings of Firando, and afterwards went to visit them. On the 8th,
Andrew Palmer, the ship's steward, and William Marnell, gunner's mate,
having been ashore all night and quarrelled in their cups, went out this
morning into the fields and fought. Both are so grievously wounded, that
it is thought Palmer will hardly escape with his life, and that Marnell
will be lame of his hands for life. The 9th I went aboard ship early,
and called the master and all the officers into my cabin, making known
to them how much I was grieved at the misconduct of some of them,
particularly of Palmer and Marnell, who had gone ashore without leave,
and had so sore wounded each other, that one was in danger of his life,
and the other of being lamed for ever; and besides, that the survivor
ran a risk of being hanged if the other died, which would necessarily
occasion me much vexation. I also said, I was informed that Francis
Williams and Simon Colphax were in the boat going ashore to have fought,
and that John Dench and John Winston had appointed to do the like. John
Dench confessed it was true, and that he had seen Palmer and Marnell
fighting, and had parted them, otherwise one or both had died on the
field. I told them these matters were exceedingly distressing to me, and
I trusted would now be remedied, otherwise the ship would be unmanned,
to the overthrow of our voyage, and the vast injury of the honourable
company which had entrusted us. After much contestation, they all
engaged to amend what was amiss, and not to offend any more, which I
pray God may be the case. I told them also, that old king Foyne had
complained to me, threatening, if any more of them went ashore to fight
and shed blood, contrary to the laws of Japan, he would order them to be
cut in pieces, as he was determined strangers should have no more
licence to infringe the laws than his own subjects.

[Footnote 40: We here resume the narrative of Captain Saris. Purch.
Pilgr. I. 378. The observations of Mr Cockes, contained in the three
preceding sub-sections, break off abruptly in the Pilgrims, as
above.--E.]


At my return ashore, old _Foyne Same_ came to visit me at the English
house, and told me that the piece of _Poldavy_, and the sash I gave him,
were consumed when his house was burnt down. This was in effect begging
to have two others, which I promised to give him. I likewise got him to
send some of his people aboard, along with John Japan, our jurebasso, to
intimate to our men that if any of them went ashore to fight, he had
given strict orders to have them cut in pieces. This I did in hopes of
restraining them in future from any more drunken combats. Towards night,
Juan Comas, a Spaniard, came from Nangasaki, bringing two letters from
Domingo Francisco, one for me, and the other for Mr Cockes, together
with three baskets of sugar as a present to me, and a pot of conserves,
with many no less sugared words of compliment in his letters, saying how
sorry he was that our seven fugitives had gone away during his absence,
excusing himself and the Jesuits, who he pretended had no hand in the
matter, and pretending they had never spoken against us, calling us
heretics. He said our men had gone from Nangasaki, three of them in a
Chinese or Japanese _soma_ for Manilla, and four in a Portuguese vessel.
Yet I esteem all these as vain words to excuse themselves, and throw the
blame on others; for the Spaniards and Portuguese mutually hate each
other and the Japanese, as these last do them.

The 11th I visited _Nobesane_, who used me kindly, and would have had me
dine with him next day, but I excused myself on account of the press of
business in which I was engaged, and the short time I had to stay. I met
old king Foyne at his house, who requested to have two pieces of English
salt beef, and two of pork, sodden by our cook, with turnips, radishes,
and onions, which I sent him. The 12th, the governors of the two kings
came to visit me at our factory, whence they went aboard the Clove,
accompanied by Mr Cockes, to signify to our crew that they should beware
of coming ashore to fight and shed blood; as, by the law of Japan, those
who went out to fight and drew weapons for that purpose, were adjudged
to death, and all who saw them were obliged to kill both offenders, on
pain of ruining themselves and all their kindred if they neglected
putting the combatants to death.

The 14th I sent Mr Cockes and our jurebasso to wait upon the kings, to
entreat they would provide me twelve Japanese seamen who were fit for
labour, to assist me in navigating the ship to England, to whom I was
willing to give such wages as their highnesses might deem reasonable.
The kings were then occupied in other affairs, so that my messengers
spoke with their secretaries, who said they needed not to trouble the
kings on that business, as they would provide me twelve fit persons; but
that there were several vagrant people about the town who would be
willing enough to go, yet were very unfit for my purpose, as they would
only consume victuals, and of whom the Dutch made use without making any
request on the matter, and it was not known what had become of these men
or of the ship; but, as the matter was now referred to them, they would
look out for such as were fit for our purpose.

The 18th, Foyne sent me word he would visit me, and meant to bring the
dancing girls of the country along with him, which he did soon after,
accompanied by three courtezans, and two or three men, who all danced
and made music after their fashion, though harsh to our ears. The 19th,
the Chinese captain, and George Duras, a Portuguese, came to visit me,
requesting me to send to _Semidono_ to procure pardon for two poor
fellows who were like to lose their lives for bidding a poor knave flee
who had stolen a bit of lead not worth three halfpence; and though the
malefactor was taken and executed, these men were in danger of the same
punishment, had I not sent Mr Cockes to _Semidono_ with my ring, to
desire their pardon for my sake, which he engaged to procure, and did in
effect.

The 20th, _Samedon_, king of _Crats_,[41] sent me word he meant to go on
board our ship, so I went there to meet him, and he came along with both
the kings of Firando, when we saluted them with five pieces of ordnance;
and we afterwards fired three with bullets at a mark, at the request of
Samedon, who gave me two Japanese pikes, having _cattans_ or _sables_ on
their ends. At their departure we again saluted them with seven guns,
one being shotted and fired at the mark. The 22d I sent a present to the
king of _Crats_, which was delivered to him at the house of _Tomesanes_
the young king, where he was at breakfast. Samedon accepted it very
kindly, sending me word by Mr Cockes that he was doubly obliged to me
for his kind entertainment aboard, and for now sending him so handsome a
present of such things as his country did not produce, all without any
desert on his part, and the only recompence in his power was, if ever
any of the English nation came into his dominions, he would give them a
hearty welcome, and do them all the service in his power.

[Footnote 41: This personage must have been governor of one of the
provinces, islands, or towns of Japan; but no place in that eastern
empire bears a name in modern geography which in the smallest degree
resembles Crats.--E]


The 25th, the purser and Mr Hownsell came ashore, and told me that
Andrew Palmer, the steward, had died the night before, Thomas Warner,
our surgeon, affirming that he owed his death to his own obstinacy, his
wound being curable if he would have been ruled. I desired that he might
be buried on an island as secretly as possible, as we were about to get
some Japanese into our ship, who might be unwilling to embark if they
heard of any one having died. On the 28th a Japanese was put to death,
who some said was a thief, and others an incendiary. He was led by the
executioner to the place of punishment, a person going before him
carrying a board, on which the crime for which he was to be punished was
written, and the same was exhibited on a paper flag carried over his
head. Two pikemen followed the culprit, having the points of their pikes
close to his back, ready to slay him instantly if he offered to resist.

The ship being ready to depart, several of the natives complained that
the ship's company owed them money, and desired to be paid. To prevent
greater inconvenience, I listened to these people, and wrote to the
master to make enquiry aboard as to who were in debt, that I might
satisfy their creditors, making deductions accordingly from their wages.

On the 26th I assembled my mercantile council to consult about leaving a
factory here in Firando, upon these considerations. 1. The encouragement
we had privately received at the Moluccas. 2. That the Dutch had already
a factory here. 3. The large privileges now obtained from the emperor of
Japan. 4. The certain advice of English factories established at Siam
and Patane. 5. The commodities remaining on hand appointed for these
parts, and the expected profit which farther experience might produce.
It was therefore resolved to leave a factory here, consisting of eight
Englishmen, three Japanese _jurebassos_ or interpreters, and two
servants. They were directed, against the coming of the next ships, to
explore and discover the coasts of Corea, _Tushmay_, other parts of
Japan, and of the adjoining countries, and to see what good might be
done in any of them.

The 5th of December, 1613, Mr Richard Cockes, captain and _Cape_
merchant of the English factory now settled at Firando in Japan, took
his leave of me aboard the Clove, together with his company, being eight
English and five others, as before mentioned. After their departure, we
mustered the company remaining aboard, finding forty-six English, five
_swarts_ or blacks, fifteen Japanese, and three passengers, in all
sixty-nine persons. We had lost since our arrival in Japan ten
Englishmen; two by sickness, one slain in a duel, and seven who deserted
to the Portuguese and Spaniards, while I was absent at the court of the
emperor. The English whom we left in the factory were Mr Richard Cockes,
William Adams, now entertained in the service of the company at a
hundred pounds a year, Tempest Peacock, Richard Wickham, William Eaton,
Walter Carwarden, Edward Saris, and William Nelson.

Sec.12. _Voyage from Japan to Bantam, and thence Home to England_.

That same day, being the 5th December, we set sail with a stiff
northerly gale, steering S. by W. 1/2 a point westerly. By exact
observation on shore, we found the island of Firando to be in lat. 33 deg.
30' N. and the variation 2 deg. 50' easterly.[42] We resolved to keep our
course for Bantam along the coast of China, for which purpose we brought
our starboard tacks aboard, and stood S.W. edging over for China, the
wind at N.N.E. a stiff gale and fair weather. The 7th it blew very hard
at N.W. and we steered S.S.W. encountering a great current which shoots
out between the _island_ of Corea[43] and the main land of China,
occasioning a very heavy sea. The 8th, being in lat. 29 deg. 40' N. we
steered W.S.W, on purpose to make Cape _Sumbor_ on the coast of China.
The sea was very rough, and the wind so strong that it blew our main
course out of the bolt ropes. The 9th, in lat. 28 deg. 23', we sounded and
had forty-nine to forty-five fathoms on an oozy bottom. The weather was
clear, yet we could not see land. The 11th we had ground in forty-nine,
forty-three, thirty-eight, thirty-seven, and thirty fathoms, the water
being very green, and as yet no land to be seen.

[Footnote 42: The town of Firando is in lat. 33 deg. 6' N. and even the most
northern part of the island of that name only reaches to 33 deg. 17'. The
town is in long. 128 deg. 42' E. from Greenwich.--E.]

[Footnote 43: Corea was long thought to be an island after the period of
this voyage. Astl. I. 492. c.--It is now known to be an extensive
peninsula, to the east of China, having the Yellow sea interposed.--E.]

The 12th, in thirty-five fathoms, and reckoning ourselves near the coast
of China, we had sight of at least 300 sail of junks, of twenty and
thirty tons each and upwards, two of which passed us close to windwards,
and though we used all fair means to prevail upon them to come aboard we
could not succeed, and seeing they were only fishing vessels we let them
pass. Continuing our course we soon espied land, being two islands
called the _Fishers islands_.[44] At noon our latitude was 25 deg. 59' N.
and we had ground at twenty to twenty-six fathoms. About seven p.m.
while steering along the land, we came close by a rock, which by good
providence we had sight of by moonlight, as it lay right in our course.
When not above twice our ship's length from this rock, we had thirty
fathoms water, on which we hauled off for one watch, to give the land a
wide birth, and resumed our course S.W. after midnight. The wind was
very strong at N.E. and continually followed as the land trended. The
13th, in lat. 24 deg. 35' N. and variation 1 deg. 30' easterly, having the wind
strong at N.E. with fair weather, we steered S.W. keeping about five
leagues off the islands along the coast of China. The 15th we came among
many fisher boats, but had so much wind that we could not speak any of
them, but they made signs to us, as we thought to keep to the westwards.
At noon our lat. was 21 deg. 40' N. and having the wind at N.N.E. a stiff
gale, we steered W.N.W. northerly, to make the land, and about two hours
afterwards had sight of it, although by our dead reckoning we ought
still to have been fifty-six leagues from it. It is to be noted, that
the islands along the coast of China are considerably more to the
southward than as laid down in the charts. About three p.m. we were
within about two leagues of an island called _Sancha_[45].

[Footnote 44: By the latitude indicated in the text, Captain Saris
appears to have fallen in with the coast of Fo-kien, and to have passed
through between that province and the island of Formosa, without
discovering the existence of that island.--E.]

[Footnote 45: Probably the island of Tchang-to-huen, to the S.W. of the
bay of Canton, the situation of which agrees with the latitude in the
text, and the sound of the two first syllables of which name has some
affinity with that given by Saris, evidently from Spanish or Portuguese
charts. At this part, of his voyage, Saris entirely misses to notice the
large island of Hai-nan.--E.]

The 18th, in lat. 15 deg. 43' N. we had sight of an island called
Pulo-cotan, being high land, and is about twenty leagues, according to
report, from the shoal called _Plaxel_. In the morning of the 19th the
coast of Cambodia was on our starboard side, about two leagues off,
along which we steered S.E. by E. easterly, our latitude at noon being
13 deg. 31' N. estimating the ship to be then athwart _Varella_. We have
hitherto found the wind always _trade_ along shore, having gone _large_
all the way from Firando, the wind always following us as the land
trended. The 20th at noon we were in latitude 10 deg. 53', and three
glasses, or an hour and half after, we had sight of a small island,
which we concluded to be that at the end of the shoal called
_Pulo-citi_. We found the book of _Jan Huyghens van Linschoten_ very
true, for by it we have directed our course ever since we left Firando.
The 22d we had sight of _Pulo Condor_ about five leagues off, our
latitude at noon being 8 deg. 20' N.

About four a.m. on the 25th we made the island of _Pulo Timon_, and two
hours afterwards saw _Pulo Tinga_. The 28th at three p.m. we had oosy
ground at twenty fathoms, having divers long islands on our starboard
and sundry small islands on our larboard, forming the straits of
China-bata, which we found to be truly laid down in a chart made by a
Hollander called _Jan Janson Mole_, which he gave to Mr Hippon, who gave
it to the company. _Pulo Bata_, one of these islands, is low land, and
is full of trees or bushes at the S.W. end.

A little before noon on the 29th, we perceived the colour of the water
a-head of the ship to change very much, by which observation we escaped
an imminent danger. This shoal seemed of a triangular shape, the S.W.
end being the sharpest, and is not far from the entrance into the
straits of _China-bata_. At noon our latitude was 4 deg. 6' N. At eight p.m.
we came to anchor in seven fathoms, the weather threatening to be foul
in the night, the place very full of shoals, and our experience little
or nothing. Before our anchor took hold, we had six 1/4, five 1/2, six,
and then seven fathoms, soft sandy ground.

In the morning of the 30th we spoke the Darling, then bound for
Coromandel, her company consisting of twenty-one English and nine
blacks. By her we first learnt of the death of Sir Henry Middleton, the
loss of the Trades-increase, and other incidents that had occurred
during our voyage to Japan. In the night of the 30th God mercifully
delivered us from imminent danger, as we passed under full sail close by
a sunken ledge of rocks, the top of which was only just above water
within a stone's throw of our ship; and had not the noise of the
breakers awakened us, we had not cleared our ship. We instantly let go
our anchor, being in a rapid current or tide-way, in seventeen fathoms
upon oozy ground. When morning broke on the 31st we had sight of the
high land of Sumatra, having an island a-stern, the ledge of rocks we
had passed on our starboard, and three small islands forming a triangle
on our larboard bow. We were about eight leagues off the high land of
Java, but could not then get into the straits of Sunda, as the wind was
quite fallen.

The 1st January, 1614, being quite calm, was mostly spent at anchor. The
2d, having a little wind, we set sail, and about eight o'clock fell in
with the Expedition, homewards bound for England, laden with pepper, by
which ship we wrote to our friends in England. The 3d we came to anchor
in the road of Bantam, end to our great grief found no lading ready for
us, for which neglect I justly blamed those I had left to provide the
same, while they excused themselves by alleging they did not expect us
so soon back. I questioned _Kewee_, the principal Chinese merchant, who
came to visit me on board, as to the price of pepper. He answered, that
it was already known ashore I was homewards bound, and must necessarily
load pepper; and, as my merchants had not provided any before hand, I
might be assured it would rise. He said the price was then at twelve
dollars for ten sacks, but he could not undertake to deliver any
quantity at that price. I offered him twelve dollars and a half the ten
sacks, but he held up so high, that we had no hope of dealing for the
present. Of the ten persons left by us in the factory when we departed
for Japan, we found only five alive at our return, while we only lost
one man between Firando and Bantam.

I went ashore on the 4th to visit the governor of Bantam, to whom I
presented two handsome _cattans_, or Japanese swords, and other articles
of value; and this day I bargained with _Kewee_ for 4000 sacks of pepper
at thirteen dollars the ten sacks, bating in the weight 3 per cent and
directed the merchants to expedite the milling thereof as much as
possible. I employed the 5th in reducing the several English factories
at Bantam under one government, settling them all in one house; also in
regulating the expences of diet, that all might be frugally managed, to
prevent extravagance in rack-houses abroad, or in hanger-on blacks at
home, which had lately been the case. I directed also that there should
be fewer warehouses kept in the town, and that these might be better
regulated, and the goods stowed in a more orderly manner. Hitherto the
multiplication of factories, having one for each voyage, had occasioned
great expence, and had raised the price of pepper, as each outbid the
other, for the particular account of their own several voyages, with
great loss to the public.

The 6th was employed in re-weighing the pepper received the day before,
most of the sacks being found hard weight, and many to want a part of
what was allowed by the king's beam; wherefore I sent for the weigher,
whom I used kindly, entreating him to take a little more care to amend
this fault, which he promised to do, and for his better encouragement I
made him a present to the value of five dollars. The 16th being Sunday,
I staid aboard, and about 2 p.m. we observed the whole town to be on
fire. I immediately sent our skiff ashore to assist the merchants in
guarding our goods. The wind was so violent, that in a very short space
of time the whole town was burnt down, except the English and Dutch
factories, which it pleased God of his mercy to preserve.

Being ashore on the 20th, I procured two Chinese merchants, named
_Lackmoy_ and _Lanching_, to translate the letter which the king of
Firando in Japan had given me to deliver to our king, James I. It was
written in the Chinese character and language, which they translated
into the Malay, and which in English was as follows:

_To the King of Great Britain, &c._ "Most mighty king, I cannot
sufficiently express how acceptable your majesty's most loving letter,
and bountiful present of many valuable things, sent me by your servant
Captain John Saris, has been to me; neither the great happiness I feel
in the friendship of your majesty, for which I render you many thanks,
desiring the continuance of your majesty's love and correspondence. I am
heartily glad at the safe arrival of your subjects at my small island,
after so long a voyage. They shall not lack my help and furtherance to
the utmost, for effecting their so worthy and laudable purposes, of
discovery and commerce, referring for the entertainment they have
received to the report of your servant, by whom I send to your majesty
an unworthy token of my gratitude; wishing your majesty long life. Given
from my residence of Firando, the sixth day of the tenth month. _Your
majesty's loving friend, commander of this island of Firando in Japan,

FOYNE SAM-MASAM."_

My interpreters could not well pronounce his name, Lanching saying it
was _Foyne Foshin Sam_, while Lackmoy said it was written as above. This
comes to pass by reason of the Chinese characters, which, in proper
names, borrow the characters of other words, of the same or nearest
sound, and thereby occasion frequent mistakes.

The 22d, such houses as had escaped in the former fire of the 16th, were
now burnt down; yet the English and Dutch houses escaped, for which we
were thankful to God. On the 26th, a Dutch ship of 1000 tons arrived
from Holland, called the Flushing. At the island of Mayo, the company
mutinied against the captain, whom they would have murdered in his
cabin, had it not pleased God that a Scotsman revealed the plot when the
mutineers were already armed to carry it into effect, so that they were
taken between decks with their weapons in their hands. In this ship
there were several English and Scots soldiers. She did not remain at
Bantam, but sailed towards evening for Jacatra.

The 27th, our lading being fully procured, and several of our company
fallen sick, I went ashore to hasten our merchants to get us ready for
sailing. The 1st February, the Darling was forced back to Bantam; and
order was taken by mutual consultation for the proper care of her goods,
and for her immediate departure for _Succadanea_ in the island of
Borneo, and thence to Patane and Siam.

The 13th of February we got out from the straits of Sunda, in which the
tide of flood sets twelve hours to the eastwards, and the ebb twelve
hours to the westwards. On the 16th of May we anchored in the bay of
Saldanha, where we found the Concord of London, being the first ship set
out by the united company. We now found the natives of this place very
treacherous, making us to understand by signs; that two of their people
had been forcibly carried off. They had sore wounded one of the people
belonging to the Concord; and while we were up in the land, they
assaulted the people who were left in charge of our skiff, carried away
our grapnel, and had spoiled the boat-keepers if they had not pushed off
into deep water. The 19th a Dutch ship arrived bound for Bantam, the
master being Cornelius van Harte.

We remained here twenty-three days, where we thoroughly refreshed the
ship's company, and took away with us alive fourteen oxen and seventy
sheep, besides good store of fish and beef, which we _powdered_ there,
finding it to take salt well, contrary to former reports. For ten days
after leaving Saldanha, we had the wind N.W. and W.N.W. but after that
we had a fine wind at S.W. so that we could hold our course N.W. On the
27th September, thanks be to God, we arrived at Plymouth; where, for the
space of five or six weeks, we endured more tempestuous weather, and
were in greater danger of our lives, than during the whole voyage
besides.

Sec.13. _Intelligence concerning Yedzo, or Jesso, received from a Japanese
at Jedo, who had been twice there_.[46]

Yedzo, or Jesso, is an island to the N.W. of Japan, from which it is ten
leagues distant. The natives are of white complexions, and
well-conditioned, but have their bodies covered all over with hair like
monkies. Their weapons are bows and poisoned arrows. The inhabitants of
the south extremity of this country understand the use of weights and
measures; but those who inhabit the inland country, at the distance of
thirty days journey, are ignorant of these things. They have much silver
and gold-dust, in which they make payment to the Japanese for rice and
other commodities; rice and cotton-cloth being of ready sale among them,
as likewise iron and lead, which are carried there from Japan. Food and
cloathing are the most vendible commodities among the natives of that
country, and sell to such advantage, that rice often yields a profit of
four for one.

[Footnote 46: This article is appended to the Voyage of Saris, in the
Pilgrims, vol. I. p. 384.--E.]

The town where the Japanese have their chief residence and mart in
Yetizo is called _Matchma_,[47] in which there are 500 households or
families of Japanese. They have likewise a fort here, called
_Matchma-donna_. This town is the principal mart of Yedzo, to which the
natives resort to buy and sell, especially in September, when they make
provision against winter. In March they bring down salmon and dried fish
of sundry kinds, with other wares, for which the Japanese barter in
preference even to silver. The Japanese have no other settled residence
or place of trade except this at Matchma [48]. Farther northward in
Yedzo there are people of a low stature like dwarfs.[49] The other
natives of Yedzo are of good stature like the Japanese, and have no
other cloathing but what is brought them from Japan. There is a violent
current in the straits between Yedzo and Japan, which comes from the sea
of Corea, and sets E.N.E. The winds there are for the most part like
those usual in Japan; the northerly winds beginning in September, and
ending in March, when the southerly winds begin to blow.

[Footnote 47: In modern maps, the southern peninsula of Yesso, or Yedso,
is named _Matsaki_, apparently the same name with that in the text.--E.]

[Footnote 48: In our more modern maps, there are four other towns or
residences on the western coast of the peninsula of Matsaki, named
Jemasina, Sirekosawa, Famomoli, and Aria.--E.]

[Footnote 49: The island of Kubito-sima, off the western coast of Yedzo,
is called likewise in our maps, the Isle of Pigmies.--E.]

Sec.14. _Note of Commodities vendible in Japan_.[50]

Broad-cloths of all sorts, as black, yellow, and red, which cost in
Holland eight or nine gilders the Flemish ell, two ells and three
quarters, are worth in Japan, three, four, to five hundred.[51] Cloth of
a high wool is not in request, but such as is low shorn is most
vendible. Fine _bayes_ of the before-mentioned colours are saleable, if
well cottoned, but not such as those of Portugal. Sayes, _rashes_,
single and double bouratts, silk grograms, Turkey grograms; camblets,
_Divo Gekepert, Weersetynen, Caniaut, Gewart twijne_;[52] velvets, musk,
sold weight for weight of silver; India cloths of all sorts are in
request; satins, taffetas, damasks, Holland linen from fifteen to twenty
stivers the Flemish ell, but not higher priced; diaper, damasks, and so
much the better if wrought with figures or branches; thread of all
colours; carpets, for tables; gilded leather, painted with figures and
flowers, but the smallest are in best demand; painted pictures, the
Japanese delighting in lascivious representations, and stories of wars
by sea or land, the larger the better worth, sell for one, two, or three
hundred. Quick-silver, the hundred cattees sell from three to four
hundred.

[Footnote 50: This forms a part of the Appendix to the Voyage of Saris,
Purch. Pilg. I. 394; where it is joined to the end of observations by
the same author on the trade of Bantam, formerly inserted in this
Collection under their proper date.--E.]

[Footnote 51: This account is very vaguely expressed; but in the title
in the Pilgrims, the sales are stated to be in _masses_ and
_canderines_, each canderine being the tenth part of a masse. The
information contained in this short subdivision is hardly intelligible,
yet is left, as it may possibly be of some use towards reviving the
trade of Japan, now that the Dutch are entirely deprived of their
eastern possessions.--E.]

[Footnote 52: These articles, in italics, are unknown.]

The hundred cattees of vermilion are worth from three to six hundred.
Paint for women's faces, the hundred cattees are worth twenty-eight.
Cooper in plates, 125 Flemish pounds are worth from 90 to 100. Lead in
small bars, the 100 cattees from 60 to 88. Lead in sheets is in greater
request, the thinner the better, and 100 pounds Flemish sell for 80.
Fine tin, in logs or bars, 120 pounds Flemish bring 350. Iron, twenty
five Dutch ounces worth four. Steel, the 100 cattees, worth from one to
two hundred. Tapestry. Civet, the cattee worth from 150 to 200. China
root, the 100 cattees or pekul worth 40. China sewing gold, the paper
worth three masse three. Powdered Chinese sugar, the 100 cattees or
pekul worth forty to fifty. Sugar-candy, the pekul or 100 cattees, from
fifty to sixty. Velvets, of all colours, eight ells the piece, from 120
to 130. Wrought velvets, from 180 to 200. Taffetas of all colours, and
good silk, worth, the piece, from twenty-four to thirty or forty. Satin,
seven or eight ells long, the piece worth from 80 to 100. Figured satin,
from 120 to 150. _Gazen_, of seven pikes or ells, from forty to fifty.
Raw silk, the cattee of twelve pounds Flemish, from thirty to forty.
Untwisted silk, the weight of twenty-eight pounds Flemish, from thirty
to forty. Twisted silk, from twenty-eight to forty.

Drinking-glasses of all sorts, bottles, canns, cups, trenchers, plates,
beer-glasses, salt-sellers, wine-glasses, beakers, gilt looking-glasses
of large size, _Muscovy glass_, salt, writing-papers, table-books,
paper-books, _lead to neal_ pots. Spanish soap is in much request, and
sells for one masse the small cake. Amber beads, worth 140 to 160. Silk
stockings, of all colours. Spanish leather, neats leather, and other
kinds of leather used for gloves, worth six, eight, or nine. Blue
_candiques_ of China, from fifteen to twenty. Black _candiques_, from
ten to fifteen. Wax for candles, 100 pounds Flemish worth from 200 to
250. Honey, the pekul, worth sixty. _Samell_ of Cochin-China, the pekul,
worth 180. Nutmegs, the pekul, twenty-five. Camphor of Borneo, or
_barous, the pound hollans_, from 250 to 400. Sanders of _Solier_, the
pekul, worth 100. Good and heavy Callomback wood, the pound, worth one,
two, three, to five. Sapan, or red wood, the pekul, from twenty to
twenty-six. Good and large elephants teeth, from 400, to 500, 600, 700,
and even 800. Rhinoceros horns, the Javan cattee, worth thirty. Gilded
harts-horns, the piece, worth 300, 400, 500. Roch allum in request, in
so much that what cost only three gilders has sold for 100 gilders; but
not in demand by every one.

The Chinese in Japan will commonly truck for silver, giving gold of
twenty-three carats, at the rate of from fifteen to twenty times its
weight in silver, according as silver is plenty or scarce.

The following commodities are to be bought in Japan, and at the rates
here quoted. Very good hemp, 100 cattees, being 120 pounds of Holland,
are worth from sixty-five to seventy. _Eye-colours_ for dying blue,
almost as good as indigo, made up in round cakes, and packed 100 cakes
in a fardel, worth fifty to sixty. Dye-stuff for white, turning to red
colour, made up in fardels of fifty _gautins malios_, worth five to
eight. Very good white rice, cased, worth, the _fares_, eight
three-fifths. Rice of a worse sort, the bale, worth seven three-tenths.
At Jedo, Osaka, and Miaco, there is the best dying of all sorts of
colours, as red, black, and green; and for gliding gold and silver, is
better than the Chinese varnish. Brimstone is in great abundance, and
the pekul may be bought for seven. Saltpetre is dearer in one place than
another, being worth one and a half. Cotton-wool, the pekul, may be
bought for ten.

Sec.15. _Supplementary Notices of Occurrences in Japan, after the Departure
of Captain Saris_.[53]

"This subdivision consists entirely of letters from Japan, and conveys
some curious information respecting the transactions of the English in
Japan, whence they have been long excluded. They are now perhaps of some
interest, beyond the mere gratification of curiosity, as, by the entire
expulsion of the Dutch from India, there seems a possibility of the
British merchants in India being able to restore trade to that distant
country. In the _Third_ PART of our Collection, various other relations
of Japan will be inserted."--E.

[Footnote 53: These are appended in the Pilgrims, vol. I. pp. 406--413,
to the observations of Mr. Richard Cocks, already given in conjunction
with the voyage of Captain Saris.--E.]

No. I. _Letter from Mr Richard Cocks, dated Firando, 10th December,
1614_.[54]

To this day, I have been unable to complete my old books of accounts,
owing to the dispatching of our people, some to one place and some to
another, and owing to the rebuilding of our house, and afterwards buying
a junk, and repairing her. She is now ready to set sail for Siam, having
been at anchor these ten days, waiting for a fair wind to proceed on her
voyage, at _Couchi_, a league from Firando, where your ship rode at your
departure from hence. She is called the Sea-Adventure, of about 200 tons
burden, in which Mr Adams goes as master, with Mr Wickham and Mr Edward
Sayers as merchants, in consequence of the death of Mr Peacock, slain in
Cochin-China, and the probability that Mr Carwarden has been cast away
in his return from thence, as we have no news of him or of the junk in
which he sailed, as I have at large informed the worshipful company.

[Footnote 54: This letter appears to have been written to Captain
Saris.--E.]

Since your departure from Japan, the emperor has banished all jesuits,
priests, nuns, and friars, from the country, shipping them off for
_Anacau_ [Macao] in China, or Manilla in the Philippine islands, and has
caused all their churches and monasteries to be pulled down or burnt.
_Foyne Same_, the old king of Firando, is dead, and _Ushiandono_, his
governor, with two other servants, cut open their bellies to bear him
company, their bodies being burned, and their ashes entombed along with
his. Wars are likely to ensue between _Ogusho Same_, the old emperor,
and _Fidaia Same_, the young prince, son of _Tico Same_, who has
strongly fortified himself in the castle of _Osaka_, having collected an
army of 80,000 or 100,000 men, consisting of malcontents, runaways, and
banished people, who have repaired from all parts to his standard, and
he is said to have collected sufficient provisions for three years. The
old emperor has marched against him in person, with an army of 300,000
men, and is at the castle of _Fusima_. The advanced parties of the two
armies have already had several skirmishes, and many have been slain on
both sides. The entire city of Osaka has been burned to the ground,
excepting only the castle, so that Mr Eaton had to retire with his goods
to _Sakey_,[55] yet not without danger, as a part of that town has
likewise been burnt. So great a tempest or tuffoon has lately occurred
at _Edoo_ [Jedo,] as had never been before experienced at that place.
The sea overflowed the whole city, obliging the people to take refuge on
the hills: and the prodigious inundation has defaced or thrown down all
the houses of the nobles, which you know were very beautiful and
magnificent.

[Footnote 55: It has been formerly explained that _Sakey_ was a town on
the river Jodo, directly opposite to Osakey or Osaka, the river only
being interposed.--E.]

Let this suffice for Japanese news; and I now proceed to inform you of
our success in selling our goods. The emperor took all our ordnance,
with most of our lead, and ten barrels of gunpowder, with two or three
pieces of broad-cloth. Most of our other broad-cloths are sold, namely,
black, hair-colour, and cinnamon-colour, at fifteen, fourteen, thirteen,
and twelve tayes the _tattamy_; but they will not even look at
Venice-reds and flame-colours, neither are _stammels_ in such request as
formerly, but they enquire much for whites and yellows. As the Dutch
sold most of their broad-cloths at low prices, we were forced to do so
likewise. In regard to our Cambaya goods, they will not look at our _red
Zelas_, blue _byrams_, or _dutties_, being the principal part of what is
now left us; and only some white bastas sell at fourteen or fifteen
masses each. _Cassedys nill, alleias_, broad _pintados_, with spotted,
striped, and checquered stuffs, are most in request, and sell at good
profit. We have also sold nearly half of our Bantam pepper for
sixty-five _masse_ the _pekull_, and all the rest had been gone before
now, had it not been for the war. I am in great hope of procuring trade
into China, through the means of Andrea, the China captain, and his two
brothers, who have undertaken the matter, and have no doubt of being
able to bring it to bear, for three ships to come yearly to a place near
_Lanquin_,[56] to which we may go from hence in three or four days with
a fair wind. Of this I have written at large to the worshipful company,
and also to the lord-treasurer.

[Footnote 56: As Nangasaki is uniformly named _Langasaque_ in this first
English voyage to Japan, I am apt to suspect the _Lanquin_ of the text
may have been Nan-kin.--E.]

Some little sickness with which I have been afflicted is now gone, for
which I thank God. Mr Easton, Mr Nealson, Mr Wickham, and Mr Sayer, have
all been very sick, but are all now well recovered, except Mr Eaton, who
still labours under flux and tertian ague. May God restore his health,
for I cannot too much praise his diligence and pains in the affairs of
the worshipful company. Jacob Speck, who was thought to have been cast
away in a voyage from hence to the Moluccas, is now returned to Firando
in the command of a great ship called the Zelandia, together with a
small pinnace called the Jacatra. The cause of his being so long missing
was, that in going from hence by the eastward of the Philippines, the
way we came, he was unable to fetch the Moluccas, owing to currents and
contrary winds, and was driven to the west of the island of Celebes, and
so passed round it through the straits of Desalon, and back to the
Moluccas. The Chinese complain much against the Hollanders for robbing
and pilfering their junks, of which they are said to have taken and
rifled seven. The emperor of Japan has taken some displeasure against
the Hollanders, having refused a present they lately sent him, and would
not even speak to those who brought it. He did the same in regard to a
present sent by the Portuguese, which came in a great ship from Macao to
Nangasaki. You thought, when here, that if any other ship came from
England we might continue to sell our goods without sending another
present to the emperor; but I now find that every ship which comes to
Japan must send a present to the emperor, as an established custom. I
find likewise that we cannot send away any junk from hence without
procuring the yearly licence from the emperor, as otherwise no Japanese
mariner dare to leave the country, under pain of death. Our own ships
from England may, however, come in and go out again when they please,
and no one to gainsay them.

We have not as yet been able by any means to procure trade from _Tushma_
into Corea; neither indeed have the inhabitants of Tushma any farther
privilege than to frequent one small town or fortress, and must not on
pain of death go beyond the walls of that place. Yet the king of Tushma
is not subject to the emperor of Japan.[57] We have only been able to
sell some pepper at Tushma, and no great quantity of that. The weight
there is much heavier than in Japan, but the price is proportionally
higher.

[Footnote 57: No place or island of any name resembling _Tushma_ is to
be found in our best maps. The name in the text probably refers to
_Tausima_, called an some maps _Jasus_, an island about forty miles
long, about midway between Kiusiu and Corea.--E.]

I have been given to understand that there are no great cities in the
interior of Corea, between which inland country and the sea there are
immense bogs or morasses, so that no one can travel on horseback, and
hardly even a-foot; and as a remedy against this, they have great
waggons or carts upon broad flat wheels, which are moved by means of
sails like ships. Thus, by observing the monsoons or periodical winds,
they transport their goods backwards and forwards, by means of these
sailing waggons. In that country they make damasks, sattins, taffaties,
and other silk stuffs, as well as in China.

It is said that _Fico Same_, otherwise called _Quabicondono_, the former
emperor of Japan, pretended to have conveyed a great army in these
sailing waggons, to make a sudden assault upon the emperor of China in
his great city of Pekin, where he ordinarily resides; but was prevented
by a nobleman of Corea, who poisoned himself to poison the emperor and
many of the nobles of Japan. On which occasion, as is said, the Japanese
lost, about twenty-two years ago, all that they had conquered in Corea.

James Turner, the youth who used to play the fiddle, left a girl here
with child; and though I gave her two tayes in silver to bring up the
child; she killed it as soon as it was born, which is a common thing in
this country. The whistle and chain belonging to Mr Foster, the master
of the Clove, are found, and are under the charge of Mr Adams, who will
be accountable for them. I meant to have sent you a Japanese almanack by
a former letter to the same effect as this, dated the 25th _ultimo_, and
sent by the Sea Adventure by way of Siam, but forgot to do so; and which
I now send along with this letter. I pray you that this letter may
suffice for your brother, Mr George Saris, and the rest of my loving
friends: And, with hearty commendations in general, I leave you all to
the holy protection of the Almighty; resting always your ever loving
friend at command, RICHARD COCKS.


_No. 2. Letter from Mr Richard Cocks, dated Firando, 10th December,
1614, to the Worshipful Thomas Wilson, Esq. at his House in the
Britain-burse[58] in the Strand._

[Footnote 58: Perhaps that now called Exeter Change.--E.]

My last to you was of the 1st December, 1613, from this island of
Firando in Japan, and sent by Captain John Saris in the ship Clove. In
that letter, I advised you how unkindly the Hollanders dealt with us at
the Moluccas; since which time there has not occurred any matter of
moment to communicate, except what I have detailed in another letter to
my good Lord Treasurer. It is given out here by the Hollanders, that our
East India Company and that of Holland are likely to join into one; and
if this prove true, it is thought it will be an easy matter to drive the
Spaniards and Portuguese out of these eastern parts of the world, or
else to cut them off from all trade. You would hardly believe how much
the Hollanders have already daunted the Portuguese and Spaniards in
these parts, especially in the Moluccas, where they daily encroach on
the Spaniards, who are unable to withstand them, and are even in fear
that they may shortly deprive them of the Philippine islands. The
Portuguese also are in great fear of being driven by them out of the
trade they now carry on from Ormus to Goa, and with Malacca and Macao in
China.

There is one thing of which I cannot yet conceive the issue, and that is
the robbing and plundering the Chinese junks, which is daily done by the
Hollanders in these parts, the goods whereof must amount to great value,
and suffice to fit out and maintain a great fleet, which is worthy of
consideration. Should the emperor of Japan fall out with the Hollanders,
and debar them from the trade of his dominions, which is not unlikely,
the Hollanders will then make prize of the Japanese junks as well as of
those of China; for their strength at sea in these parts is sufficient
to do what they please, if only they had a place to retire to for
revictualling and refitting their ships; for they are of late grown so
stout, that they mock at those who were formerly their masters and
teachers. It is very certain that they have got possession of several
fortresses at the Moluccas and other parts; yet, to my certain
knowledge, the natives in these parts are more inclined towards the
Spaniards, although at the first they were glad of the arrival of the
Hollanders, having been disgusted by the intolerable pride of the
Spaniards. But now they have time to reflect, that the Spaniards brought
them abundance of money, and were liberal though proud; while the poor
Hollanders, who serve there both by sea and land, have such bare pay,
that it can hardly supply clothes and food; and their commanders
allege, that all the benefits derived from conquest or reprisals, belong
to the states and the _Winthebbers_, as they call them. It is hard to
judge how all these things may end.

Were it not for the misbehaviour of the Hollanders, I am of opinion that
we should procure trade with China, as we only demand leave for three
ships to come and go there, and merely to establish factors there to
transact our business, without bringing any Jesuits or _padres_, whom
the Chinese cannot abide to hear of, because they came formerly in such
great numbers to inhabit the land, and were always begging and craving,
to the great displeasure of the pagans. I am however in good hope of
success, as our English nation has acquired a good fame and character
since our arrival, which I am given to understand has come to the ears
of the emperor of China, who has heard how we have been received by the
emperor of Japan, having large privileges allowed us, and also that we
have at all times held the Castilians in defiance both by sea and land.
I have been informed of these things by the Chinese who come hither, and
that the emperor and other great men of China delight to hear accounts
of our nation. I had almost forgotten to mention, that some China
merchants lately asked me, if we were allowed to trade with China,
whether the king of England would prevent the Hollanders from robbing
and spoiling their junks? Which question was rather doubtful to me, yet
I answered that his majesty would take measures to prevent the
Hollanders from injuring them.

We have lately had news that a tuffon or tempest has done vast injury at
Jedo, a city of Japan as large as London, where the Japanese nobility
have very beautiful houses, now mostly destroyed or greatly injured. The
whole city was inundated, and the inhabitants forced to take shelter in
the hills; a thing never before heard of. The palace of the king, which
is a stately building in a new fortress, has had all its gilded tiles
carried away by a whirlwind, so that none of them could be found. The
pagans attribute this calamity to some charms or conjurations of the
Jesuits, who were lately banished: but the Japanese converts to popery
ascribe it to the vengeance of God, as a punishment for having banished
these holy men.

We have lately had a great disaster in Cochin-China, to which place we
sent a quantity of goods and money, to the value of L730, as it cost in
England, under the care of Mr Tempest Peacock and Mr Walter Carwarden,
who went as merchants in a Japanese junk, carrying our king's letters
and a handsome present for the king of Cochin-China. They arrived at the
port called _Quinham_,[59] delivered his majesty's letters and present,
and were entertained with kind words and fair promises. The Hollanders,
seeing that we adventured to that country, would needs do the same, and
were at first kindly entertained; but in the end, Mr Peacock and the
chief Dutch merchant going ashore one day in the same boat, to receive
payment from the king for broad-cloth and other commodities they had
sold him, they were treacherously assailed on the water, their boat
overset, and both were killed in the water with harpoons, as if they had
been fishes, together with their interpreters and other attendants, who
were Japanese. Mr Carwarden being aboard our junk escaped sharing in
this massacre, and came away, but neither he nor the junk have ever been
since heard of, so that we fear he has been cast away.

[Footnote 59: _Turon_ is the port of Cochin-China in the present time,
and _Quinham_ is unknown in modern geography; perhaps the old name of
some island or village at the port or bay of Turon.--E.]

It is commonly reported here, both among the Chinese and Japanese, that
this was done by order of the king of Cochin-China in revenge against
the Hollanders, who had burnt one of his towns, and had slaughtered his
people most unmercifully. The origin of this quarrel was occasioned by a
large quantity of false dollars, sent to _Quinham_ by the Hollanders
some years ago, and put off in payment for silks and other Chinese
goods, to the great injury of the merchants of that country. When the
falsehood of the money was discovered, they laid hands upon the Dutch
factors, and are said to have put some of them to death. Upon this the
Dutch ships came upon the coast, and landed a body of men, who burnt a
town, putting man, woman, and child to the sword. This, as reported, was
the occasion of our present mischance, and of the slaughter of Mr
Peacock, because he was in company with the Hollanders. Along with this
letter, I send you a Japanese almanack, by which you will see the manner
of their printing, with their figures and characters. And so I leave you
to the holy protection of the Almighty, resting always, &c.

RICHARD COCKS.



No. 3. _Letter from Edmond Sayer, dated Firando, 5th December, 1615. But
having no Address_.

I received a letter from you by the hands of Captain Copendall of the
Horiander, who arrived here on the 29th of August this year, by which I
learnt your safe arrival at the Cape of Good Hope, homewards bound, and
of the loss of some of your company; and I make no doubt that, long ere
now, you are safe arrived in England, by the blessing of God. I sent you
a letter, dated in November, 1614, by the Dutch ship called the Old
Zealand, in which I informed you of the death of Mr Peacock and Walter
Carwarden, both betrayed in Cochin-China, to our great grief, besides
the loss of goods to the company.

The last year, Mr Wickham, Mr Adams, and I, when bound for Siam in a
junk we had bought, and meeting with great storms, our vessel sprung a
leak, and we were fain to bear up for the _Leukes_[60] islands, where we
had to remain so long, before we could stop our leaks, that we lost the
monsoon, and had to return here. We have fitted her out again this year,
and are now ready to sail again for Siam. My greatest hope in these
parts is, that we shall be able to establish trade with China, of which
we seem to have a fair prospect through the efforts of the China captain
and his brothers; and I make no doubt that we shall have a factory there
ere long.

[Footnote 60: The Liqueo islands are here obviously meant, a group to
the south of the south-western extremity of Japan, in 28 deg. N. and long.
129 deg. 30' W. from Greenwich; such being the latitude and longitude of the
centre of the great Liqueo, the principal island of the group.--E.]

This last summer we have had great troubles, in consequence of war
between the emperor and _Fidaia Same_, and we do not certainly know
whether the latter be slain or fled; but the emperor gained the victory,
with a vast loss of men on both sides.[61] Having no other news to
write, I commit you to the protection of the Almighty, and am, &c.
EDMOND SAYER.

[Footnote 61: In the text of the Pilgrims, this loss is estimated at
400,000, and in a marginal note at 40,000, both in words at length; for
which reason the number is omitted in the text.--E.]

No. 4. _Letter, with no address, from Edmond Sayer, dated Firando, 4th
December, 1616._

Worshipful Sir,--My duty always remembered. Having a favourable
opportunity, I could not omit to trouble you with a few lines. I am but
newly arrived here in Firando from a difficult and tedious voyage to
Siam, to which country we went in a junk belonging to the right
honourable company, in which Mr Adams was master, and myself factor.
Having bought there more goods than our own junk could carry, we
freighted another junk for Japan, in which Mr Benjamin Fry, the chief in
the factory at Siam, thought it proper for me to embark, for the safety
of the goods. The year being far spent, we were from the 1st June to the
17th September in our voyage between Siam and _Shachmar_, during which
we experienced many storms and much foul weather, and lost twenty of our
men by sickness and want of fresh water. The great cause of our tedious
and unfortunate voyage was in our not having a good pilot. The one we
had was a Chinese, who knew nothing of navigation; for, when out of
sight of land, he knew not where he was, nor what course to steer.
Besides he fell sick, and was unable to creep out of his cabin, so that
I was obliged to do my best to navigate our junk; which, with what small
skill I possessed, and by the aid of God, I brought safe to _Shachmar_,
where we arrived on the 17th of September, having then only five men
able to stand on their legs. In consequence, I arrived so late at
Firando that I could not go this year to Siam. But Mr William Eaton has
gone there in the company's junk, having two English pilots, named.
Robert and John Surges.--I am, &c. EDMOND SAYER.


_No. 5. Letter from Richard Cocks to Captain John Saris, dated Firando,
15th February, 1617.[62]_

[Footnote 62: Perhaps the date of this letter, according to modern
computation, ought to have been 1618, as in those days the year did not
begin till Lady-day, the 25th March.--E.]

My last letter to you was dated 5th January, 1616, and sent by way of
Bantam in the ship Thomas, which went from hence that year along with
another small ship called the Advice. In that letter I wrote you at
large of all things that had then occurred, and mentioned having
received two of your letters from London; one dated 4th November, 1614,
and the other 15th August, 1615. The Advice has since returned to
Japan, and arrived at Firando on the 2d of August last, and by her I had
a letter from the honourable company, dated 30th January, 1616.

You will perhaps have heard that Captain Barkeley, while on his
death-bed, narrowly escaped losing 6000 dollars, paid out for custom on
pepper; for, if he had died before it was found out, perhaps some other
man might have taken credit for paying that sum. It is a common saying,
that it is easy for those who live at Bantam to grow rich, as _no man
dies _without an heir_. We have been again this year before the emperor
of Japan, but could not procure our privileges to be enlarged, having
still only leave to carry on trade at Firando and Nangasaki, and our
ships to come only to Firando.

Mr Edmond Sayer went last year to Cochin-China with a cargo amounting to
about 1800 tayes, in goods and money; and when ready to cone away, was
defrauded of 650 tayes, by a Chinese and others, of whom he had bought
silk for the worshipful company. He had weighed out the money, waiting
to receive the silk, and the money lay in the room where he sat; but
some of the thievish people made a hole through the cane-wall of the
room, and stole away the money unperceived. I am sorry for this
mischance; but Mr Sayer is in hopes to recover it this year, as he left
a person to follow out the suit, and goes back himself in a Chinese
junk, with 2000 tayes in silver to purchase silk. He is to be
accompanied by one Robert Hawley, as his assistant and successor, in
case be should die, and Mr William Adams goes pilot, in place of the
Chinese. God send them a prosperous voyage, and that they may recover
the lost money. Our own junk, the Sea Adventure, made another voyage
last year to Siam, Mr William Eaton being merchant; and has gone back
again this year. God send them a prosperous voyage.

Last year, the Hollanders sent a fleet of ships from the Moluccas to
Manilla, to fight the Spanish fleet: But the Spaniards kept safe in port
for five or six months, so that the Hollanders concluded they durst not
come out at all, and therefore separated to look out for Chinese junks,
of which some say they took and plundered twenty-five, while others say
thirty-five. It is certain that they took great riches, and all under
the assumed name of Englishmen. At length the Spanish fleet put to sea,
and set upon five or six of the Dutch ships, the admiral of which was
burnt and sank, together with two other ships, the rest escaping. The
Spaniards then separated their fleet, to seek out the remaining Dutch
ships. The Spanish vice-admiral fell in with two Dutch ships one morning
and fought them both all day; but was at length constrained to run his
ship ashore and set her on fire, that she might not be taken by the
Hollanders. These two Dutch ships, and one that was in the former fight,
came afterwards to Firando, together with two other large Dutch ships
from Bantam, as big as the Clove, intending to have intercepted the
Macao ship, which they narrowly missed. Thus five great Holland ships
came this year to Firando, the smallest of them being as large as the
Clove. One of these, called the Red Lion, which was she that rode beside
us at the Moluccas, was cast away in a storm at Firando, together with a
Chinese junk they brought in as a prize. All the goods were recovered,
but were all wet. The emperor allows them to make good prize of all they
take.

The Black Lion, one of their ships, of 900 tons burden, was sent away
for Bantam, fully laden with raw silk and other rich Chinese
commodities. Another, called the Flushing, of 700 or 800 tons, is gone
for the Moluccas, fully laden with provisions and money. The Sun, a ship
of 600 or 700 tons, with a galliass of above 400 tons, are left to scour
the coast of China, to make what booty they can, and to return next
monsoon. The galliass has sailed already, but the Sun waits for the
Macao ship departing from Nangasaki, that she may endeavour to take her.
The Macao ship had actually sailed, but seeing the galliass, she
returned to Nangasaki, and will, as I think, hardly venture to sail this
year. As I said before, the Dutch have always robbed the Chinese under
the name of Englishmen, which has greatly injured our endeavours to
procure trade in that country; so that we have been obliged to send
people to give notice to the Chinese governors, that they were
Hollanders who have taken and plundered their junks, and not Englishmen.
In fine, I have advised the worshipful company at large of every thing
of moment, which I doubt not will be communicated to you. I send you
here inclosed a copy of my last year's letter; and so, committing you to
God, I rest your loving friend at command,

RICHARD COCKS.


No. 6. _Extract of a Letter from Richard Cocks, without Date or
Address_.

There came two friars in that ship as ambassadors from the viceroy of
New Spain, with a present for the emperor; but he would neither receive
the present, nor speak with them that brought it, even sending Mr Adams
to order them to quit his dominions, as he had formerly banished all men
of their cloth, and continued still in the same mind. It is said that
_Fidaia Same_ had promised to receive the jesuits again into Japan, if
he had got the victory and been settled in the empire. Had this taken
effect, we and the Hollanders had doubtless been turned out of Japan, so
that it is better as it is.

Last year, when we fitted out our junk, we employed a Spaniard, called
Damian Marina, the same person who thought to have gone with you in
company with George Peterson. This Damian was a good helmsman, and was
therefore employed by us, and another Spaniard, named Juan de Lievana,
went with them as passenger. The junk however lost her voyage, and they
returned to Nangasaki, where the carrak of Macao soon afterwards
arrived. Understanding that these two Spaniards had gone in our vessel,
the Portuguese arrested them and put them in irons in their ship,
condemning them to death as traitors to their king and country, for
serving their English enemies. I took their defence in hand, and
procured an order from the emperor to set them at liberty, to the great
displeasure of the Spaniards and Portuguese; and these two men are going
passengers to Bantam in the Hosiander.

We have had great troubles in Japan, in consequence of the wars, by
transporting our goods from place to place, to save them. Mr Adams is
gone again in the junk for Siam, accompanied only by Mr Edmond Sayer. Mr
Nealson is very sick; but Mr Wickham and Mr Eaton are both well. I long
to hear from you, and I pray you to deliver the inclosed to my brother.
Yours, most assured at command,

RICHARD COCKS.


No. 7. _Letter from Richard Cocks, without Address, dated Firando, 10th
March, 1620_.[63]

[Footnote 63: In the Pilgrims, the date of this letter is made 1610,
evidently by error of the press; and, as observed of No. 5, the real
date, according to modern computation, ought to be 1621. The
introductory paragraph is a note by Purchas, distinguished by inverted
commas, retained as a curious specimen of his mode of writing.--E.]

"Hollanders abuses of the English in those parts, are here published
for knowledge of these eastern affairs and occurrents, as it is meet in
a history. But neither were these national, but personal crimes, and
done in time and place of pretended hostility; and now, I hope,
satisfaction is or shall be made. Neighbourhood of region, religion, and
customs, are easily violated by drink, covetousness, and pride, the
three furies that raised these combustions. This history hath related
the worth of many worthy Hollanders: If it yields a close-stool for
Westarwood, as excrements rather than true Dutch, or a grain-tub or
swill-tub for some brave brewers and bores, that embrued with nobler
blood than themselves, prefer their brutish passions to God's glory,
religion, and public peace let it be no imputation to the nation, which
I love and honour, but to such baser spirits as have [like scorbutical
humours in these long voyages, and their longer peace and want of wonted
employments,] been bred as diseases to their, and infections to our
bodies. My intent is to present others with their acts, and myself with
prayers, that all may be amended."--_Purchas_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now almost three years since I wrote your worship any letter. The
purpose of this is to inform you of the unlooked for and unruly
proceedings of the Hollanders against our English nation, in all these
parts of the world, not sparing us even in this empire of Japan,
contrary to the large privileges granted to us by the emperor, that the
Japanese should not meddle with or molest us. But these Hollanders,
having this year seven ships great and small in this port of Firando,
have, with sound of trumpet, proclaimed open war against our English
nation, both by sea and land, threatening to take our ships and goods,
and to kill our persons, as their mortal enemies. This was done by one
Adam Westarwood, their admiral or lord-commander, as they call him, and
was openly proclaimed aboard all their ships. They have even come to
brave us before our own doors, picking quarrels with us, and forcibly
entering our house, thinking to have cut all our throats, yet only
wounded two persons; and, had it not been for the assistance of the
Japanese our neighbours, who took our parts, they had assuredly slain us
all, as there were an hundred Hollanders to one Englishman. Not
contented with this, they took our boat when going about our business,
in which was one Englishman, whom they carried prisoner to their house,
threatening to put him to death; and indeed he was in imminent danger,
among a crowd of drunken fellows, who threatened to stab him with their
knives. This young man was Richard King, son to Captain King of
Plymouth. Besides this, as two of our barks were passing their ships,
within the town and harbour of Firando, they pointed a cannon at them,
which missed fire, yet shot at them with muskets, which missed the
Englishmen and killed a Japanese. For all this there is no justice
executed against them by the king of Firando, though he has received the
commands of the emperor to that effect.

Yon will also please to understand, that two of these ships which they
have brought to Firando are English ships, taken by them from Englishmen
in the Indies. They also took two other ships from us, which were riding
at anchor in the road of Patania, where we have a factory, and had not
the least suspicion of any such event. In this unwarrantable affair,
they killed Captain John Jordaine,[64] our chief president for the right
worshipful company in the Indies. Several others were then slain, and
the Hollanders carried the ships and goods away; but six of the
mariners, which were in these captured English ships, escaped from them
here at Firando, and came to our house. The Hollanders sent to me,
demanding to have these men given up to them. But I answered, that I
must first see their commission, that I might know by what authority
they presumed to take our ships and goods, and to slay our men, the
faithful subjects of his majesty. Upon this, they went to the _Tono_, or
king of Firando, desiring to have their _English slaves_,[65] as they
were pleased to call our men, delivered up to them. But they were told,
that they must first demand of the emperor, and whatever he ordained
should be obeyed; but that, in the meantime, he did not consider the
English to be their slaves. This was the grand occasion on which they
grounded their quarrel against us, and meant to have killed us all. But
I trust in God and his majesty, by the solicitations of our right
honourable and right worshipful employers, that his majesty will not
suffer his true and loyal subjects to lose their lives, ships, and goods
by this thievish and unthankful rabble, who are assembled in these parts
of the world, and who make a daily practice to rob and steal from all,
whether friends or foes: And I trust that you will become a solicitor in
this so just cause, against so inveterate an enemy.

[Footnote 64: This Captain Jordaine is said to have been treacherously
slain in the time of a treaty--_Purch._]

[Footnote 65: And who was the happy instrument of their own delivery,
from what they accounted slavery, but the English nation?--_Purch._]

This Adam Westarwood, their lord-commander, set my life to sale;
offering fifty dollars to any one that would kill me, and thirty dollars
for every other Englishman that they could slay: But hitherto God hath
preserved me and the rest in this place; for though they have wounded
two or three of our men, none have died. This villainous proceeding[66]
of their lord-commander was secretly told me by some of their own
people, who advised me and the rest of us to take heed to our safety.
They also informed me of the noble parentage of this their
lord-commander Westarwood, telling me that his father is a close-stool
maker at Amsterdam, or thereabouts; and that the best of their captains
are the sons of shoemakers, carpenters, or brewers. God bless their
honourable and worshipful generation! I would say, God bless me from
them. To make an end of this matter, I went up this year to the
emperor's court at Meaco, to complain of the abuses offered to us in his
dominions, contrary to the privileges his majesty had granted us. I had
very good words, and fair promises made me that we should have justice,
and that the _tono_ or king of Firando should be ordered to see it
performed: But as yet nothing has been done, though I have many times
made earnest suit on the subject.

[Footnote 66: Unchristian, uncivil, inhumane, immane, devilish
impiety.--_Purch._]

While I was at the court, and in the emperor's palace at Meaco, there
were several Spaniards and Portuguese there to pay their obeisance to
the emperor, as is their custom every year on the arrival of their
ships. There was also a Hollander at the court, who had lived almost
twenty years in Japan, and speaks the Japanese language very fluently.
In my hearing, and that of others, this fellow began highly to extol
their king of Holland, pretending that he was the greatest king in
Christendom, and held all the others under his command. He little
thought that we understood what he said; but I was not slack in telling
him, that he need not be so loud, for they had no king in Holland, being
only governed by a count, or rather that they governed him. Nay, if they
had any king at all in whom they could boast, it certainly was the king
of England, who had hitherto been their protector, and without whose aid
they had never been able to brag of their States. This retort made the
Spaniards and Portuguese laugh heartily at the poor Hollander, and made
him shut his mouth.

And now for the news of this country. The emperor is great enemy to the
name of Christians, especially to the Japanese who have embraced the
faith; so that all such as are found are put to death. While at Meaco, I
saw fifty-five martyred at one time, because they would not forsake the
faith, and among them were some children of five or six years old, who
were burnt in the arms of their mothers, calling on Jesus to receive
their souls. Also, in the town of Nangasaki, sixteen others were
martyred for the same cause, of whom five were burnt, and the rest
beheaded and cut in pieces, and their remains put into sacks and cast
into the sea in thirty fathoms deep: Yet the priests got them up again,
and kept their remains secretly as relics. There are many others in
prison, both here and in other places, who look hourly to be ordered for
execution, as very few of them revert to paganism. Last year, about
Christmas, the emperor deposed one of the greatest princes in all Japan,
called _Frushma-tay_, lord of sixty or seventy _mangocas_, and banished
him to a corner in the north of Japan, where he has a very small portion
in comparison with what was taken from him, and he had the choice of
this or of cutting open his own belly. It was thought that this would
have occasioned great troubles in Japan, for all the subjects of
_Frushma-tay_ were up in arms, and meant to hold out to the utmost
extremity, having fortified the city of _Frushma_, and laid in
provisions for a long time. But the _tay_ and his son, being then at the
emperor's court, were commanded to write to their vassals, ordering them
to lay down their arms and submit to the emperor, or otherwise to cut
open their own bellies. Life being sweet, they all submitted, and those
were pardoned who had taken up arms for their _tay_. The emperor has
given their dominions, which were two kingdoms, to two of his own
kinsmen; and this year the emperor has ordered the castle belonging to
Frushma to be pulled down, being a very beautiful and gallant fortress,
in which I saw him this year, and far larger than the city of Rochester.
All the stones are ordered to be conveyed to Osaka, where the ruined
castle, formerly built by _Fico-Same_, and pulled down by _Ogosha-Same_,
is ordered to be rebuilt three times larger than before; for which
purpose all the _tonos_ or kings have each their several tasks appointed
them; to be executed at their several charges, not without much
grumbling: For they had got leave, after so many years attendance at
court, to return to their own residences, and were now sent for again
all of a sadden to court, which angreth them not a little: "But go they
must, will they nill they, on pain of belly-cutting."

At this time there runs a secret rumour, that _Fidaia Same_ is alive,
and in the house of the _Dairo_[67] at Meaco; but I think it has been
reported several times before this that he was living in other places,
but proved untrue. There are some rich merchants here that belong to
Meaco, who are much alarmed by this report, lest, if true, the emperor
may burn Meaco; and who are therefore in haste to get home. Were Fidaia
actually alive it might tend to overthrow the emperor's power, for,
though a great politician, he is not a martial man: But be this as it
may, things can hardly be worse for us. I advised you in my last of the
destruction of all the Christian churches in Japan; yet there were some
remnants left at Nangasaki till this year, and in particular the
monastery of Misericiordia was untouched, as were all the church-yards
and burying-places; but now, by order of the emperor, all is destroyed,
all the graves and sepulchres of the Christians opened, and the bones of
the dead taken out by their parents and kindred, to be buried elsewhere
in the fields. Streets have been built on the scites of these churches,
monasteries, and burying-grounds, except in some places, where pagodas
have been erected by command of the emperor, who has sent heathen
priests to occupy them, thinking utterly to root out Christianity from
Japan. There were certain places near Nangasaki where several jesuit
fathers and other Christians were martyred, in the reign of _Ogosha
Same_, and where their parents and friends had planted evergreen-trees,
and erected altars near each tree, where many hundreds went daily to say
their prayers; but now, by command of the emperor, all these trees are
cut down, the altars destroyed, and the ground all levelled, it being
his firm resolution utterly to root out the remembrance of all matters
connected with Christianity.

[Footnote 67: The Dairo was formerly the sovereign of Japan, uniting the
supreme civil and spiritual power, committing the military affairs to a
kind of generalissimo, who usurped supreme authority, and reduced the
Dairo to be a kind of sovereign pontiff or chief-priest.--E.]

In the months of November and December, 1618, there were two comets seen
all over Japan. The first, rising in the east, was like a great fiery
beam, rent to the southwards, and vanished away in about the space of a
month. The other rose also in the east, like a great blazing star, and
went northwards, vanishing quite away within a month near the
constellation of Ursa-Major or Charles-waine. The wizards of Japan have
prognosticated great events to arise from these comets, but hitherto
nothing material has occurred, excepting the deposition of
_Frushma-tay_, already related.

I am almost ashamed to write you the news which the Spaniards and
Portuguese report, though some of them have shewn me letters affirming
it to be true, of a bloody cross having been seen in the air in England;
and that an English preacher, speaking irreverently of it from the
pulpit, was struck dumb: On which miracle, as they term it the king of
England sent to the pope, to have some cardinals and learned men brought
to England, as intending that all the people of England should become
Roman catholics. I pray you pardon me for writing of such nonsense,
which I do that you may laugh; yet I assure you there are many Spaniards
and Portuguese here who firmly believe it. I know not what more to write
you at this time: But I hope to come to England in the next shipping
that comes here; and I trust in God that I may find your worship in good
health.

RICHARD COCKS.




SECTION XVI.

_Ninth Voyage of the East India Company, in 1612, by Captain Edmund
Marlow_.[68]

We sailed from the Downs on the 10th February, 1612, in the good ship
James, and crossed the equator on the 11th April.[69] The 27th of that
month, at noon, we were in latitude, by observation, 19 deg. 40' S. and in
longitude, from the Lizard, 11 deg. 24' W. We this day saw an island
fourteen leagues from us in the S.E. which I formerly saw when I sailed
with Sir Edward Michelburne. It is round like Corvo, and rises rugged,
having a small peaked hill at its east end. Its lat. is 23 deg. 30' S. and
long. 10 deg. 30' W. from the Lizard; and there is another island or two in
sight, seven or eight leagues E.N.E. from this.[70]

[Footnote 68: Purch. Pilg. I. 440.--The relation of this voyage in the
Pilgrims is said to have been written by Mr John _Davy_, the master of
the ship: Probably the same John _Davis_, or _Davies_, formerly
mentioned as having frequently sailed as master to India in these early
voyages, and from whose pen Purchas published a _Rutter_, or brief book
of instructions for sailing to India. On the present occasion, this
voyage has been considerably abbreviated, especially in the nautical
remarks, which are now in a great degree obsolete and useless, and have
been already sufficiently enlarged upon in the former voyages to
India.--E.]

[Footnote 69: From some indistinct notices, in the commencement of this
voyage, the Dragon and Hosiander appear to have belonged to the _tenth_
voyage of the East India Company, and the Solomon to the _eleventh_
voyage; and that these three ships sailed from England at the same time
with the James, which belonged to the _ninth_ voyage.--E.]

[Footnote 70: This seemeth the island of Martin Vaz.--_Purch._ The
island of Trinidad, or Martin Vaz, is only in lat. 20 deg. 15' S. and long.
29 deg. 32' W. from Greenwich.--E.]

We saw the island of St Lawrence on the 29th June, and anchored in five
fathoms water in the bay of St Augustine on the 28th at night. Next day
we weighed, and brought the ship to anchor in the river, one anchor
being in thirty-five and the other in ten fathoms. A ship may ride here
in shallower water at either side, the deep channel being narrow. In
this anchorage no sea can distress a ship, being protected by the land
and shoals, so that it may well be called a harbour, from its safety. We
remained here twenty days, and sailed for Bantam on the 18th of July.

In the morning of the 24th September we saw the islands of Nintam, in
lat. 1 deg. 30' S.[71] The sound between the two great islands is eighteen
leagues from Priaman, and eleven leagues from the shoals before _Ticoo_,
which must be carefully avoided during the night, by laying two or three
or four leagues off till day-light. When you see three hummocks that
resemble three islands, take care always to have a person stationed on
the outer end of the boltsprit to give warning of any spots in your way,
as there are coral beds, which may be easily seen and avoided. The
course from this sound for Ticoo or Priaman is E.N.E. to these shoals.
In passing this sound, keep your lead always going, and come no nearer
the large southern island than the depth of sixteen fathoms, as there
are shoals towards the east side, and a breach or ledge also off the
northern island, on the larboard going in for Priaman. When nearing the
shoals of Ticoo, set the three hummocks on the main, which look like
islands, as all the land near them is very low; and when you have these
hummocks N.E. by E. then are you near the shoals, and when the hummocks
are N.N.E. you are past the shoals. But great care is necessary
everywhere, as it is all bad ground hereabout, till past the high land
of _Manancabo_, which is in lat 4 deg. 30' S. or thereby.

[Footnote 71: Pulo Mintao is probably here meant, which is to the south
of the line, but touches it at its northern extremity. The sound in the
text, is probably that between Pulo Botoa and Pulo Mintao.--E.]

We came to anchor in the road of Priaman on the 26th September, where
we found the Thomas, and remained fourteen days to refresh our sick men,
when the Hector and our ship sailed for Bantam, where we arrived in
company with the Janus and Hector on the 23d October. The 4th November
we weighed from the road of Bantam, intending to proceed by the straits
of Sunda for Coromandel; but the winds and currents were so strong
against us, that we were forced back into the straits of Sunda to refit
our ship, which was much weather-beaten. The 11th December, we anchored
again at Pulo Panian, and went to work to trim our ship and take in
ballast. Being ballasted, watered, and refitted, we sailed again on the
10th January, 1613, for the straits of Malacca. But, being too late in
the monsoon, and both wind and current against us, we got no farther
than seventy leagues from Bantam by the first of March, with much toil
to the men. Wherefore we concluded to take in wood and water, and to
return for Bantam by the outside of Sumatra.

Having again sailed for Coromandel, we were at noon of the 5th June,
1613, in lat. 12 deg. N. and long. 23 deg. W. from the salt hills, having been
carried by the currents 4 deg. 30', or ninety leagues out of our reckoning.
Whoever sails from Bantam, either up or down, will find such uncertain
reckoning that he may well miss his destined port, unless he looks well
to the variation of the needle, which will help materially in ten or
fifteen leagues, and indeed there is no other way of dealing with these
currents. We now got sight of the land, which is so very low that the
pagodas or pagan churches are first descried. With the aid of the lead,
you may sail boldly on this coast of Coromandel in fifteen fathoms by
night, and ten by day; but a steady man must always be kept at the lead
on such occasions, as the sea shoals suddenly; for after thirteen
fathoms, it will suddenly fall off to shoal water, being like a well or
steep bank, and the ground ooze. The course along the coast is N. by E.
to Pullicate, and so to Masulipatam.

The 6th June we anchored at noon in the road of Pullicate, in eight
fathoms on sand. There is a middle ground, having only five fathoms, and
within that another, having six, seven, and eight. The marks for the
road where we anchored, are the round hill by the other hill, W. by N.
and the Dutch fort S.W. by W. The latitude is 13 deg. 30' N. and the
variation 18 deg. 10'. Departing from Pullicate roads on the night of the
7th, we were on the 8th in lat. 14 deg. 40' at noon, having sailed
twenty-three leagues since last night, our depth of water being
twenty-three to twenty-fire fathoms, and our course N. by E. but the
lead is our sure guide on this coast, under God. The 9th at noon we were
in lat. 15 deg. 30', having the land in sight, but not the high land of
_Petapoli_ [Putapilly]. During the last twenty-four hours, we sailed
seventeen leagues north, in fifteen and sixteen fathoms. The high land
now in sight is known by a pagoda or pagan temple, and is five leagues
from the high land of Putapilly, in the road of which place we anchored
on the 10th in five fathoms on sand, this new high land bearing from us
N.N.W. the platform of palm trees upon the island E.N.E. by E. and the
bar N.W. by N. The whole sea coast is low land. The latitude here is 15 deg.
52'. Having established a factory, in which we left Mr George Chansey
and our purser as merchants, with other seven men to assist in taking
care of our goods, we sailed from Putapilly on the forenoon of the 19th.

We anchored in the road of Masulipatam on the 21st, where we found a
ship belonging to Holland. We remained here for six months, until the
6th January, 1614, and then set sail for Putapilly, where we arrived on
the 19th of that month, and remained there, taking in the merchants and
their goods till the 7th February, when we sailed for Bantam. We arrived
there on the 20th April, and on the 10th June set sail for Patane. By
noon of that day, being in lat. 5 deg. 44' S. we had sight of the islands
nine leagues from Bantam, our course, after getting clear of the road,
being N.N.E. in five, six, seven, eight, twelve, fourteen, and so to
twenty-four fathoms. At six in the morning of the 11th, we were close
beside the two islands that are north from Bantam near Sumatra, in lat.
5 deg. S. and in twenty fathoms; this being the surest course both going to
and from Bantam, but it is necessary to keep a good look-out for the
sand-banks which are even with the water. The 12th, being involved in a
strong adverse current, we were forced to anchor in a quarter less four
fathoms, in sight of a reef, twelve leagues short of Lucapara, and
forty-eight from Bantam.

The 14th, we came in with the island of Banda and the main of Sumatra,
and went through between them in five 1/2 fathoms. In this passage it is
proper to keep nearer the Sumatra shore, though the water is deeper on
the Banda side of the strait; as that side is rocky, while the side
towards Sumatra is oozy. The 16th we came to Palimbangan point; and the
17th at noon, being in lat, 1 deg. 10' S. we anchored in nine fathoms, on
account of it falling calm with a strong current, the isle of Pulo Tino
being to seawards. The 30th, we anchored in the road of Patane in three
1/2 fathoms. On the 1st August we sailed to Sangora to trim our ship,
being a good place for that purpose under shelter of two islands hard by
the main, and fourteen or fifteen leagues from Patane. We anchored in
Sangora road, under the eastermost of the two islands, on the 4th; and
having put our ship into good trim, we came away on the 9th September,
and returned to Patane next day. We remained there a month taking in
the goods of the Globe, to carry them to Bantam, for which place we
sailed on the 9th October, and arrived at Bantam on the 9th November. We
continued there till the 27th January, 1615, to load our ship, and to
get all things in readiness for our voyage home to England.

The 29th we set sail from Bantam, homewards bound; and when some hundred
leagues from thence, our captain, Mr Edmund Marlow, died. He was an
excellent man, and well skilled in the mathematics and the art of
navigation. The first place at which we anchored was Saldanha bay, where
we arrived on the 29th April, 1615, and next day our consort the Globe
came in. Having well refreshed and refitted our ships, we set sail from
thence on the 17th May, and arrived at St Helena on the 3d June. Sailing
from thence along with our consort, on the 7th of that month, we arrived
in England on the 3d of August, giving praise to God for our safety.




SECTION XVII.


_Tenth Voyage of the English East India Company, in 1612, written by Mr
Thomas Best, chief Commander_.[72]

From the full tide of this voyage, in the Pilgrims, we learn that there
were two ships employed in this _tenth_ voyage, named the Dragon and the
Hosiander, in which were about 380 persons; and these were accompanied
by two other ships, the James and the Solomon, which belonged to other
voyages, each voyage being then a separate adventure, and conducted by a
separate subscription stock, as formerly explained in the introduction
to the present chapter. We learn from other parts of the Pilgrims, that
the James belonged to the _ninth_ voyage, related immediately before
this, and the Solomon to the _eleventh_, to be afterwards narrated.--E.

[Footnote 72: Purch. Pilgr. I.456.]

Sec.1. _Observations during the Voyage from England to Surat_.

We sailed from Gravesend on the 1st of February, 1612. At noon on the
22d March we made the latitude 15 deg. 20' N. and at two p.m. were abreast
of Mayo, one of the Cape Verd islands, being S.W. by S. about twelve
leagues from Bonavista. To the N. and N.N.W. of Mayo the ground is all
foul, and due N. of the high hummocks a great ledge of rocks runs out
from the land for five or six miles, a mile without which ledge there
are twenty fathoms water. On the west side of the island, you may borrow
in twelve or fifteen fathoms, till you come into the road, where we
anchored in twenty-four fathoms.

On the morning of the 28th March, we came close by an island in lat. 23 deg.
30', and long. from the meridian of Mayo, 1 deg. 50' E. We did not land upon
this island, but came within two or three miles of it, and in my opinion
there is hardly any anchorage to be found. It may probably produce some
refreshment, as it certainly has wood, which we saw, and it may have
water, as we observed a fair plain spot and very green on its southern
part; but we could find no ground within two or three miles of its
coast. E.N.E. some seven or eight leagues from this, there is another
island; and E. by S. or E.S.E. from the first island, about four or five
leagues, there are two or three white rocks.[73]

[Footnote 73: In the text it is not said if the latitude be N. or S. yet
S. is probably meant. No island is however to be found in the indicated
situation. In the _eleventh_ voyage, an island is said to have been
discovered in lat. 19 deg. 34'S. certainly known to have been Trinidad,
Santa Maria d'Agosto, or Martin Vaz, of which hereafter.--E.]

We remained twenty-one days in Saldanha road, and bought for the
three[74] ships thirty-nine beeves and 115 sheep, which we paid for with
a little brass cut out of two or three old kettles. We got the sheep for
small pieces of thin brass, worth about a penny or three halfpence each;
and the beeves in the same manner for about the value of twelve-pence
a-piece. This is an excellent place of refreshment, as besides abounding
in beef and mutton, there is plenty of good fish, all kinds of fowls,
and great store of fat deer, though we could not kill any of these. It
has likewise excellent streams of fresh water, and a most healthful
climate. We landed eighty or ninety sick, who were lodged in tents, and
they all recovered their health in eighteen days, save one who died.
From the 7th to the 28th June, when we set sail from Saldanha bay, we
had continual fine weather, the sun being very warm, and the air
pleasant and wholesome.

[Footnote 74: One of the ships appears to have been separated from the
fleet, but it does not appear which.--E.]

We sailed from Saldanha road on the 28th June, and were 100 leagues to
the east of _Cabo das Aguilhas_ before we found any current, but it was
then strong. The 31st July at noon, we found the latitude 17 deg. 8' S. our
longitude being 20 deg. 47' E. and at four p.m. we saw the island of _Juan
de Nova_, distant four leagues E.S.E.[75] Its size, and I think we saw
it all, is about three or four miles long, all very low and rising from
the sea like rocks. Off the west end we saw breakers, yet could not get
ground with a line of 150 fathoms, sounding from our boat. The latitude
of this island, observed with great accuracy, is 17 deg.,[76] and it seems
well laid down in our charts, both in regard to latitude and longitude.
It is a most sure sign of being near this island, when many sea fowl are
seen, and we accordingly saw there ranch fowl, some white, having their
wings tipped only with black, and others all black.

[Footnote 75: St Juan de Nova is in lat. 17 deg. 50' S. and long. 45 deg. 30'E.
from Greenwich--E.]

[Footnote 76: In lat. 17 deg. S. and long. 60 deg. E. is an island or bank
called Nazareth, Corados, or Garajos, a long way however from St Juan de
Nova.--E.]

The 3d August, in lat 13 deg. 35' by observation, and longitude 22 deg. 30' from
the Cape, we saw _Mal-Ilha_, one of the Comoros, about twelve leagues
off, having on the east part of it a very fair sugar-loaf hill.[77] At
the same time with this island, we had sight of that named Comoro,
bearing N.N.W. by W. being high land. At six a.m. of the 4th we were
close in with _Mal-Ilha_, and standing in for some place in which to
anchor, while some eight or nine miles from the shore, we saw the ground
under the ship in not less than eight or ten fathoms. The Hosiander, two
miles nearer the land, had four or five fathoms, and her boat was in
three fathoms. We then sent both our boats to sound, which kept shoaling
on a bank in eight, ten, and twelve fathoms, and off it only half a
cable's length had no ground with 100 fathoms. At the north end of
Mal-Ilha there is a fair big high island, about five or six miles in
circuit.[78] A bank or ledge of rocks extends all along the west side of
Mal-Ilha, continuing to the small high island; and from this little
island to Mal-Ilha may be some eight or nine miles, all full of rocks,
two of them of good height. Being at the north end of this ledge, and
the little island bearing S.E. you may steer in with the land, keeping
the island fair aboard; and within the rocks or broken ground and
Mal-Ilha there is a bay with good anchorage. To the eastwards, on coming
in from the ledge of rocks, there is a great shoal, the outermost end of
which is N.E. or N.E. by E. from the small island five or six miles, and
no ground between that we could find with forty or fifty fathoms line.
In fine, all the north side of Mal-Ilha is very dangerous, but the
above-mentioned channel is quite safe. I would have come to anchor here,
as there is a town about a mile east from the before-mentioned bay, the
people being very good, and having abundance of refreshments, as beeves,
goats, hens, lemons, cocoa-nuts in great plenty, and excellent water,
but could not get in, owing to the wind being directly south.

[Footnote 77: Mohilla, the Mal-ilha of the text, is in lat. 16 deg. 44 deg. S.
and long. 44 deg. E. from Greenwich. Its difference of long. from the Cape
of Good Hope is 23 deg. 45' E. Thus, in every instance hitherto, the
observations of lat. and long. by Captain Best, at least as printed by
Purchas, are grossly erroneous.--E.]

[Footnote 78: This description seems rather to refer to the island of
Mayotto, about thirty leagues E. of S. from Mohilla; the small island to
the north, or N. by W. being called Saddle Isle.--E.]

Two of my men had belonged to a Dutch fleet, that year when they
assaulted Mosambique, on which occasion they put in here, and recovered
the healths of 400 or 500 men in five weeks. Yet it is well named
Mal-Ilha, or the bad island, for it is the most dangerous of any place I
ever saw. It is next to Comoro, from which it is distant some twelve or
fourteen leagues S.S.E.

At dawn on the 1st September we got sight of land to the eastwards, four
or five leagues distant, my reckoning being then eighty or ninety
leagues short, owing, I suppose, to some current setting east from the
coast of Melinda; neither from the latitude of Socotoro to Damaun could
we see the sun, to know our variation. The 3d at seven a.m. we spoke two
country boats, which informed us that the town, church, and castle in
sight was Damaun. From these boats I got two men, who engaged to carry
the Dragon to the bar of Surat, promising not to bring us into less than
seven fathoms. On the 5th a Surat boat came on board with _Jaddow_ the
broker, who had served Captain William Hawkins three years, and Sir
Henry Middleton all the time he was here. There were likewise in this
boat the brother of the customer of Surat, and three or four others. All
these remained with us till the 7th, when we came to anchor at the bar
of Surat, in eight 1/4 fathoms at high water, and six 1/2 at neap tides.
At spring tides, however, I have found the tide to rise in the offing
three fathoms, and even three 1/2. The latitude of our anchorage was 21 deg.
10' N. and the variation 16 deg. 20' or 16 deg. 27'.[79] On the 11th, _Thomas
Kerridge_ came aboard, with a certificate or licence under the seals of
the justice and governor of Surat, for our quiet and peaceable trade and
intercourse, and with kind entreaties to come ashore, where we should be
heartily welcomed by the people. They also brought off a letter or
narrative, written by Sir, Henry Middleton, which had been left in
charge of the _Moccadam_ of Swally. On the same day, I again sent Mr
Kerridge ashore, accompanied by Hugh Gettins.

[Footnote 79: Sorat bar is in lat. 21 deg. 2' N. and long. 72 deg. 50' E. from
Greenwich--E.]

Sec.2. _Transactions with the Subjects of the Mogul, Fights with the
Portuguese, Settlement of a Factory, and Departure for Acheen_.

On the 13th September, 1612, sixteen sail of Portuguese frigates, or
barks, put into the river of Surat. The 22d, we determined in council to
send a dispatch to the king at Agra, signifying our arrival, and to
require his explicit answer, whether he would permit us to trade and
settle a factory; and if refused, that we would quit his country. The
30th, I got notice that Mr Canning, our purser, and William Chambers,
had been arrested ashore; wherefore I caused a ship of Guzerat to anchor
close beside me, determining to detain her till I should see how matters
went ashore. We also stopped a bark laden with rice from Bassare,
belonging to the Portuguese, out of which we took twelve or fourteen
quintals of rice, for which we paid at the rate of thirteen-pence the
quintal. When I had taken possession of the Guzerat ship, I wrote to the
chiefs of Surat, requiring them to send me all my men, together with the
value of the goods I had landed; on which I should deliver up their ship
and people, allowing them till the 5th of October to give me an answer;
at which time, if I had not a satisfactory answer, I declared my
determination to dispose of the ship and her goods at my pleasure. There
were some 400 or 450 men aboard that ship, ten of the chiefest among
whom I brought into my ship, to serve as hostages.

On the 6th October, _Medi Joffer_ came aboard my ship, accompanied by
four chiefs and many others, bringing me a great present, and came to
establish trade with us, and to solicit the release of the Guzerat ship.
On the 10th I left the bar of Surat, and came to Swally roads, where I
anchored in eight fathoms at high water. This road-stead is ten or
twelve miles north from the bar of Surat. The 17th, the governor of
_Aamadavar_ [Ahmedabad] came to the water side. I landed on the 19th,
having four principal persons sent aboard my ship, as pledges for my
safety. On the 21st I concluded upon articles of agreement with the
governor and merchants, of which the tenor follows:

"Articles agreed upon, and sealed, by the governor of Ahmedabad, the
governor of Surat, and four principal merchants; and to be confirmed by
the firmaun and seal of the Great Mogul, within forty days from the date
and sealing hereof, or else to be void; for the settlement of trade and
factories in the cities of Surat, Cambaya, Ahmedabad, Goga, or in any
other part or parts of the dominions of the Great Mogul in this country.
Witnessed by their hands and seals, the 21st of October, 1612."

1. All that concerns Sir Henry Middleton is to be remitted, acquitted,
and cleared to us; so that they shall never make seizure, stoppage, or
stay of our goods, wares, or commodities, as satisfaction for the same.

2. They shall procure at their own proper cost, from the King or Great
Mogul, his grant and confirmation of all the articles of this agreement,
under the great seal of his government, and shall deliver the same to
us, for our security and certainty of perpetual amity, commerce, and
dealing, within forty days from the date and sealing hereof.

3. It shall be lawful for the king of England to keep his ambassador
continually at the court of the Great Mogul, during all the time of this
peace and trade, there to accommodate and conclude upon all such great
and weighty matters as may in any respect tend to disturb or break the
said peace.

4. At all times, on the arrival of any of our ships in the road of
Swally, proclamation shall be made in the city of Surat, during three
successive days, that all the people of the country shall be free to
come down to the shore, and there to have free trade, dealing, and
commerce with us.

5. That all English commodities shall pay custom, according to the
value or price they bear, at the time of entry at the custom-house,
after the rate of three 1/2 per cent. ad valorem.

6. All petty and pedlar ware to be free from duty, that does not exceed
the value of ten dollars.

7. The English are to have ten _manu_ carried from the water side to
Surat for a _manuda_,[80] and at the same rate back; and are to be
furnished with carts on application to the _moccadam_ of Swally for
sending to Surat, and at that place by a broker with carts downwards to
the sea side at Swally.

[Footnote 80: This unexplained rate of carriage was probably ten
_manuda_ for one _mahinoodic_.--E.]

8. If any of our people die in the country, neither the king, the
governor, nor any inferior officer should pretend any title or claim to
any thing that had belonged to the deceased, neither should demand any
fees, taxes, or customs, upon the same.

9. In case all the men left in these parts should die before the return
of any of our ships, then some officer appointed for the purpose shall
make a true inventory and schedule of all monies, goods, jewels,
provisions, apparel, or other things, belonging to our nation, and shall
safely preserve and keep the same, to be delivered over to the general,
captain, or merchants of the first English ships that arrive afterwards,
from whom a regular receipt and discharge shall be given for the same.

10. That they shall guarantee all our men and goods on land, redeeming
all of both or either that may happen to be taken on the land by the
Portuguese; delivering both to us again free of all charges, or in lieu
thereof the full value of our said goods and men, and that without
delay.

11. Insomuch as there are rebels and disobedient subjects in all
kingdoms, so there may be some pirates and sea-rovers of our nation, who
may happen to come into these parts to rob or steal. In that case, the
trade and factory belonging to the English shall not be held responsible
or liable to make restitution for goods so taken; but we shall aid the
subjects of the Great Mogul, to the best of our power who may happen to
be thus aggrieved, by application to our king for justice against the
aggressors, and for procuring restitution.

12. That all victuals and provisions, required during the stay of our
ships in the roads of Surat and Swally, shall be free of custom,
provided they do not exceed the value of 1000 dollars.

13. That in all questions of wrongs and injuries offered to us and to
our nation, we shall receive speedy justice from the judges and others
in authority, according to the nature of our complaints and the wrongs
done to us, and shall not be put off by delays, or vexed by exorbitant
charges or loss of time.

On the 24th October, I landed the present intended for the Great Mogul,
which I brought to the tent of the governor of Ahmedabad, who took a
memorandum of all the particulars, as also a copy of our king's letter
to their sovereign. After which, as before agreed upon with the
governor, I sent them back aboard ship: For I had told him, unless his
king would confirm the articles agreed upon, and likewise write our king
a letter, that I would neither deliver the present nor our king's
letter; for, if these things were refused, then was their king an enemy
not a friend, and I had neither present nor letter for the enemy of our
king. At this time, however, I delivered our present to the governor,
and another to his son.

The 14th November, a great fleet of frigates or barks, consisting of
some 240 sail, came in sight. I thought they had come to attack us, but
they were a _caffila_ of merchantmen bound for Cambaya; as there comes
every year a similar fleet from Goa, Chaul, and other places to the
southwards, for Cambaya, whence they bring the greatest part of the
loading which is carried by the caracks and galleons to Portugal.

The 27th I received notice from Mr Canning and Edward Christian, who
were both ashore, that four galleons were fitted out from Goa, and were
coming to attack us, having been in full readiness, and at anchor on the
bar of Goa on the 14th November. The Portuguese fleet came in sight of
us on the 28th; and on the 29th drew near us with the tide of flood. At
two in the afternoon I got under weigh, and by four was about two
cables length from their vice-admiral, fearing to go nearer lest I might
have got my ship aground. I then opened a fire upon him, both with great
guns and small arms, and in an hour had peppered him well with some
fifty-six great shot. From him we received one small ball, either from a
minnion or saker, into our mizen-mast, and with another he sunk our
long-boat, which we recovered, but lost many things out of it.

The 30th at day-light, I set sail and steered among the midst of the
Portuguese fleet, bestirring ourselves manfully, and drove three of
their four ships aground on the bar of Surat; after which I anchored
about nine a.m. This morning the Hosiander did good service, coming
through also among the enemy's ships, and anchored beside me. At the
tide of flood, the three ships that were aground floated. We then
weighed and made sail towards them, they remaining at anchor. On getting
up to them, we spent upon three of them 150 great shot, and the morning
after some fifty more. At night, we gave the admiral a salute from our
four stern guns as a farewell; in return for which he fired one of his
bow guns, a whole or demi-culverine, the shot from which came even with
the top of our forecastle, went through our _Davie_, killed William
Burrel, and carried off the arm of another of our men. The Hosiander[81]
spent the whole of this day in firing against one of the ships that was
aground, and received many shots from the enemy, one of which killed
Richard Barker the boatswain.

[Footnote 81: Nathaniel Salmon of Leigh was master of the
Hosiander.--_Purch._]

Night coming on, we anchored some six miles from the Portuguese ships;
and at nine p.m. they sent a frigate down towards us, which came driving
right _athwart halse_ of the Hosiander, and being discovered by their
good watch, was speedily saluted by shot. The first shot made them hoist
sail, the second went through their sails, and, they immediately made
off.[82] Their intention certainly was to have set our ships on fire, if
they had found us off our guard.[83]

[Footnote 82: This frigate was sunk by the shot, as I was assured by Mr
Salmon the actor, and eighty of her men were taken up drowned.--_Purch._]

[Footnote 83: On this occasion the Portuguese had four great galleons
and some twenty-six frigates, or armed barks. In these fights they lost
all their _quondam_ credit, and 160 men, or as others say 500; and the
English settled trade at Surat in spite of all their efforts.--_Purch._]

We remained at anchor all the first December, the Portuguese not coming
to us nor we to them; though they might easily have come to us without
danger from the sands, but not so we to them. This day I called a
council, and it was concluded to go down to the south, that we might
have a broader channel, hoping that the galleons would follow us. We
accordingly went down some six or seven leagues on the 2d, but they did
not follow us; wherefore on the 3d we stood up again, and anchored
fairly in sight of them. We weighed again on the morning of the 4th, and
stood away before them, they following: But in the afternoon they gave
us over, and hauled in with the land, and at night we directed our
course for Diu. At night of the 5th, we anchored in fourteen fathoms
near the shore, four or five leagues eastwards of Diu.

The 9th we came to _Madafaldebar_[84] which is ten or eleven leagues E.
by N. from Diu, the coast between being very fair, and having no unseen
dangers. The depth near Diu is fifteen or sixteen fathoms, halfway to
_Madafaldebar_ twelve fathoms, then ten and nine, but not less; and in
nine fathoms we anchored in a fine sandy bay, on the west side of which
is a river coming from a considerable distance inland. This place is
some five or six miles west from the isles of _Mortie_[85] The 15th we
set sail to explore the bay of _Mohar_,[86] having been reported by some
of the people who had belonged to the Ascension to be a good place for
wintering in, or waiting the return of the monsoon for sailing to the
southwards. We accordingly anchored that night in the bay, which is nine
or ten leagues E.N.E. from Madafaldebar, finding the coast and
navigation perfectly good, with ten fathoms all the way, and no danger
but what is seen. I sent my boat ashore, and got twenty excellent sheep
for three shillings each, the best we had seen in the whole voyage. We
found the ruins of a great town at this place, but very few inhabitants.

[Footnote 84: From the indications in the text, this must be _Jaffrabat_
on the coast of Guzerat, about thirty-one miles E. by N. from Diu. The
name used in the text must be taken from the native language, while that
of modern geography is the Persian, Mogul, or Arabic name of the
place.--E.]

[Footnote 85: Called _Searbett_ in Arrowsmith's excellent map of
Hindostan, eight miles E.N.E. from Jaffrabat.--E.]

[Footnote 86: Called on the margin of the Pilgrims, _Moha, Mona_, or
_Mea_; and which from the context appears to be a bay immediately west
from _Wagnagur_.--E.]

There happened to be an army encamped in the neighbourhood of this
place, and on the 17th, the general sent four men to me, requesting a
conference. I landed on the 21st, and had much conversation with the
general, who greatly desired to have two pieces of ordnance from us,
making many fair promises of favour to our nation, and even presented me
with a horse and furniture and two Agra girdles or sashes; but I refused
him, having none to spare, and needing all we had for our defence. I
presented him in return with two vests of stammel cloth, two firelocks,
two bottles of brandy, and a knife.

The 22d, we saw the four galleons coming towards us, and at nine p.m.
they anchored within shot of where we lay. At sun-rise next morning we
weighed and bore down upon them, and continued to fight them till
between ten and eleven a.m. when they all four weighed and stood away
before the wind. We followed them two or three hours, but they sailed
much better large than we, so that we again came to anchor, and they
likewise anchored about two leagues from us. In this days fight, I
expended 133 great shot, and about 700 small. At sunrise of the 24th we
again weighed and bore down upon the galleons, and began to fight them
at eight a.m. continuing till noon, having this day expended 250 great
shot, and 1000 small. By this time both sides were weary, and we all
stood to sea, steering S. by E. The galleons followed us till two or
three p.m. when they put about and come to anchor. I now took account of
our warlike ammunition, and found more than half our shot expended, the
store of the Hosiander being in a similar situation. We had now
discharged against the enemy 625 great shot, and 3000 small.

Being about four or five leagues from the land, we met with a sand, on
which there was only two or two 1/2 fathoms, laying S.S.E. or thereabout
from _Mosa_. I went over it in nine fathoms, at which time the two high
hills over _Gogo_ were nearly N. from us. Upon this sand the Ascension
was cast away. Between the main and this sand, the channel is nine and
ten fathoms, and the shoaling is rather fast. We continued steering S.
with the tide of ebb, and anchored in eight fathoms, finding the tide to
set E.N.E. and W.S.W. by the compass. At midnight of the 24th we
weighed, standing S.S.E. and at two p.m. of the 25th we anchored in
seventeen fathoms at high water, full in sight of Damaun, which bore
E.S.E. In the afternoon of the 26th we anchored off the bar of Surat.
The 27th we went to Swally road, when Thomas Kerridge and Edward
Christian came aboard.

On the 6th of January, 1613, the _Firmaun_ from the Great Mogul, in
confirmation of peace and settlement of a factory for trade, came to
Swally as a private letter; wherefore I refused to receive it, lest it
might be a counterfeit, requiring that the chief men of Surat should
come down and deliver it to me, with the proper ceremonials.
Accordingly, on the 11th, the sabandar, his father-in-law Medigoffar,
and several others, came to Swally, and delivered the Firmaun to me in
form, making great professions of respect for our nation in the name of
their king. The 14th we landed all our cloth, with 310 elephants teeth,
and all our quicksilver. This day likewise the Portuguese galleons came
within three or four miles of us. The 16th, I landed Anthony Starkey,
with orders to travel over land for England, carrying letters to give
notice of our good success.[87]

[Footnote 87: Mr Starkey and his Indian companion or guide were poisoned
on the way by two friars.--Purch.]

The 17th, having received all my goods from Surat, I set sail at night,
leaving these coasts. The 18th we passed the four galleons, which all
weighed and followed us for two or three hours; but we finally separated
without exchanging shots. The 19th, when abreast of Basseen, we stopt
three Malabar barks, which had nothing in them, and from one of which we
took a boat. The 20th at night we were abreast of Chaul, both town and
castle being full in sight. In the afternoon of the 21st we were abreast
of Dabul, where we boarded three junks belonging to Calicut, laden with
cocoanuts. The 22d in the morning, the Hosiander sent her boat aboard
two junks, and at noon we were at the rocks, which are ten or eleven
leagues N. of Goa, and six or eight miles from the main. Two or three of
these rocks are higher than the hull of a large ship. At six p.m. we
were abreast of Goa, which is easily known by the island at the month of
the river, on which island there is a castle. All the way from Damann to
Goa, the coast trends nearly N. and S. with a slight inclination to N.W.
and S.E. the whole being very fair and without danger, having fair
shoaling and sixteen or seventeen fathoms some three or four leagues off
shore, with good-anchorage every where.

The 24th we saw a fleet of sixty or eighty frigates or barks bound to
the southwards, being in lat. 13 deg. 00' 30". The high land by the sea now
left us, and the shore became very low, yet with fair shoaling of
sixteen and seventeen fathoms some three or four leagues off. In the
afternoon we went into a bay, where all the before-mentioned frigates
were at anchor, together with three or four gallies. We brought out a
ship with us, whence all the Portuguese fled in their boats, and as two
frigates lay close aboard of her, they had carried away every thing
valuable. Next day we examined our prize, and found nothing in her
except rice and coarse sugar, with which we amply supplied both ships;
and having taken out her masts, and what firing she could afford, we
scuttled and sunk her, taking out likewise all her people, being twenty
or twenty-five Moors. The 26th we met a boat belonging to the Maldives
laden with cocoa-nuts and bound for Cananor, into which I put all the
people of the prize, except eight, whom I kept to assist in labour, one
of them being a pilot for this coast.

The 27th we were a little past Calicut, abreast of Paniany, our lat. at
noon being 10 deg. 30' N. In the morning of the 28th, we saw Cochin, which
is known by the towers and castle, being in lat 9 deg. 40' N. or thereby.
All the way from Goa to Cochin we never had above twenty fathoms,
though, sometimes four or five leagues from the land; and when only
three, four, or six miles off, the depths were from ten to twelve
fathoms. From lat 11 deg. 30' N. to Cochin, the land was all very low by the
water side; but up the country it was very high all along. Four or five
leagues to the north of Cochin, there is a high land within the country,
somewhat like a table mountain, yet rounded on the top, having long high
mountains to the north of this hill. All this day, the 28th, we sailed
within six or eight miles of the land, in nine, ten, and twelve fathoms.

We anchored on the 30th in fifteen fathoms, about twenty-six leagues to
the north of Cape Comorin right over against a little village, whence
presently came off six or eight canoes with water and all kinds of
provisions; the name of this place is _Beringar_, which our mariners
usually call Bring-John, being in the kingdom of Travancor. The 1st
February, the king sent me a message, offering to load my ship with
pepper and cinnamon, if I would remain and trade with him. The 5th we
were abreast of Cape Comorin, where we had a fresh gale of wind at E. by
N. which split our fore-top-sail and main bonnet, yet a canoe with eight
men came off to us three or four leagues from the land. We were here
troubled with calms and great heat, and many of our men fell sick, of
which number I was one. On the 8th we were forced back to the roads of
_Beringar_. This place has good refreshments for ships, and the people
are very harmless, and not friends to the Portuguese. From this place to
Cape Comorin, all the inhabitants of the sea coast are Christians, and
have a Portuguese priest or friar residing among them. It is to be
remarked, that the whole coast, even from Damaun to Cape Comorin, is
free from danger, and there is fair shoaling all the way from Cochin to
that cape, having sixteen, eighteen, and twenty fathoms close to the
land, and no ground five or six leagues off, after you come within
twenty-five or thirty leagues of the Cape. The variation at Damaun was
16 deg. 30'; halfway to the Cape about 15 deg., and 14 deg. at the cape, the
latitude of which is 7 deg. 30' N. [_exactly_ 7 deg. 57'].

In the afternoon we were fair off the Cape, and found much wind at
E.S.E. giving small hope of being able to go eastwards till the end of
the monsoon, which our Indians reported would be about the end of April.
So I bore up, and came to anchor, four or five leagues within the Cape,
in twenty fathoms close by two rocks. About two miles right off these
two rocks is a sunken rock, which is very dangerous, especially if
sailing in twenty fathoms, but by keeping in twenty-four fathoms all
danger is avoided. We remained here nine days, when we again made sail.
In the morning of the 28th we had sight of Ceylon, some eight or nine
leagues E.S.E. being in lat. 7 deg. N. At 4 p.m. we were close in with that
island, in thirteen, fifteen, and sixteen fathoms. The 1st of March, at
6 p.m. we were abreast of Columbo, the lat. of which is about 6 deg. 30' N.
[7 deg. 2']; having twenty-four and twenty-five fathoms three leagues off.
The 12th we stood in with the land, and anchored in twenty-four fathoms,
the wind being S.E. and S. I sent my boat ashore four leagues to the
north of _Punta de Galle_, and after some time a woman came to talk with
one of our Indians who was in the boat. She said we could have no
provisions: but by our desire she went to tell the men. Afterwards two
men came to us, who flatly refused to let us have any thing, alleging
that our nation had captured one of their boats; but it was the
Hollanders not the English. The 14th, in the morning, the southern point
of Ceylon, called _Tanadare_ [Dondra], bore E.S.E. of us, some five
leagues off. This point is in lat. 5 deg. 30' [5 deg. 54' N.], and is about ten
or twelve leagues E.S.E. from Punta de Galle. The 17th we were near one
of the sands mentioned by Linschoten, being two leagues from the land.
We had twenty-five fathoms water, and on the land, right opposite this
sand, is a high rock like a great tower. The land here trends E.N.E.[88]

[Footnote 88: Owing probably to careless abbreviation by Purchas, this
solitary notice is all that is given of the voyage between Dondra-head
in Ceylon and Acheen, in the north-west end of Sumatra, to which the
observation in the text seems to refer.--E.]

Sec.3. _Occurrences at Acheen, in Sumatra_.

At noon of the 12th April, 1613, we came to anchor in the road of
Acheen, in twelve fathoms, but ships may ride in ten or even eight
fathoms; the best place in which to ride being to the eastward of the
castle, and off the river mouth. I landed the merchants on the 13th; but
the king did not come to town till the 15th, when he sent me his _chop_
or licence to land, which was brought by an eunuch, accompanied by the
_Xabander_ and six or eight more, to whom I gave 120 _mam_. I landed
along with them, and two hours afterwards the king sent me a present of
some provisions, I having sent him on my landing a present of _two
pieces_;[89] the custom being to make the king some small present on
landing, in return for which he sends several dishes of meat.

[Footnote 89: These _pieces_, so often mentioned in the early voyages,
were probably fowling-pieces, or European fire-arms.--E.]

On the 17th, the king sent an elephant, with a golden bason, for our
king's letter, which I accompanied to court, attended by forty of our
men, who were all admitted into the king's presence. After many
compliments, the king returned me our king's letter, that I might read
it to him; and accordingly the substance of it was explained in the
native language, with the contents of which he was well pleased. After
some time, the king told me that he would shew me some of his
diversions, and accordingly caused his elephants to fight before us.
When six of them had fought for some time, he caused four buffaloes to
be brought, which made a very excellent and fierce fight; such being
their fierceness that sixty or eighty men could hardly part them,
fastening ropes to their hind-legs to draw them asunder. After these,
some ten or twelve rams were produced, which fought very bravely. When
it was so dark that we could hardly see, these sports were discontinued,
and the king presented me with a banquet of at least 500 dishes, and
such abundance of hot drinks as might have sufficed to make an army
drunk. Between nine and ten at night, he gave me leave to depart,
sending two elephants to carry me home; but as they had no coverings I
did not ride either of them.

On the 18th, I went again to court by appointment of the king, when we
began to treat concerning the articles formerly granted by his
grandfather to Mr James Lancaster; but when we came to that in which all
goods were to be brought in and carried out free from customs, we broke
off without concluding any thing. The 19th the ambassador of Siam came
to visit me, and told me, that about thirty months before, three
Englishmen had waited upon his king, who gave them kind entertainment,
being rejoiced at receiving letters from the king of England. He also
said that his king would be much pleased if our ships came to his ports,
telling me what great quantities of Portugal cloth, for so he called our
English cloth, would sell in his country. According to his opinion, the
colours most saleable in his country are, _stammel_ and other reds,
yellows, and other light, gay, and pleasing colours, such as those
already in most request at Surat. He also told me, that his king had
made a conquest of the whole kingdom of Pegu, as that he is now the most
powerful sovereign in the east, except the emperor of China, having
twenty-six tributary kings under his government and authority, and is
able to equip for war 6000 elephants. Their coin is all of silver, gold
being less esteemed, and of less proportional value than with us. That
country produces great abundance of pepper and raw silk; and he said the
Hollanders have factories at Patane, an excellent port, where they are
called English. Siam likewise, according to him, is a good port, and
nearer the court than Patane: Those who go to the city in which the king
resides land always at the port of Siam, whence the royal residence is
twenty days journey by land. I requested from the ambassador to give me
a letter to his sovereign, and letters also to the governors of the
maritime towns in Siam, in favour of the English nation, when we should
come upon these coasts, which he promised me. And, lastly, in token of
friendship we exchanged coins; I giving him some of our English coin,
and receiving from him the coins of Siam. I had often, after this first
interview, friendly intercourse with this ambassador.

I went to court on the 20th, butt had no opportunity to speak with the
king; whereupon I sent to the king's deputy, or chief minister, and
complained of having been dishonoured, and of having been abused by the
_shahbander_. He promised me speedy redress, and that he should inform
the king without delay, which indeed he did that same day. On the day
following, the king sent two officers of his court to me, to intimate
that I might repair freely to his court at all times, passing the gate
without hindrance or waiting for his _criss_. He also removed the
shahbander of whom I had complained, and appointed a gentleman, who had
formerly been his vice-ambassador to Holland, to attend upon me at all
times to court, or any where else, at my pleasure. The 24th I went to
court, and had access to the king, who satisfied me in all things, and
promised to ratify and renew all the articles formerly agreed upon
between his predecessor and Mr James Lancaster. After many compliments,
he gave me leave; and presently after my return, he sent me an elephant
to attend upon me, and to carry me at all times to any place I pleased.
This is a sign of the highest honour and esteem, as no person may have
an elephant, or ride upon one, but those whom the king is pleased to
honour with that privilege.

The 2d of May, the king invited me to his fountain to swim, and I was
there accordingly along with him, the place being some five or six miles
from the city; and he even sent me two elephants, one to ride upon, and
the other to carry my provision. Having washed and bathed in the water,
the king made me partake of a very splendid banquet, in which there was
too much arrak, the whole being eaten and drank us we sat in the water;
and at this entertainment all his nobles and officers were present. Our
banquet continued from one till towards five in the evening, when the
king allowed me to depart. Half an hour afterwards, all the strangers
were permitted to go away, and presently afterwards he came away
himself.

On the 14th, some Portuguese came to Acheen on an embassy from the
governor of Malacca to the king; and as the wind was scant, they landed
three leagues to the east of Acheen road. I immediately sent the
Hosiander, of which I appointed Edward Christian captain, to go in
search of the bark from Malacca, which was brought to me on the 17th:
But the king sent me two messengers, desiring me to release her and her
people and cargo; which I refused, till I had examined the bark and her
contents; saying, however, that in honour and respect for his majesty, I
should then do whatever he was pleased to desire. Afterwards, I was
informed by Mr Christian, that there were only four or five bales of
goods in the bark, and that nothing she contained had been meddled with.
Being satisfied of this I went ashore, and found my merchants were at
the court. They returned presently, saying, that the king was greatly
displeased at the capture of the Portuguese bark in his port, protesting
by his god that he would make us all prisoners, if she were not
released. Having notice that I was ashore, the king presently sent for
me; and, as I was on my way to the court, I met with a gentleman from
the king, who desired me in his name to release the bark; but I told him
I must first see and speak to the king. I was then brought into the
king's presence, and, after much discourse with him, I gave him the
bark and all her contents; with which he was so much pleased, that he
gave me the title of _Arancaia Puto_, signifying the _honourable white
man_, requiring all his nobles to call me by that name. In farther proof
of his satisfaction with my conduct on this occasion, he sold me all his
benzoin at my own price, being twenty _tailes_ the bahar, though then
selling commonly at thirty-four and thirty-five tailes. He at the same
time expressed his esteem and affection for me in the strongest terms,
desiring me to ask from him whatever I thought proper. I only requested
his letters of recommendation and favour for Priaman, which he most
readily promised; and, at my taking leave, he both made me eat some
mangoes, of which he was then eating, and gave me some home with me.

On the 27th, _Malim Cairy_ came to Acheen, by whom I received letters
from our merchants at Surat, as also a copy of the _firmaun_, sent them
from Agra, bearing date the 25th January, in the seventh year of the
then reigning Great Mogul, by which everything was confirmed that had
been agreed upon between the governor of Ahmedabad and me. The 17th of
June, a Dutch merchant came to Acheen from Masulipatam, who had been
eight months on his way, from whom we learnt the death of Mr Anthony
Hippon at Patane, and of Mr Brown, master of the Globe, who died at
Masulipatam, where our people had met with evil usage. The 24th I
received of the king his present for the king of England, consisting of
a _criss_ or dagger, a _hasega_, four pieces of fine Calicut lawn, and
eight camphire dishes.[90]

[Footnote 90: In the translation of the letter accompanying these
presents, to be noticed hereafter, they are thus described:--"A criss
wrought with gold, the hilt being of beaten gold, with a ring of stones;
an Assagaya of Swasse, half gold half copper; eight porcelain dishes
small and great, _of camfire one piece of souring stuff_; three pieces
of callico lawns."--The passage in Italics is inexplicable, either in
the words of the letter, or in the description in the text.--E.]

The 3d of July, the fleet of armed vessels belonging to Acheen arrived,
being only twenty days from the coast of Johor, at which place they had
captured the factory of the Hollanders, making prize of all their goods,
and had brought away some twenty or twenty-four Dutchmen as prisoners.
The 7th, I received the king's letter for Priaman, together with a
_chop_ or licence for my departure; and on the 12th, taking my leave of
Acheen, I embarked. In the morning of the 13th I set sail. It is to be
noted, that, from the 12th April to the middle of June, we had much rain
here at Acheen, seldom two fair days following, and accompanied, by much
wind in sudden gusts. From the 15th June to the 12th July, we had
violent gales of wind, always at S.W. or W.S.W. or W.

Sec.4. _Trade at Tecoo and Passaman, with the Voyage to Bantam, and thence
Home to England_.

Leaving Acheen, as said before, on the 13th July, 1613, we came in sight
of _Priaman_ on the 3d of August, it being then nine or ten leagues off,
N.E. by E. and clearly known by two great high hills, making a great
_swamp_ or saddle between them. We saw also the high land of _Tecoo_,
which is not more than half the height of that of Priaman, and rises
somewhat flat. At the same time likewise we saw the high land of
_Passaman_, some seven or eight leagues north of Tecoo, mid-way between
Tecoo and Priaman, which mountain is very high, and resembles Aetna in
Sicily.[91] In the afternoon of the 7th we came to Tecoo, and anchored
to the eastward of the three islands in seven fathoms, the southmost
isle bearing W.S.W. the middle isle W.N.W. and the northern isle N. 1/2
E. our anchorage being a mile from them.

[Footnote 91: Perhaps this observed similarity with Aetna is meant to
indicate that this hill also is a volcano.--E.]

I sent ashore my merchants on the 19th, and landed myself in the
afternoon. Next day, by advice of our council, the Hosiander was sent to
Priaman, with the letter of the king of Acheen. She sailed from Tecoo on
the 12th, and came back on the 18th, when she was dispatched to Bantam.
The 25th there came a junk from Bantam, the owners of which were
Chinese. They confirmed to me the reported death of Sir Henry Middleton,
with the loss of most of the men belonging to the Trades-increase, in
consequence of her main-mast breaking, while heaving her down for
careening her bottom. She was now returned from Pulo-Pannian to Bantam,
and they said that three hundred Chinese had died while employed at work
upon her.

The 28th a boat I had sent to Passaman returned, having been well
entertained at that place, and brought with them the _Scrivano_ to deal
with me, with whom accordingly I concluded a bargain. The 29th, the
governor of Tecoo sent for me to come ashore, when I went to wait upon
him. He was in council, with all the chiefs of the district, and, after
a long discussion, we agreed on the following price of pepper. In the
first place, we were to pay eighteen dollars the bahar; then there was
8d. the bahar for lastage or weighing, 30d. for _canikens_, and 35 d.
for _seilars_: Besides all which they bargained for presents to sixteen
chiefs or great men. On the 30th, Henry Long came from Passaman, and
informed me that Mr Oliver had fallen sick, and that several others of
our men had died there; upon which I sent my pinnace to bring back Mr
Oliver and all others who survived, and to discontinue our factory at
that place.

The 21st October, the Hosiander returned from Bantam, bringing me
letters from the English merchants at that place; saying that they had
17,000 bags of pepper ready, all of which I might have, or any part of
it I thought proper, if I chose to come for it, at thirteen dollars the
_timbane_. On this, and several other considerations, I held a
mercantile council, in which it was agreed that the Hosiander should be
left at _Tecoo_ for the sale of our Surat goods, all of which were
accordingly put on board her for that purpose, and I departed in the
Dragon for Bantam from the road of Tecoo on the 30th October. I remained
in this road of Tecoo eleven weeks, in which time I bought 115 or 120
tons of pepper, and buried twenty-five of our men. All of these either
died, or contracted their mortal illnesses at Passaman, not at Tecoo;
and surely, if we had not attempted to trade at Passaman, all, or at
least most of these, might have now been living. Wherefore, I earnestly
advise all of our nation to avoid sending any of their ships or men to
Passaman, for the air there is so contagious, and the water so
unwholesome, that it is impossible for our people to live at that place.

I set sail from Tecoo on the 30th October, and arrived in the road of
Bantam on the 11th November, where I anchored in a quarter less four
fathoms, [3-3/4 fathoms.] Next day I convened our English merchants on
board my ship, and agreed on the price of pepper at thirteen dollars the
_bahar_, which is 600 pounds of our weight. Having concluded my business
at this place, I set sail for Saldanha bay; where I bought for a small
quantity of copper, worth perhaps between three and four pounds, 494
sheep, 4 beeves, and 9 calves. We sailed again from that place on the
4th March, 1614; and on the day of our departure, the natives brought us
more live-stock than we knew how to dispose of; but we brought away
alive, eighty sheep, two beeves, and one calf.

The 24th of March we saw St Helena, eight or nine leagues to the W.N.W.
its latitude, by my estimation, being 16 deg. S. and its long, from the Cape
of Good Hope, 22 deg. W. At three p.m. we anchored in the road of that
island, right over-against the Chappel. While at St Helena, finding the
road from the Chappel [church valley], to where the lemon-trees grow, a
most wicked way, insomuch that it was a complete day's work to go and
come, I sent my boats to the westward, in hopes of finding a nearer and
easier way to bring down hogs and goats. In this search, my people found
a fair valley; some three or four miles to the S.W. which leads directly
to the lemon-trees, and is the largest and finest valley in the island,
after that at the Chappel, and is either the next, or the next save one,
from the valley of the Chappel. At this valley, which is some three or
four miles from that of the Chappel, and is from it the fourth valley or
swamp one way, and from the point to the westward the second, so that it
cannot be missed, it is much better and easier for getting provisions or
water, and the water is better and clearer. The road or anchorage is all
of one even ground and depth, so that it is much better riding here than
at any other part of the island; and from this place, a person may go up
to the lemon-trees and back again in three hours. We here got some
thirty hogs and pigs, and twelve or fourteen hundred lemons; but if we
had laid ourselves out for the purpose, I dare say we might have got 200
hogs, besides many goats.

Continuing our voyage home, we got sight of the Lizard point on the 4th
June, 1614, our estimated longitude from the Cape of Good Hope being
then 27 deg. 20', besides two degrees carried by the currents; so that the
difference of longitude, between the Cape and the Lizard, is 29 deg. 20', or
very nearly. Though we had then only left the Cape of Good Hope three
months before, and were only two months and nine days from St Helena,
more than half our company was now laid up by the scurvy, of which two
had died. Yet we had plenty of victuals, as beef, bread, wine, rice,
oil, vinegar, and sugar, as much as every one chose. All our men have
taken their sickness since we fell in with Flores and Corvo; since which
we have had very cold weather, especially in two great storms, one from
the N. and N.N.E. and the other at N.W. so that it seemeth the sudden
coming out of long heat into the cold is a great cause of scurvy. All
the way from the Cape of Good Hope to the Azores, I had not one man
sick.

The 15th of June, 1614, we came into the river Thames, by the blessing
of God, it being that day six months on which we departed from Bantam in
Java.


SECTION XVIII.

_Observations made during the foregoing Voyage, by Mr Copland, Chaplain,
Mr Robert Boner, Master, and Mr Nicholas Whittington, Merchant_.[92]

[Footnote 92: Purch. Pilgr. I. 466. On this occasion, only such notices
as illustrate the preceding voyage are extracted.--E.]

Sec.1. _Notes extracted from the Journal of Mr Copland, Chaplain of the
Voyage_.

The bay of Saldhana, and all about the Cape of Good Hope, is healthful,
and so fruitful that it might well be accounted a terrestrial paradise.
It agrees well with our English constitutions; for, though we had ninety
or an hundred sick when we got there, they were all as well in twenty
days as when we left England, except one. It was then June, and we had
snow on the hills, though the weather below was warmish. The country is
mixed, consisting of mountains, plains, meadows, streams, and woods
which seem as if artificially planted on purpose, they are so orderly;
and it has abundance of free-stone for building. It has also plenty of
fish and wild-fowl, as geese, ducks, and partridges, with antelopes,
deer, and other animals. The people were very loving, though at first
afraid of us, because the Dutch, who resort hither to make train-oil,
had used them unkindly, having stolen and killed their cattle; but
afterwards, and especially on our return, they were more frank and kind.
They are of middle size, well limbed, nimble and active; and are fond of
dancing, which they do in just measure, but entirely naked. Their dress
consists of a cloak of sheep or seals-skin to their middle, the hair
side inwards, with a cap of the same, and a small skin like that of a
rat hanging before their privities. Some had a sole, or kind of sandal,
tied to their feet. Their necks were adorned with greasy tripes, which
they would sometimes pull off and eat raw; and when we threw away the
guts of beasts and sheep we bought from them, they would eat them half
raw and all bloody, in a most beastly and disgusting manner. They had
bracelets about their arms of copper or ivory, and were decorated with
many ostrich feathers and shells. The women were habited like the men,
and were at first very shy; but when here on our return voyage, they
became quite familiar, even lifting their rat-skins: But they are very
loathsome objects, their breasts hanging down to their waists. The hair
both of the men and women is short and frizzled. With these people
copper serves as gold, and iron for silver. Their dwellings are small
tents, removable, at pleasure; and their language is full of a strange
_clicking_ sound, made by doubling their tongues in their throats. There
is a high hill, called the _Table Mountain_, which covers all the
adjoining territory for an hundred miles. The natives, who are quite
black, behaved to us very peaceably, but seemed to have no religion, yet
their skins were slashed or cut, like the priests of Baal; and one
seemed to act as chief, as he settled the prices for the whole. Some of
our people went a considerable way into the country, and discovered many
bays and rivers.

When at Surat, the Guzerats took some of our sea-coal to send to their
sovereign, the Great Mogul, as a curiosity. At this place there came
against us a Portuguese squadron of four galleons, attended by
twenty-five or twenty-six armed barks or frigates, commanded by an
admiral named Nuno de Accunna, and having all red colours displayed, in
token of defiance. When advised by the sabander to keep between us and
the shore, he proudly answered, That he scorned to spend a week's
provisions on his men in hindering us from trade, as he was able to
force us to yield to his superior force in an hour. After three fights,
they sent one of their frigates against us, manned with six or seven
score of their best men, intending to set us on fire, but they were all
sunk.

_Medhaphrabad_,[93] formerly a fine walled city, has been entirely
ruined in the wars of the Moguls. It has still a strong castle, held by
a refractory chief of the Rajapoots, and was besieged by the nabob,
having fifty or sixty thousand men in his camp. The nabob dwelt in a
magnificent tent, covered above with cloth of gold, and spread below
with Turkey carpets, having declared he would not desist from the siege
till he had won the castle. He sent a horse, and two vests wrought with
silk and gold, to our general Captain Best, with four vests for four
others. On the 23d and 24th of December, we fought again with the
Portuguese, in view of the whole army of the Moguls, and forced them to
cut their cables and flee from us, being better sailing vessels than
ours.

[Footnote 93: Called Madafaldebar in the preceding section, and there
supposed to be the place now named Jaffrabat, on the coast of
Guzerat.--E.]

I rode from Swally to Surat in a coach drawn by oxen, which are
ordinarily used in this country for draught, though they have plenty of
excellent and handsome horses. On the way I was quite delighted to see
at the same time the goodliest spring and harvest combined I had ever
seen any where, often in two adjoining fields, one as green as a fine
meadow, and the other waving yellow like gold, and ready to cut down;
their grain being wheat and rice, of which they make excellent bread.
All along the road there were many goodly villages, full of trees which
yield a liquor called _toddy_, or palm-wine, which is sweet and
pleasant, like new wine, being strengthening and fattening. They have
grapes also, yet only make wine from the dried raisins. In Surat there
are many fair houses built of stone and brick, having flat roofs, and
goodly gardens, abounding in pomegranates, pomecitrons, lemons, melons,
and figs, which are to be had at all times of the year, the gardens
being continually refreshed with curious springs and fountains of fresh
water. The people are tali, neat, and well-clothed in long robes of
white callico or silk, and are very grave and judicious in their
behaviour. The sabander assured us that we had slain 350 of the
Portuguese; but we heard afterwards, that above 500 were killed or
maimed. Our general sent letters for England by land, but the messenger
and his Indian attendant were poisoned by two friars. A second letter
was entrusted to a mariner, which reached its destination.

We anchored in the road of Acheen on the 12th April, 1613, where we were
kindly received by the king. On the 2d of May, all the strangers then at
Acheen were invited to a banquet at a place six miles from the town, and
on this occasion two elephants were sent for our general. To this place
all the dishes were brought by water by boys, who swam with one hand,
while each carried a dish in--the other; and the drink was brought in
the same manner. When the guests had satisfied themselves with tasting
any of the dishes, which indeed they must of all, the remainder was
thrown into the river. In this feast there were at least 500 dishes
served, all well dressed. It continued from one o'clock till five; but
our general, who was wearied with sitting so long in the water beside
the king, was dismissed an hour before the other guests. The captain or
chief merchant of the Dutch factory, either by taking too much strong
drink, or from sitting too long in the cold water, caught an illness of
which he died soon after.

The 2d June we were entertained by a fight of four elephants with a wild
tyger, which was tied to a stake; yet did he fasten on the legs and
trunks of the elephants, making them to roar and bleed extremely. This
day, as we were told, one eye of a nobleman was plucked out by command
of the king, for having looked at one of the king's women, while bathing
in the river. Another gentleman, wearing a sash, had his head cut round,
because it was too large. Some he is said to throw into boiling oil,
some to be sawn in pieces, others to have their legs cut off, or spitted
alive, or empaled on stakes. The 25th of June, the king of Acheen sent
our general a letter for the king of England, most beautifully written
and painted, of which the following is a translation of the
preamble.[94]

[Footnote 94: Being merely complimentary, it has not been deemed
necessary to give any more of this letter than the hyperbolical titles
assumed by the petty Mallay rajah.--E.]

_PEDUCKA SIRIE, Sultan, King of kings renowned in war, sole king of
Sumatra, more famous than his ancestors, feared in his dominions, and
honoured in all the neighbouring countries. In whom is the true image of
a king, reigning by the true rules of government, formed as it were of
the most pure metal, and adorned by the must splendid colours. Whose
seat is most high and complete; whence floweth, as a river of fine
crystal, the pure and undefiled stream of bounty and justice. Whose
presence is like the most pure gold: King of Priaman, and of the
mountain of gold: Lord of nine sorts of precious stones: King of two
Umbrellas of beaten gold; who sitteth upon golden carpets; the furniture
of whose horses, and his _own armour, are of pure gold; the teeth of his
elephants being likewise of gold, and every thing belonging to them. His
lances half gold half silver; his small shot of the same; a saddle also
for an elephant of the same; a tent of silver; and all his seals half
gold half silver. His bathing-vessels of pure gold; his sepulchre also
entire gold, those of his predecessors being only half gold half silver.
All the services of his table of pure gold; &c.

This great king sendeth this letter of salutation to James, king of
Great Britain, &c._

This king of Acheen is a gallant-looking warrior, of middle size, and
full of spirit. His country is populous, and he is powerful both by sea
and land. He has many elephants, of which we saw 150 or 180 at one time.
His gallies are well armed with brass ordnance, such as demi-cannons,
culverins, sackers, minions, &c. His buildings are stately and spacious,
though not strong; and his court or palace at Acheen is very pleasant,
having a goodly branch of the main river surrounding and pervading it,
which he cut and brought in from the distance of six miles in twenty
days, while we were there. At taking leave, he desired our general to
offer his compliments to the king of England, and to entreat that two
white women might be sent him: "For," said he, "if I have a son by one
of them, I will make him king of Priaman, Passaman, and the whole pepper
coast; so that you shall not need to come any more to me, but may apply
to your own English king for that commodity."

Sec.2. _Notes concerning the Voyage, extracted from the Journal of Mr
Robert Boner, who was Master of the Dragon_.

The regular trade-wind is seldom met with till two or three degrees
south of the equator. Tornados are sure to be encountered in two or
three degrees north of the line, and sometimes even four degrees. It is
necessary to use the utmost diligence in getting well to the south, as
in that consists the difference between a good and bad voyage, and the
health of the men depend greatly on that circumstance. In passing the
line, it is proper so to direct the course from the island of Mayo as to
cross between the longitudes of _seven_ and _nine_ degrees _west_ of the
Lizard, if possible. At all events be careful not to come within _six_
degrees, for fear of the calms on the coast of Guinea, and not beyond
_ten_ degrees west from the Lizard if possible, to avoid the W.N.W.
stream which sets along the coast of Brazil to the West Indies; and in
crossing the line, in 7 deg., 8 deg., or 9 deg. west of the Lizard, you shall not
fear the flats of Brazil: For the general wind in these longitudes is at
E.S.E. or S.E. so that you may commonly make a S.S.W. course, so as to
keep the ship full that she may go speedily through; for there is much
loss of time in hauling the ship too close by the wind, and it is far
better therefore to give her a fathom of the sheet.

In making for the bay of Saldanha [_Table bay,_] keep between the
latitudes of 33 deg. 50' and 34 deg. 20' of S. lat. so as to be sure of coming
not much wide of the bay. If, on seeing the land, it appear high, you
are then to the S.W. of the bay: if low sand-hills, you are then to the
northward of the bay. In falling in with, the high land to the
southward, which is between the Cape of Good Hope and the bay, the land
trends N.N.W. and S.S.E. seven leagues from the Cape, and then trends
away N.E. and S.W. towards the point of the Sugar-loaf, some four
leagues. From this point of the _Sugar-loaf_ lieth _Penguin_ island; but
keep fair by the point, as two miles from Penguin island there are two
shoals. From the point to the island there are some seven or eight miles
N. and S. and so, borrowing on that point, in eight or nine fathoms,
steer a course S.E. and E.S.E. till you bring the _Table_ S.S.W. and the
_Sugar-loaf_ S.W. by W. when you may anchor in 6 or 6 1/2 fathoms as you
please; and then will the point of land by the _Sugar-loaf_ bear W.N.W.
some two leagues off, and _Penguin_ island N.N.W. some three leagues
distant. The latitude of the point going into the bay of Saldanha
[_Table bay,_] is 34 deg. 5' S.[95] On coming in there is nothing to fear,
though the air be thick, as the land is bold within a cable's length of
the shore.

[Footnote 95: Only 33 deg. 54'--E.]

In my opinion, the current near Cape _Aguillas_ sets to the southward
not above fifty or sixty leagues from the land: Wherefore, in going to
the eastwards, it is right to have sixty leagues from land, so that you
may miss that current. For 90 or 100 leagues beyond Cape _Aguillas_, the
land trends E. by N. and not E.N.E. as in the charts.

In my opinion the gulf of Cambaya is the worst place in all India for
worms; wherefore ships going to Surat ought to use every precaution
against injury from them. At Acheen our general was denominated
_Arancaya Pattee_ by the king, who showed him extraordinary favour,
sending for him to be present at all sports and pastimes; and all our
men were very kindly used by the people at this place, more so than any
strangers who had ever been there before.


Sec.3. _Extracts from a Treatise, written by Mr Nicholas Whittington, who
was left as Factor in the Mogul Country by Captain Best, containing some
of his Travels and Adventures_.

The sheep at the Cape of Good Hope are covered with hair instead of
wool. The beeves are large, but mostly lean. The natives of that
southern extremity of Africa are negroes, having woolly heads, flat
noses, and straight well-made bodies. The men have only one testicle,
the other being cut out when very young.[96] Their apparel consists of a
skin hung from their shoulders, reaching to their waist, and two small
rat-skins, one before and the other behind, and all the rest of their
body naked, except a kind of skin or leather-cap on their heads, and
soles tied to their feet, considerably longer and broader than the foot.
Their arms are very scanty, consisting of bows and arrows of very little
force, and lances or darts very artificially made, in the use of which
they are very expert, and even with them kill many fish. They are in use
to wear the guts of sheep and oxen hanging from their necks, smelling
most abominably, which they eat when hungry, and would scramble for our
garbage like so many dogs, devouring it quite raw and foul.

[Footnote 96: Captain Saris told me that some have two; but these are of
the baser sort and slaves, as he was told by one of these marked by this
note of gentility.--_Purch._]

At Surat, although Sir Henry Middleton had taken their ships in the Red
Sea, they promised to deal fairly with us, considering that otherwise
they might burn their ships and give over all trade by sea, as _Mill
Jaffed_, one of the chief merchants of Surat, acknowledged to us. While
at Surat, every one of us that remained any time ashore was afflicted
with the flux, of which Mr Aldworth was ill for forty days. The custom
here is, that all strangers make presents on visiting any persons of
condition, and they give other presents in return.

Finding it impossible to have any trade at Surat, as the Portuguese
craft infested the mouth of the river, our general removed with the
ships to Swally roads, whence we might go and come by land without
danger, between that place and Surat. Mr Canning had been made prisoner
by the Portuguese, but the viceroy ordered him to be set ashore at
Surat, saying, "Let him go and help his countrymen to fight, for we
shall take their ships and all of them together." He was accordingly
liberated, and came to us at Swally. The purser had likewise been nearly
taken; but he escaped and got on board. The 3d October, _Seikh Shuffe_,
governor of _Amadavar_, [Ahmedabad], the chief city of Guzerat, came to
Surat and thence to Swally, where he entered into articles of agreement
for trade and friendship.

The 29th of October, four Portuguese galleons and a whole fleet of
frigates, or armed grabs, hove in sight. Our general went immediately to
meet them in the Dragon, and fired not one shot till he came between
their admiral and vice-admiral, when he gave each of them a broadside
and a volley of small arms, which made them come no nearer for that day.
The other two galleons were not as yet come up, and our consort the
Hosiander could not get clear of her anchors, so that she did not fire a
shot that day. In the evening both sides came to anchor in the sight of
each other. Next morning the fight was renewed, and this day the
Hosiander bravely redeemed her yesterday's inactivity. The Dragon drove
three of them aground, and the Hosiander so _danced the hay_ about them,
that they durst never show a man above hatches. They got afloat in the
afternoon with the tide of flood, and renewed the fight till evening,
and then anchored till next day. Next day, as the Dragon drew much
water, and the bay was shallow, we removed to the other side of the bay
at _Mendafrobay_, [Jaffrabat], where _Sardar Khan_, a great nobleman of
the Moguls, was then besieging a castle of the _Rajaputs_, who, before
the Mogul conquest, were the nobles of that country, and were now
subsisting by robbery. He presented our general with a horse and
furniture, which he afterwards gave to the governor of Gogo, a poor town
to the west of Surat.

After ten days stay, the Portuguese having refreshed, came hither to
attack us. Sardar Khan advised our general to flee; but in four hours we
drove them out of sight, in presence of thousands of the country people.
After the razing of this castle, Sardar Khan reported this gallant
action to the Great Mogul, who much admired it, as he thought none were
like the Portuguese at sea. We returned to Swally on the 27th December,
having only lost three men in action, and one had his arm shot off:
while the Portuguese acknowledged to have lost 160, though report said
their loss exceeded 300 men.

The 13th January, 1613, I was appointed factor for the worshipful
company, and bound under a penalty of four hundred pounds. Our ships
departed on the 18th, the galleons not offering to disturb them: and at
this time Anthony Starkey was ordered for England. Mr Canning was
seventy days in going from Surat to Agra, during which journey he
encountered many troubles, having been attacked by the way, and shot in
the belly with an arrow, while another Englishman in his company was
shot through the arm, and many of his peons were killed and wounded. Two
of his English attendants quitted him, and returned to Surat, leaving
only two musicians to attend upon him. He arrived at Agra on the 9th
April, when he presented our king's letter to the Great Mogul, together
with a present of little value; and being asked if this present came
from our king, he answered that it only came from the merchants. The
Mogul honoured him with a cup of wine from his own hand, and then
referred him, on the business of his embassy, to Morak Khan. One of his
musicians died, and was buried in the church-yard belonging to the
Portuguese, who took up the body, and buried it in the highway; but on
this being complained of to the king, they were commanded to bury him
again, on penalty of being all banished the country, and of having all
the bodies of their own dead thrown out from the church-yard. After
this, Mr Canning wrote that he was in fear of being poisoned by the
jesuits, and requested to have some one sent up to his assistance, which
was accordingly agreed to by us at Surat. But Mr Canning; died on the
29th of May, and Mr Kerridge went up on the 22d of June.

At this time I was to have been sent by the way of Mokha to England; but
the master of the ship said it was impossible, except I were
circumcised, to go so near Mecca. The 13th October, 1613, the ship
returned, and our messenger made prisoner at the bar of Surat by the
Portuguese armed frigates, [grabs] worth an hundred thousand pounds, and
seven hundred persons going to Goa.[97] This is likely to be of great
injury here, for no Portuguese is now permitted to pass either in or out
without a surety; and the Surat merchants are so impoverished, that our
goods are left on our hands, so that we had to send them to Ahmedabad.
John Alkin, who deserted from Sir Henry Middleton to the Portuguese,
came to us at this time, and told us that several of their towns were
besieged by the Decaners, and other neighbouring Moors, so that they
had to send away many hundred Banians and others, that dwelt among them,
owing to want of provisions; and indeed three barks came now with these
people to Surat, and others of them went to Cambaya. Their weak
behaviour in the sea-fight with us was the cause of all this.

[Footnote 97: Probably owing to careless abridgement by Purchas, this
passage is quite unintelligible. The meaning seems to be, That the ship
in which was the English messenger, having a cargo worth 100,000_l_.
sterling, and 700 persons aboard, bound on the pilgrimage to Mecca, was
taken and carried into Goa.--E.]

About this time also, Robert Claxon of the Dragon, who had deserted to
the Portuguese for fear of punishment, came to us accompanied by a
German who had been a slave among the Turks. One Robert Johnson, who was
with the Portuguese, and meant to have come to us, was persuaded by
another Englishman, while passing through the Decan, to turn mussulman,
and remain in that country, where he got an allowance of seven shillings
and sixpence a-day from the king, and his diet from the king's table.
But he died eight days after being circumcised. Robert Trully, the
musician, fell out with Mr Kerridge at Agra, and went to the king of
Decan, carrying a German with him as interpreter. They both offered to
turn Mahometans, and Trully, getting a new name at his circumcision,
received a great allowance from the king, in whose service he continues;
but the German, who had been, formerly circumcised in Persia, and now
thought to have deceived the king, was not entertained; whereupon he
returned to Agra, where he serves a Frenchman, and now goes to mass.
Robert Claxon, above mentioned, had also turned Mahometan in the Decan,
with a good allowance at court; but, not being contented, he came to
Surat, where he was pitied by us for his seeming penitence; but being
entrusted with upwards of forty pounds, under pretence of making
purchases, he gave us the slip and returned to the Decan. Thus there are
at present four English renegadoes in the Decan, besides many
Portuguese. The 27th October, 1613, we received letters sent by Mr
Gurney of Masulipatam, written by Captain Marlow of the ship Janus,
informing us of his arrival and trade at that place.

From Surat I went to _Periano_? three _coss_; thence to Cossumba, a
small village, ten _coss_; and thence to Broach, ten _coss_. This is a
very pretty city on a high hill, encompassed by a strong wall, and
having a river running by as large as the Thames, in which were several
ships of two hundred tons and upwards. Here are the best calicoes in the
kingdom of Guzerat, and great store of cotton. From thence I went to
_Saninga_ [Sarang], ten coss; to _Carrou_? ten c. and then fourteen c.
to _Boldia_ [Brodrah], a smaller city than Broach, but well built,
having a strong wall, and garrisoned by 3000 horse under _Mussuff Khan_.
I went thence ten c. to a river named, the _Wussach_, [the Mahy?] where
Mussuff was about to engage with the rajaputs who lay on the opposite
side of the river, the chief of whom was of the race of the former kings
of Surat. Thence other fourteen coss to _Niriand_,[Nariad] a large town
where they make indigo; and thence, ten c. more to _Amadabar_, or
Ahmedabad, the chief city of Guzerat, nearly as large as London,
surrounded by a strong wall, and seated in a plain by the side of the
river Mehindry. There are here many merchants, Mahometans, Pagans, and
Christians; with great abundance of merchandize, which chiefly are
indigo, cloth of gold, silver tissue, velvets, but nothing comparable to
ours, taffeties, _gumbucks_, coloured _baffaties_, drugs, &c. _Abdalla
Khan_ is governor of this place, who has the rank and pay of a commander
of 5000 horse. From, thence, on my way to Cambay, I went seven c. to
_Barengeo_, [Baregia] where every Tuesday a _cafilla_ or caravan of
merchants and travellers meet to go to Cambay, keeping together in a
large company to protect themselves from robbers. From thence sixteen c.
we came to Soquatera, a fine town with a strong garrison; whence we
departed about midnight, and got to Cambay about eight next morning, the
distance being ten _coss_.

In November, we rode to _Sarkess_, three coss from Ahmedabad, where are
the sepulchres of the Guzerat kings, the church and handsome tombs being
kept in fine order, and many persons resort to see them from all parts
of the kingdom. At the distance of a coss, there is a pleasant house
with a large garden, a mile round, on the banks of the river, which
_Chon-Chin-Naw_,[98] the greatest of the Mogul nobles, built in memory
of the great victory he gained at this place over the last king of
Guzerat, in which he took the king prisoner, and subjugated the kingdom.
No person inhabits this house, and its orchard is kept by a few poor
men. We lodged here one night, and sent for six fishermen, who in half
an hour caught more fish for us than all our company could eat.

[Footnote 98: This name seems strangely corrupted, more resembling the
name of a Chinese leader than of a Mogul Khan or Amir. Perhaps it ought
to have been Khan-Khanna.--E.]

The 28th November, we received intelligence at Ahmedabad, that three
English ships had arrived at _Larry Bunder_, the port town of
_Guta-Negar-Tutla_, [Tatta] the chief city of _Sindy_. I was sent
thither, and came on the 13th December to _Cassumparo_, where I overtook
a cafilla or caravan travelling to _Rahdunpoor_, six days journey on my
way. We went thence to _Callitalouny_, a fair castle; thence seven c. to
_Callwalla_, a pretty village, given by the emperor Akbar to a company
of women and their posterity for ever, to bring up their children in
dancing and music. They exhibited their talents to our caravan, and
every man made them some present, and then they openly asked if any of
us wanted bedfellows. On the 16th we went eight _coss_ to _Cartya_,
where is a well-garrisoned fortress. We remained here till the 18th,
waiting for another caravan for fear of thieves, and then went to
_Deccanaura_,[99] on which day our camel was stolen and one of our men
was slain. The 19th we travelled ten c. to _Bollodo_, a fort held by
_Newlock Abram Cabrate_ for the Mogul, and who that day brought in 169
heads of the Coolies, a plundering tribe. The 20th in thirteen c. we
came to a fort named _Sariandgo_, and the 21st in ten c. we arrived at
_Rhadunpoor_, a large town with a fort. We remained here till the 23d,
to provide water and other necessaries for our journey through the
desert.

[Footnote 99: It singularly happens, in the excellent map of Hindoostan
by Arrowsmith, that none of the stages between Ahmedabad and Rahdunpoor
are laid down, unless possibly _Decabarah_ of the map may be _Decanauru_
of the text; while Mr Arrowsmith actually inserts on his map the route
of Whittington across the sandy desert of Cutch, between Rahdunpoor and
the eastern branch of the Indus, or _Nulla Sunkra_, and thence through
the Delta to Tatta.--E.]

The 23d, leaving Rhadunpoor, we travelled seven coss, and lay all night
in the fields, having that day met a caravan coming from Tatta that had
been plundered of every thing. On the 24th I sent off one of my peons
with a letter to Larry Bunder, who promised to be there in ten days, but
I think he was slain by the way; we went twelve c. that day. The 25th we
travelled fourteen c. and lodged by a well, the water of which was so
salt that our cattle would not drink it. The 26th ten c. to such
another well, where our camels took water, not having had any for three
days. The 27th after fourteen c. we lodged on the ground; and the 28th,
in ten c. we came to a village called _Negar Parkar_. In this desert we
saw great numbers, of wild asses, red deer, foxes, and other wild
animals. We stopt all the 29th, and met another caravan, that had been
robbed within two days journey of Tatta. _Parkar_ pays tribute yearly to
the Mogul; but all the people from thence to _Inno_, half a day's
journey from Tatta, acknowledge no king, but rob and spare at their
pleasure. When any of the Moguls come among them, they set their own
houses on fire, and flee into the mountains; and as their houses are
only built of straw and mortar, they are soon rebuilt. They exact
customs at their pleasure, and even guard passengers through the desert,
not willing they should be robbed by any but themselves. The 30th we
left Parkar, and after travelling six coss, we lay at a tank or pond of
fresh water. The 31st we travelled eight c. and lay in the fields beside
a brackish well. The 1st January, 1614, we went ten c. to _Burdiano_,
and though many were sick of this water, we had to provide ourselves
with a supply for four days. The 2d we travelled all night eighteen c.
The 3d, from afternoon till midnight, we went ten c. The 4th twelve c.
This day I fell sick and vomited, owing to the bad water. The 5th, after
seven c. we came to three wells, two of them salt and one sweetish. The
6th, having travelled ten c. we came to _Nuraquimire_, a pretty town,
where our company from Rhadunpoor left us. We who remained were two
merchants and myself with five of their servants, four of mine, ten
camels, and five camel-drivers.

This town of _Nuraquimire_ is within three days journey of Tatta, and to
us, after coming out of the desert, seemed quite a paradise. We agreed
with a kinsman of the Rajah, or governor, for twenty _laries_, or
shillings, to conduct us on the remainder of our journey. We accordingly
departed on the 8th, and travelled ten c. to _Gaundajaw_, where we had
been robbed but for our guard. The 9th we were twice set upon, and
obliged to give each time five _laries_ to get free. We came to
_Sarruna_, a great town of the _rajputs_ with a castle, fourteen _coss_
from Tatta. We visited the governor, _Ragee Bouma_, eldest son to sultan
_Bulbul_, who was lately captured by the Moguls and had his eyes pulled
out, yet had escaped about two months ago, and was now living in the
mountains inviting all his kindred to revenge. The _Ragee_ treated me
kindly as a stranger, asking me many questions about my country. He
even made me sup with him, and gave me much wine, in which he so
heartily partook, that he stared again. A banian at this place told me
that Sir Robert Sherly had been much abused by the Portuguese and the
governor of _Larry Bunder_, having his house set on fire, and his men
much hurt in the night; and that on his arrival at Tatta, thirteen days
journey from thence, he had been unkindly used by the governor of that
city. He likewise told me of the great trade carried on at Tatta, and
that ships of 300 tons might be brought up to Larry Bunder; and advised
me to prevail upon _Ragee Bouma_ to escort us to Tatta.

According to this bad advice, we hired the _Ragee_ for forty _laries_ to
escort us with fifty horsemen to the gates of Tatta. We departed from
_Sarruna_ on the 11th January, and having travelled five coss we lay all
night by the side of a river. Departing at two next morning, the Ragee
led us in a direction quite different from our right road, and came
about daybreak into a thicket, where he made us all be disarmed and
bound, and immediately strangled the two merchants and their five men by
means of their camel ropes. After stripping them of all their clothes,
he caused their bodies to be flung into a hole dug on purpose. He then
took my horse and eighty rupees from me, and sent me and my men up the
mountains to his brothers, at the distance of twenty coss, where we
arrived on the 14th, and where I remained twenty days a close prisoner.
On the 7th February, an order came to send me to _Parkar_, the governor
of which place was of their kindred, and that I should be sent from
thence to Rhadunpoor; but I was plundered on the way of my clothes and
every thing else about me, my horse only being left me, which was not
worth taking away.

Arriving at Parkar on the 28th February, and finding the inhabitants
charitable, we were reduced to the necessity of begging victuals; and
actually procured four mahmoodies by that means, equal to as many
shillings. But having the good fortune to meet a banian of Ahmedabad,
whom I had formerly known, he relieved me and my men. We were five days
in travelling from Parkar to Rhadunpoor, where I arrived on the 19th
March, and went thence to Ahmedabad on the 2d April, after an absence of
111 days. Thence to Brodia and Barengeo, thence sixteen c. to Soquatera,
and ten c. to Cambay. We here crossed the large river, which is seven
coss in breadth,[100] and where many hundreds are swallowed up yearly.
On the other side of the river we came to _Saurau_,[101] where is a town
and castle of the _razbootches_ or rajputs. The 16th of April I
travelled twenty-five coss to Broach. The 17th I passed the river
[Narbuddah], and went ten c. to _Cossumba_; and on the 18th thirteen c.
to Surat.

[Footnote 100: The great river in the text is assuredly the upper part
of the gulf of Cambay, where the tide sets in with prodigious rapidity,
entering almost at once with a vast wave or bore, as described on a
former occasion in the Portuguese voyages.--E.]

[Footnote 101: Probably Sarrode, on the south side of the entry of the
river Mahy.--E.]

According to general report, there is no city of greater trade in all
the Indies than Tatta in Sinde; its chief port being Larry Bunder, three
days journey nearer the mouth of the river. There is a good road without
the river's mouth, said to be free from worms; which, about Surat
especially, and in other parts of India, are in such abundance, that
after three or four months riding, were it not for the sheathing, ships
would be rendered incapable of going to sea. The ports and roads of
Sinde are said to be free. From Tatta they go in two months by water to
Lahore, and return down the river in one. The commodities there are
_baffatys_, stuffs, _lawns_ [muslins], coarse indigo, not so good as
that of Biana. Goods, may be carried from Agra on camels in twenty days
to _Bucker_ on the river Indus, and thence in fifteen or sixteen days
aboard the ships at the mouth of the Indus. One may travel as soon from
Agra to Sinde as to Surat, but there is more thieving on the Sinde road,
in spite of every effort of the Mogul government to prevent it.

The inhabitants of Sinde consist mostly of Rajputs, Banians, and
Baloches, the governors of the cities and large towns being Moguls. The
country people are rude; going naked from the waist upwards, and wear
turbans quite different from the fashion of the Moguls. Their arms are
swords, bucklers, and lances; their bucklers being large and shaped like
bee-hives, in which they are in use to give their camels drink, and
their horses provender. Their horses are good, strong, and swift, and
though unshod, they ride them furiously, backing them at a year old. The
Rajputs eat no beef or buffalo flesh, even worshipping them; and the
Moguls say that the Rajputs know how to die as well as any in the world.
The Banians kill nothing, and are said to be divided into more than
thirty different casts, that differ somewhat among them in matters of
religion, and may not eat with each other. All burn their dead; and when
the husband dies, the widow shaves her head, and wears her jewels no
more, continuing this state of mourning as long as she lives.

When a Rajput dies, his wife accompanies his body to the funeral pile in
her best array, attended by all her friends and kindred, and by music.
When the funeral pile is set on fire, she walks round it two or three
times, bewailing the death of her husband, and then rejoicing that she
is now to live with him again: After which, embracing her friends, she
sits down on the top of the pile among dry wood, taking her husband's
head on her lap, and orders fire to be put to the pile; which done, her
friends throw oil upon her and sweet perfumes, while she endures the
fire with wonderful fortitude, loose not bound. I have seen many
instances of this. The first I ever saw was at Surat, the widow being a
virgin of ten years old, and her affianced husband being a soldier slain
in the wars at a distance, whence his clothes and turban were sent to
her, and she insisted on burning herself along with these. The governor
refused to give her permission, which she took grievously to heart, and
insisted on being burnt; but they durst not, till her kindred procured
leave by giving the governor a present, to her great joy. The kindred of
the husband never force this, but the widow esteems it a disgrace to her
family not to comply with this custom, which they may refrain from if
they choose: But then they must shave their heads, and break all their
ornaments, and are never afterwards allowed to eat, drink, sleep, or
keep company with any one all the rest of their lives. If, after
agreeing to burn, a woman should leap out of the fire, her own parents
would bind her and throw her in again by force; but this weakness is
seldom seen.

The Banian marriages are made at the age of three years or even under;
and two pregnant women sometimes enter into mutual promises, if one of
their children should prove male and the other female, to unite them in
marriage. But these marriages are always in the same cast and religion,
and in the same trade and occupation; as the son of a barber with the
daughter of a barber, and so on. When the affianced couple reach three
years of age, the parents make a great feast, and set the young couple
on horseback dressed in their best clothes, a man sitting behind each to
hold them on. They are then led about the city in procession, according
to their state and condition, accompanied by bramins or priests and many
others, who conduct them to the pagoda or temple; and after going
through certain ceremonies there, they are led home, and feasts are
given for several days, as they are able. When ten years of age, the
marriage is consummated. The reason they assign for these early
marriages is, that they may not be left wifeless, in case their parents
should die. Their bramins are esteemed exceedingly holy, and have the
charge of their pagodas or idol temples, having alms and tithes for
their maintenance; yet they marry, and follow occupations, being good
workmen and ready to learn any pattern. They eat but once a day, washing
their whole bodies before and after meat, and use ablutions after the
natural evacuations.

The _Baloches_ are Mahometans, who deal much in camels, and are mostly
robbers by land or on the rivers, murdering all they rob; yet are there
very honest men among them in Guzerat and about Agra. While I was in
Sinde, they took a boat with seven Italians and a Portuguese friar, all
the rest being slain in fight. This was ripped up by them in search of
gold.[102]

[Footnote 102: This is obscurely expressed, leaving it uncertain _what_
was ripped up in search of gold: The boat, the bodies of the slain, or
the prisoners.--E.]

John Mildnall, or Mildenhall, an Englishman, had been employed with
three other young Englishmen, whom he poisoned in Persia, to make
himself master of the goods. He was himself also poisoned, yet, by means
of preservatives, he lived many months afterwards, though exceedingly
swelled, and so came to Agra with the value of 20,000 dollars. On this
occasion I went from Surat for Agra, on the 14th May, 1614. I arrived
first at _Bramport_, [Bushanpoor] where Sultan _Parvis_ lives, situated
in a plain on the river _Taptee_ or of Surat, which is there of great
breadth, and at this place there is a large castle. Thence I went to
Agra in twenty-six days, having travelled the whole way from Surat to
Agra, which is 700 coss or 1010 English miles, in thirty-seven days of
winter, during which time it rained almost continually. From Surat to
Burhanpoor is a pleasant champain country, well watered with rivers,
brooks, and springs. Between Burhanpoor and Agra the country is very
mountainous, not passable with a coach, and scarcely to be travelled on
camels. The nearest way is by _Mando_, passing many towns and cities on
every day's journey, with many high hills and strong castles, the whole
country being well inhabited, very peaceable, and clear of thieves.

Agra is a very large town, its wall being two coss in circuit, the
fairest and highest I ever saw, and well replenished with ordnance; the
rest of the city being ruinous, except the houses of the nobles, which
are pleasantly situated on the river. The ancient royal seat was
_Fatipoor_, twelve coss from Agra, but is now fallen into decay. Between
these two is the sepulchre of the king's father, to which nothing I ever
saw is comparable: yet the church or mosque of _Fatipoor_ comes near it,
both being built according to the rules of architecture. In Agra the
Jesuits have a house and a handsome church, built by the Great Mogul,
who allows their chief seven rupees a-day, and all the rest three, with
licence to convert as many as they can: But alas! these converts were
only for the sake of money; for when, by order of the Portuguese, the
new converts were deprived of their pay, they brought back their beads
again, saying they had been long without pay, and would be Christians no
longer. In consequence of the Portuguese refusing to deliver back the
goods taken at Surat, the king ordered the church doors to be locked up
and they have so continued ever since; so the _padres_ make a church of
one of their chambers, where they celebrate mass twice a day, and preach
every Sunday, first in Persian to the Armenians and Moors, and
afterwards in Portuguese for themselves, the Italians, and Greeks.

By them I was informed of the particulars of Mildenhall's goods, who had
given them all to a French protestant, though himself a papist, that he
might marry a bastard daughter he had left in Persia, and bring up
another. The Frenchman refusing to make restitution, was thrown into
prison and after four months all was delivered up.

Between Agumere and Agra, at every ten _coss_, being an ordinary day's
journey, there is a _Serai_ or lodging house for men and horses, with
hostesses to dress your victuals if you please, paying a matter of
three-pence for dressing provisions both for man and horse. And between
these two places, which are 120 coss distant, there is a pillar erected
at every _coss_, and a fair house every ten coss, built by Akbar, on
occasion of making a pilgrimage on foot from Agra to Agimere, saying his
prayers at the end of every coss. These houses serve for accommodating
the king and his women, no one else being allowed to use them. The king
resides at Agimere on occasion of wars with _Rabna_, a rajput chief, who
has now done homage, so that there is peace between them. I made an
excursion to the Ganges, which is two days journey from Agra. The
Banians carry the water of the Ganges to the distance of many hundred
miles, affirming that it never corrupts, though kept for any length of
time. A large river, called the _Geminie_ [Jumna], passes by Agra.

On the 24th of May, 1616, while on our voyage home to England, we went
into Suldunha bay, where were several English ships outwards bound,
namely, the Charles, Unicorn, Janus, Globe, and Swan, the general being
Mr Benjamin Joseph. We arrived safe at Dover on the 15th September,
1616.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Mildenhall, mentioned in the foregoing article, left England on the
12th February, 1600, and went by Constantinople, Scanderoon, Aleppo,
Bir, Caracmit, Bitelis, Cashbin, Ispahan, Yezd, Kerman, and Sigistan, to
Candhar; and thence to Lahore, where he arrived in 1603. He appears to
have carried letters from Queen Elizabeth to the Great Mogul, by whom he
was well received, and procured from him letters of privilege for trade
in the Mogul dominions. He thence returned into Persia, whence he wrote
to one Mr Richard Staper from Cashbin, on the 3d October, 1606, giving
some account of his travels, and of his negociations at the court of the
Mogul. This letter, and a short recital of the first two years of his
peregrinations, are published in the Pilgrims, vol. I. pp. 114--116, but
have not been deemed of sufficient importance for insertion in this
collection.--E.




SECTION XIX.

_Eleventh Voyage of the East India Company, in 1612, in the
Salomon_.[103]


We sailed from Gravesend on the 1st February, 1611, according to the
computation of the church of England, or 1612 as reckoned by others. We
were four ships in company, which were counted as three separate
voyages, because directed to several parts of India: The James, which
was reckoned the _ninth_ voyage, the Dragon and Hosiander the _tenth_,
and our ship, the Salomon, as the _eleventh_.

[Footnote 103: Purch. Pilgr. I. 486. This unimportant voyage is only
preserved, for the sake of continuing the regular series of voyages
which contributed to the establishment of the East India Company. We
learn from Purchas that it was written by Ralph Wilson, one of the mates
in the Salomon, who never mentions the name of his captain. This voyage,
as given by Purchas, contains very little information, and is therefore
here abridged, though not extending to two folio pages in the
Pilgrims.--E.]

I would advise such as go from Saldanha bay with the wind at E. or S.E.
to get to a considerable distance from the land before standing
southwards, as otherwise the high lands at the Cape will take the wind
from them; and if becalmed, one may be much troubled, as there is
commonly in these parts a heavy sea coming from the west. Likewise, the
current sets in for the shore, if the wind has been at N.N.W. or W. or
S.S.W. And also the shore is so bold that no anchorage can be had.

The 18th October, we espied the land, being near _Celeber_ in the island
of Sumatra, in about 3 deg. of south latitude. The 2d November, coming
between Java and a ragged island to the westwards of the point of
_Palimbangan_, we met a great tide running out so fast that we could
hardly stem it with the aid of a stiff gale. When afterwards the gale
slacked, we came to anchor, and I found the tide to run three 1/2
leagues in one watch. I noticed that this tide set outwards during the
day, and inwards through the night. This day at noon the point of
Palimbangan bore N.E. by E. three leagues off, and from thence to the
road of Bantam is five leagues, S.S.E. 1/3 E. The latitude of Bantam is
6 deg. 10' S. and the long. 145 deg. 2' E. This however is rather too much
easterly, as I think the true longitude of Bantam is 144 deg. E. from
Flores.[104]

[Footnote 104: The long. of Bantam is 106 deg. E. from Greenwich. That in
the text appears to have been estimated from the island of Flores, which
is 31 deg. 20' W. from Greenwich, so that the longitude of Bantam ought to
have been stated as 137 deg. 20' E. from Flores, making an error of excess
in the text of seven or eight degrees.--E.]

The 7th March, at five p.m. while in lat. 20 deg. 34' S. we descried land
nine leagues off, N.E. 1/2 N. The S.E. part of this island is somewhat
high, but falleth down with a low point. The W. part is not very high,
but flat and smooth towards the end, and falls right down. The south and
west parts of this island is all surrounded with shoals and broken
ground, and we did not see the other sides; yet it seemed as if it had
good refreshments. The longitude of this island is 104 deg. from Flores, but
by my computation 107 deg..[105] In these long voyages, we do not rely
altogether on our reckoning, but use our best diligence for discovering
the true longitudes, which are of infinite importance to direct our
course aright.

[Footnote 105: No island is to be found in the latitude and longitude
indicated in the text.--E.]



SECTION XX.

_The Twelfth Voyage of the East India Company, in 1613, by Captain
Christopher Newport_.[106]


The full title of this voyage, as given in the Pilgrims, is as
follows:--"A Journal of all principal Matters passed in the Twelfth
Voyage to the East India, observed by me _Walter Payton_, in the good
ship the _Expedition_.--Whereof Mr _Christopher Newport_ was captain,
being set out _Anno_ 1612. Written by the said _Walter Payton_." The
date of the year of this voyage, according to our present mode of
computation, was 1613, as formerly explained at large, the year being
then computed to commence on the 25th March, instead of the 1st
January.--E.

[Footnote 106: Purch. Pilgr. I. 488.]

Sec.1. _Observations at St Augustine, Mohelia, and divers Parts of Arabia_.

The 7th January, 1613, we sailed from Gravesend for India, in the good
ship Expedition of London, about the burden of 260 tons, and carrying
fifty-six persons; besides the Persian ambassador and his suite, of whom
there were fifteen persons, whom we were ordered to transport to the
kingdom of Persia, at the cost of the worshipful company. The names of
the ambassador and his people were these. Sir Robert Sherley the
ambassador, and his lady, named Teresha, a Circassian; Sir Thomas
Powell, and his lady, called Tomasin, a Persian; a Persian woman, named
Leylye; Mr Morgan Powell; Captain John Ward; Mr Francis Bubb, secretary;
Mr John Barbar, apothecary; John Herriot, a musician; John Georgson,
goldsmith, a Dutchman; Gabriel, an old Armenian; and three Persians,
named Nazerbeg, Scanderbeg, and Molhter.

In the morning of the 26th April; we fell in with a part of the land of
Ethiopia, [Southern Africa,] close adjoining to which is a small island,
called _Conie island_, [Dassen island] all low land, and bordered by
many dangerous rocks to seawards. It is in the lat. of 33 deg. 30' S. The
wind falling short, we were constrained to anchor between that island
and the main, where we had very good ground in nineteen or twenty
fathoms. We sent our boat to the island, where we found Penguins, geese,
and other fowls, and seals in great abundance; of all which we took as
many as we pleased for our refreshment. By a carved board, we observed
that the Hollanders had been there, who make great store of train-oil
from the seals. They had left behind them the implements of their work,
together with a great copper cauldron standing on a furnace, the
cauldron being full of oil; all which we left as we found them.

Having spent two days here at anchor, and the wind coming favourable, we
weighed and proceeded for the Cape of Good Hope, and arrived, by God's
grace, at Saldanha on the 30th of April, where we found six ships at
anchor. Two of these, the Hector and James, were English, and the other
four Hollanders, all homeward bound. We here watered, and refreshed
ourselves well with reasonable abundance of the country sheep and
beeves, which were bought from the natives, and plenty of fresh fish,
which we caught with our seyne. The 10th May the Pepper-corn arrived
here, likewise homewards bound; and as she was but ill provided with
necessaries, we supplied her from our scanty store as well as we could
spare.

Being all ready to depart with the first fair wind, which, happened on
the 15th May, we then sailed altogether from the bay, taking leave
according to the custom of the sea, and we directed our course for St
Augustine. In our way we had sight of _Capo do Arecife_,[107] part of
the main land of Africa, in lat. 33 deg. 25' S. on the 24th May, the compass
there varying 6 deg. 9'. The 15th June we got sight of the island of St
Lawrence or Madagascar, and on the 17th came to anchor close beside port
St Augustine, meaning to search the soundings and entrance into the bay
before we went in, as there was no one in the ship well acquainted with
it. Having done this, we went in next day, and came to anchor in ten
fathoms, yet our ship rode in forty fathoms. We had here wood and
water, and great abundance of fresh fish, which we caught in such
quantities with the seyne as might have served for six ships companies,
instead of our own. But we could get no cattle from the natives, who
seemed to be afraid of us; for, though they came once to us, and
promised to bring us cattle next day, they seemed to have said so as a
cover for driving away their cattle, in which they were employed in the
interim, and they came no more near us. Some days after, we marched into
the woods with forty musketeers, to endeavour to discover some of the
natives, that we might buy cattle; but we only found empty houses, made
of canes, whence we could see the people had only gone away very
recently, as their fires were still burning, and the scales of fish they
had been broiling were lying about. We also saw the foot-marks of many
cattle, which had been there not long before, and had to return empty
handed.

[Footnote 107: The latitude in the text indicates Burtrenhook, near the
mouth of the Groot river, this being probably the Dutch name, while that
in the text is the Portuguese.--E.]

The entry into the port of St Augustine resembles that of Dartmouth
haven; and on going in, you must bring the wood, called
Westminster-hall, to which it has some resemblance, to bear N.E. by E.
and then steer due E. borrowing a little towards the south side of the
bay, where your soundings will be thirteen, nine, eight, and seven
fathoms, all good ground, till you be shut within the shoal. After this
you have deep water till you come into the road, and then have seven,
eight, and ten fathoms. But if you go too far behind the hill on the
larboard hand, which resembles an old barn, you shall then have thirty
and forty fathoms. St Augustine is in lat 23 deg. 30' S. the var. being 15 deg.
40'.[108]

[Footnote 108: Long. 44 deg. 20' E. from Greenwich.--E.]

We sailed from St Augustine on the 23d June, directing our course for
the island of Mohelia, and on the 3d July we had sight of an island
called Juan, nine or ten leagues E. by S. from Mohelia. We came also
this day to anchor at Mohelia, between it and some broken land off its
southern side. We had here great abundance of refreshments, and very
cheap; for we bought five bullocks in exchange for one Levant sword, and
had goats, hens, pine-apples, cocoa-nuts, plantains, oranges, lemons,
and limes, for trifles worth little. Such bullocks as we had for money
cost a dollar each, or ten pieces of 4-1/2d.; at which rate we
purchased forty-one beeves. The natives of this island are chiefly Moors
[negroes], but there are Arabians, Turks, and others also among them;
and they are much engaged in wars with the people of _Juan_, [Hinznan or
Johanna,] and Comoro islands in their neighbourhood. They told us that
the king of the island died the day we arrived, being succeeded by his
son, _Phanehomale_, who was only of tender years, and was to reign under
the protection of the queen his mother. His brother-in-law, as chief
man, accompanied by several other people of condition, came down to bid
us welcome, and used us very kindly. Both he and many others of the
islanders spoke tolerably good Portuguese, so that I had much
conversation with them, and was informed of every thing I wished to
know.

In this island they build barks, in which they trade along the coast of
Melinda and Arabia, disposing of slaves and fruit, by which means they
supply themselves with dollars, and with such articles as they need. I
suspect also that they have some dealings with the Portuguese, but they
would not let us know this, lest we might suspect them of treachery.
They told me that we were welcome, and that the whole island was at our
command to do us service; but, if we had been Portuguese, they would
have put us all to the sword. In my opinion, however, it would be
dangerous to repose too much confidence in them. The king's
brother-in-law shewed me a letter of recommendation of the place,
written in Dutch, and left there by a Hollander; and he requested of us
to leave a letter to the same purport, certifying their honest and
friendly dealings, that they might be able to show to others of our
nation. To this we consented, and I gave them a writing, sealed by our
captain, expressing the good entertainment we had received, and the
prices of provisions; yet recommending to our countrymen, not to trust
them any farther than might seem consistent with their own safety. They
speak a kind of Moorish language, somewhat difficult to learn; so that I
could only pick up the few words following, which may serve to ask for
provisions and fruits, by such as do not understand Portuguese, or in
speaking to any of the natives who have not that language.

   _Gumbey_,   a bullock.
   _Buze_,     a goat.
   _Coquo_,    a hen.
   _Sinzano_,  a needle.
   _Seiavoye_, cocoa-nuts.
   _Demon_,    lemons.
   _Mage_,     water.
   _Surra_,    a kind of drink.
   _Soutan_,   the king.
   _Quename_,  a pine-apple.
   _Cartassa_, paper.
   _Tudah_,    oranges.
   _Arembo_,   bracelets.
   _Figo_,     plantains.

This island of Mohelia is in lat 12 deg. 10' S.[109] and has good anchorage
in its road in forty fathoms. Having watered and refreshed ourselves
sufficiently, we sailed from thence on the 10th of July, directing our
course for the island of Socotora. The 19th we passed to the north of
the equator; and on the 25th we had sight of land, which we supposed to
have been Cape Guardafui, at the entrance into the Red Sea; and so,
taking a departure for Socotora, we were unable to find it. We were
therefore obliged to consider how we might shelter ourselves against the
fury of the winter in these parts, and also to procure refreshments;
wherefore we determined to sail for the islands of _Curia Muria_, which
are in about the latitude of 18 deg. N.[110] over against the desert of
_Arabia Felix_. In our way; the weather was continually so foggy, that
we were unable at any time to see half an English mile before us, such
being usual in these seas in the months of July, August, and September.
In all this time both the sun and stars were so continually obscured,
that we were never able to get an observation, by which to regulate or
correct our dead reckoning; but, God being our guide, we at length
groped out the land by means of the lead. We could now clearly perceive
the colour of the water to be changed to white, with many yellow grassy
weeds floating on the surface; and heaving the lead continually as we
advanced, we at length struck ground in forty-three fathoms. Proceeding
nearer the land, our sounding lessened to twenty-two fathoms, when we
anchored on good ground; and though we distinctly heard the rut of the
shore at no great distance, we could not perceive the land till next
day, when the weather was somewhat clearer. We then sent our skiff in
shore, to see if any place could be discovered of more security for our
ship to ride in; but, on account of the great sea that came rolling into
the bay, the surge was so violent that they could not come near the
shore, and had to return as they went; only that they had been able to
descry some fair stone-houses by the sea-side, which proved to be
_Doffar_, in Arabia Felix.

[Footnote 109: Lat. 13 deg. 35' S. Long. 45 deg. 30' E. from Greenwich.--E.]

[Footnote 110: These islands are at the mouth of a bay of the same name
on the oceanic coast of that portion of Arabia named Mahra, in long, 55 deg.
30' E. from Greenwich.--E.]

When God sent us a little clear weather, we could perceive a high cape
on the western side of the bay, which we discovered from our skiff the
second time it was sent, and could plainly see that it formed a very
good road for all kinds of winds, except between the E. and S. by E.
points. We were thankful to God for this discovery, and warped our ship
to that road, with much toil to our men, as it was six or seven leagues
from the place where we had anchored. On the 3d of August, having
brought our ship to anchor in that road, we went ashore in the boat to a
little village by the sea-side, called _Resoit_, inhabited mostly by
Arabian fishermen, who entertained us kindly, and gave us all the
information we desired respecting the country. The governor also of
_Doffar_ came down to us, whose name was _Mir Mahommed Madoffar_, who
bade us kindly welcome, and presented us with three bullocks, and some
sheep, goats, hens, sugar-canes, plantains, cocoa-nuts, and the like. In
return we made him a present of a fine damasked fowling-piece, double
lockt, which he greatly admired. He appeared to desire our friendship as
much as we did his; and he gave us licence to land at all times when we
were inclined. He also gave orders to have a market established for us
at the village of Resoit, that we might be supplied with every kind of
provision that the country affords. Their cattle were both dear and
lean, and fresh water so scarce, bad, and difficult to be had, that we
were forced to hire the natives to bring it down to us in skins from a
distance, paying them at the rate of twenty-four shillings for the fill
of five pipes.

Before leaving this place, Mir Mahommed desired us to leave a writing of
commendation in his favour, specifying the kind and good entertainment
we had received. This was accordingly granted, and I wrote it upon
parchment, beginning it in large letters, the purport being similar to
that granted at Mohelia, and this also was signed by the captain. The
governor also sent us three notes signed by himself, for the purpose of
being given by us to other ships, if they should happen to come upon
this part of the coast, as we had been constrained to do, by which he
might know our ships from those of other nations, and give them good
entertainment accordingly. Cape _Resoit_ is in lat. 16 deg. 38' N. and has
good anchorage in 5-1/2 or 6 fathoms.

The 28th August, we set sail from thence, directing our course for the
coast of Persia, coasting along the oceanic shore of Arabia; it being
our chiefest object to set the lord ambassador on shore, as, by reason
of the news we had received at the Cape of Good Hope, our expectations
of trade at Surat, Dabul, and all other parts thereabouts, were
frustrated. The 2d September, we sailed close beside an island on the
coast of Arabia, called _Macyra_, in lat. 20 deg. 30' N. And on the 4th of
that month we passed the eastermost point of Arabia, called Cape
_Rassalgat_, in lat. 22 deg. 34' N.[111]

[Footnote 111: This Cape is in lat. 23 deg. N. and long. 58 deg. 45'E. from
Greenwich.--E.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Note_.--In explanation of the disappointment of trade at Surat, &c.
there is the following marginal note in the Pilgrims, vol. I. p.
490.--"These news at the Cape were, Captain Hawkins coming away in
disgust, as denied leave to trade; the English being often wronged by
the Mogul, in frequent breach of promise, as already shewn; for which
they forced a trade in the Red Sea on the Mogul subjects. Which
afterwards procured the privileges granted to Captain Best, as already
related, lest the Moguls should have the sea shut up to them, and all
their trade stopt. They were the more induced to grant these privileges
to the English, on seeing them able to withstand the Portuguese, whose
marine force had held the Guzerat people under maritime subjection, and
made them afraid to trade with the English."--_Purch._

Sec.2. Proceedings on the Coast of Persia, and Treachery of the Baloches_.

Having crossed the gulf from Cape Rasalgat, on the 10th September we got
sight of the coast of Persia, in the lat. of 25 deg. 10' N. When some seven
leagues from the land, we sent our skiff ashore to make enquiry
concerning the country, and to seek out some convenient place in which
to land his lordship, having Sir Thomas Powell, with two of the
ambassador's Persian attendants, and _Albertus_, our own linguist, that
we might be able to converse with the natives. They came to a little
village called _Tesseque_,[112] where they spoke with some camel-drivers
and other country-people; from whom they learnt that the country was
called _Getche Macquerona_ [Mekran], and the inhabitants _Baloches_, all
living under the government of a king, named _Melik Mirza_, whose chief
residence was some five or six days journey from thence, at a port named
_Guadal_. They were farther informed, that all the country of _Mekran_
paid tribute yearly to the king of Persia. When informed of our purpose
to land the ambassador, they told us that, by means of _Melik Mirza_,
his lordship might have a safe conveyance in nine days to _Kermshir_, in
the province of _Kerman_; and from thence might travel in eleven days
more to _Ispahan_ in Persia.

[Footnote 112: Tize is laid down upon this part of the Persian coast, in
lat 25 deg. 25' N. and long. 60 deg. 80' E. from Greenwich: Perhaps the Tesseque
of the text.--E.]

We then sailed along the coast, and on the 11th of the month we sent our
boat ashore with Sir Thomas Powell, accompanied as before, to make
farther enquiries, and to endeavour to hire a pilot to direct our course
for Guadal, as we were unacquainted with the coast. They came to a place
called _Pesseque_, about a day's journey from Tesseque, where they had
similar accounts with the former, all commending the port of Guadal as
the best place at which the ambassador could land. Wherefore, being
unable to procure a pilot, we resolved, with God's blessing, to sail to
that place with all the speed we could. On the 13th, while on our way,
we espied coming towards us from the eastwards, two great boats, called
_teradas_, which were sailing along shore for Ormus. Whereupon, that we
might procure a pilot from them, we manned our skiff sufficiently to
bring them by force to our ship, if entreaties were unavailing, yet
without meaning to offer them the smallest injury, or even to send them
away dissatisfied.

When our skiff came up with them, instead of answering the hails of our
men, they waved our skiff to leeward with a drawn sword; on which,
thinking to fear them, and make them lower their sail, our men fired a
random shot towards them, which they answered by firing another directly
at our skiff, followed by half a hundred arrows, to which our men
answered by plying all their muskets. But our skiff was unable to hold
way with them, as they were under sail, and had therefore to return to
the ship, with one man very dangerously wounded by an arrow in the
breast, who afterwards recovered. As we in the ship saw the skiff
returning without them, we hoisted out our long-boat, and sent her after
the two _teradas_, we following with the ship as near the shore as we
could with safety; for it was now of much importance that we should
speak with them, on purpose to avoid their spreading scandalous reports
of us in the country, which might have frustrated our chief hopes of
landing the ambassador at _Guadal_, being the place we most depended
upon, and being destitute of any other place for the purpose, should
this fail, considering the unwelcome intelligence we had got concerning
Guzerat at the Cape.

Our long boat, having fetched up with the _teradas_, drove them into a
bay whence they could not escape; on which the native mariners sailed so
far into the bay, that one of the teradas was cast away on the beach,
and the other had nearly shared the same fate, but was saved by our men
just without the surf. Most of the _balloches_ leapt overboard, and
several of them narrowly escaped drowning; while nine of them were
brought by our men to our ship along with the _terada_, part of whom
they had taken out of the water. There were originally twenty-six
balloches in the two teradas, but all the rest escaped ashore by
swimming through the surf. When these men came aboard our ship, they
were found to belong to Guadal; and when told that we were sorry for the
loss of their other bark, as we meant them no harm, but only wished to
speak with them, that we might learn the navigation to their port, they
were glad to learn we had no evil intentions, thinking we had been as
merciless as themselves, and acknowledged their loss proceeded from
their own folly.

We then informed them that we were bound for Guadal, on purpose to land
a Persian ambassador there, and that we earnestly entreated the master
of the terada, whose name was _Noradin_, to pilot us to that place, for
which we would satisfy him to his contentment. Knowing that he could not
chuse, he consented to go with us, on condition we would permit the
terada and his men to proceed to Muscat, whither they were originally
bound; but we did not think this quite safe, lest they might communicate
news of our arrival among the Portuguese, and thought it better to take
the bark along with us to Guadal, to manifest our own good intentions.
Noradin accordingly consented, between fear and good will, and was much
made of by us to reassure his confidence. On the passage to Guadal, we
had much conference with him and his men, both respecting the state of
the country, the character of their king, and the means of the
ambassador travelling from thence into Persia. Their answers and reports
all confirmed what we had been already told on the coast, and gave us
hopes of success. The terada was about fifteen tons burden, and her
loading mostly consisted in the provisions of the country, as rice,
wheat, dates, and the like. They had a Portuguese pass, which they
shewed us, thinking at first we had been of that nation. I translated
this, to show in what subjection the Portuguese keep all the natives of
these countries, as without such a pass they are not suffered to
navigate these seas, under penalty of losing their lives, ships, and
goods.

_Antonio Pereira de la Cerda, Captain of the Castle of Muscat, &c._

"Know all to whom these presents are shewn, that I have hereby given
secure licence to this _terada_, of the burden of fifty _candies_,
whereof is master Noradin, a Mahomedan _baloche_, dwelling in Guadal, of
the age of fifty years, who carries for his defence four swords, three
bucklers, five bows, with their arrows, three calivers, two lances, and
twelve oars. And that in manner following: She may pass and sail from
this castle of Muscat, to Soar, Dobar, Mustmacoraon, Sinde, Cache,
Naguna, Diu, Chaul, and Cor. In going she carries goods of _Conga_, as
raisins, dates, and such like; but not without dispatch from the
custom-house of this castle, written on the back hereof. In this voyage
she shall not carry any prohibited goods, viz. steel, iron, lead,
tobacco, ginger, cinnamon of Ceylon, or other goods prohibited by his
majesty's regulations. And conforming thereto, the said _terada_ shall
make her voyage without let or hindrance of any generals, captains, or
any of the fleets or ships whatever of his majesty she may happen to
meet with. This licence shall be in force for one whole year, in going
and returning; and if expired, shall continue in force till the
completion of her voyage.

   _Given at the Castle of Muscat, this_ 16_th November_, 1611.
   _Written by Antonio de Peitas, notary of the said factory,
   &c._

   _Sealed and signed by_
   ANTONIO PEREIRA."

   The certificate on the back was thus:
   "_Registered in the book of Certificates, folio xxxii, et sequ._
   Signed,  ANT. PEITAS."

The 17th September, we sailed past some high rugged cliffs, close to
which, as Noradin told us, was a good watering place, at a village named
_Ivane_, fifteen leagues west from Guadal. That same evening we arrived
at Guadal, and anchored for the night off the mouth of the port, whence
about thirty boats came out next morning to fish, some of which came to
speak with the _balloches_ we had aboard. What conversation passed among
them we did not understand, being in the _balloche_ language. Betimes on
the 18th, we cleared our pilot and his boat, and he departed well
contented. Soon after, the ambassador sent Nazerbeg, one of his Persian
attendants, on shore in our skiff, with a message to the governor
concerning his landing and passing through that country into Persia.
While on the way, our skiff was met by the governor's boat, coming off
to our ship, and Nazerbeg was taken into that boat, which carried him to
the shore, whence he was accompanied by many of the natives to the
governor's tent. He here delivered his message in Persian, which these
people understand as well as their own language, and was kindly
entertained. The answer from the governor was to this effect: That,
although this country of Mekran did not belong to the king of Persia, it
yet owed love and duty thereto, having been long tributary to the king
and his predecessors, and still was. He farther said, that the king of
Mekran was the king of Persia's slave, with many other hollow
compliments, and that the ambassador should be made as welcome as in
Persian all this only tending to allure his lordship ashore by treachery
to his ruin, as appeared by the event.

With this answer Nazerbeg returned, being accompanied on board by about
a dozen of the most ancient men of the balloches, to confirm the same.
On coming aboard, these men saluted the ambassador most submissively, in
the name of the governor of Guadal, and on their own behalf some even
offering to kiss his feet; and told his lordship that he was most
fortunate in coming to their city at this time, as only the day before
the viceroy had come down with a troop of men, to visit a saint, and
therefore his lordship would be conducted with infinite safety through
the country, and protected from the danger of rebels and thieves, who
infested the country between Mekran and Persia, and might either go
through Kerman or Segistan to Ispahan. They added, that the viceroy
would supply his lordship with camels and horses, and every other
requisite for the journey, and would gladly give him every other
accommodation in his power. They said, moreover, that they were much
rejoiced at having such an opportunity of shewing their unfeigned love
and duty towards the king of Persia, and that the ambassador should be
dispatched on his journey from Guadal in two days, if he were so
inclined. They told us, that our ship should be supplied with water, and
every other necessary of which we were in want; and they gave us three
bags of bruised dates, of about 300 pounds weight, with two boats,
saying the fishing-boats were ordered to give us two fish a-piece daily,
on account of their government, which they did accordingly.

By these shews of good-will, all men concurring in the same fair story,
both now and formerly, we were thoroughly satisfied, and had no distrust
that they meant not as well as they said. The lord ambassador,
especially, was much rejoiced at the prospect of being thus enabled to
reach Persia in twenty days, as they said; and we not less so, in
bringing our long-desired hopes to a bearing. But God, from whom no
secrets of the heart can be hidden, knew their treacherous intentions
towards us; and had not his mercy exceeded his justice, we had been
utterly destroyed, and it had never been known what became of us, our
ship, or our goods.

Being quite satisfied with these fair promises, the ambassador got every
thing in readiness, and in the morning of the 19th September, sent his
money and all his baggage on shore with the _balloches_ boats, which
came aboard for the purpose. They also brought a message from the
viceroy and governor, saying they had provided tents for his lordship
and all his followers, close to their own, where they would be happy to
receive him as soon as he pleased to land. Into this tent accordingly
all the ambassador's goods were carried, and some of his followers were
appointed by his orders to remain there in charge of them, till he
should himself land, intending to have gone ashore the same day, about
four in the afternoon, of which he sent word to the viceroy. In the mean
time our boat went ashore with empty casks to bring off fresh water, and
in her went the Persian followers of the ambassador, and three or four
more of his people, to see the careful landing of his goods, and to
accompany them to the tents.

While the ambassador's baggage was landing, some of the natives asked,
if these were all the things the ambassador had to send ashore? To which
it was answered, that these were all, except jewels and such like
things, which were to come along with himself. Some other natives
standing by, observed among themselves, That it was no matter, as these
were enough for the soldiers. This was overheard and understood by
Nazerbeg, who concealed it for the time, though it raised some suspicion
in his mind, as he said afterwards: Yet so strongly was he prepossessed
by the agreement of all that had passed before, that he could not bring
himself to believe their intentions were bad. He listened, however, more
attentively to all that was said afterwards among them, but could hear
nothing that savoured of double-dealing.

A little while afterwards, Nazerbeg met with one _Haji Comul_,[113] whom
God made an instrument to disclose the devilish project of the balloches
to circumvent and destroy us, and who now revealed the particulars of
their bloody designs. Nazerbeg was amazed, and even chid _Comul_ for not
having told this before the goods were landed. As the time appointed for
the landing of the ambassador was at hand, Nazerbeg was fearful he might
have come ashore before he could get to our ship to forewarn him.
Wherefore, hastening to the shore, where, as God would have it, our
skiff was still filling water, he told our men there was treachery
plotting against us on shore, and entreated them to row him to the ship
with all possible speed. He was therefore brought off immediately, yet
hardly a moment too soon, as the ambassador and all his suite, together
with our captain and all the principal officers among us, willing to
grace the ambassador as far as we could for the honour of our country,
were already in the waste, and ready to go on shore. When Nazerbeg had
communicated his news, we were as ready to change our purpose as we had
been before to go ashore. The purport of what he had learnt from _Haji
Comul_ was as follows:--

The viceroy and governor had agreed together to entice as many of us as
they possibly could ashore, on purpose to cut all our throats; which
done, they meant to have set upon the ship, and having taken her, to
seize every thing she contained. They had made minute enquiry into our
numbers, and had got a particular enumeration of the state and condition
of every person in the ship, all of whom they intended to put to death
without mercy, except the surgeon, the musicians, the women, and the
boys. Their reverence for the king of Persia, of which they had so
boasted, was all a mere pretence to deceive; for they were all rebels,
and it was death to talk of the king of Persia in Guadal. Though we now
understood their intended plot, for which God be praised, and were
sufficiently put upon our guard to prevent its execution by arming
ourselves, knowing that we were able to defend ourselves from injury on
board, although they had great numbers of boats, and above 1500 men
armed with muskets, besides others; yet were we at a loss how we might
recover his lordship's goods, and his three men who were ashore along
with them. But God, who had thus miraculously delivered us from their
cruel treachery, opened likewise our understandings, so that we
recovered all according to our wish, in the following manner:--

As the viceroy and his fellows expected the immediate landing of the
ambassador and followers, together with the captain and others of us, we
sent Nazerbeg again ashore, with instructions what to do. He was to
inform the viceroy that the ambassador was not very well, and had
therefore deferred his landing till next morning, which was Monday the
20th September. He was also directed to request the viceroy and
governor, to send two or three of their boats for him very early, to
bring the women and others of his company ashore, as the ship's boats
were too small; and to say, that the ambassador expected to be attended
by some men of condition from the viceroy, to come in the boats, out of
respect to the king of Persia, whose person he represented. This
message, being well delivered, took the desired effect, and the viceroy
readily promised to comply with every thing required. Having finished
this part of his introductions, Nazerbeg was to repair to the tent where
the baggage was lodged, and to fetch from one of the trunks, two bags of
money containing L200 sterling, and some other things of value, if he
could so contrive without being noticed, as it was wished to conceal the
knowledge we had of the villainous intentions of these barbarians.
Nazerbeg was also desired to use dispatch, and to desire the three
servants of the ambassador to remain all night at the tents, with
promise of being relieved next morning. All was done as directed, and
not only was the money brought away, but a trunk also containing Lady
Shirley's apparel. When the balloches enquired the reason of taking that
trunk back to the ship, they were told it contained the lady's
night-clothes, and that it was to be brought ashore again next day.

[Footnote 113: In Purchas this person is named _Hoge_ Comul; but we
suspect it ought to be _Haji_, intimating that he had made the
pilgrimage of Mecca and Medina.--E.]

The ambassador having thus recovered his money, wished much to get back
one other large trunk, containing things of value, and the three men
which were ashore with his baggage, even if all the rest were lost. For
this purpose, we filled, over night, a large chest and a night-stool,
with billets of wood, rubbish, stones, and other useless matters, to
make them heavy, binding them up carefully with mats and ropes to give
them an air of importance. Nazerbeg was instructed to take these on
shore, to be left in place of the large trunk which he was to bring
away, under pretence that it belonged to one of the merchants, and had
been landed by mistake. The three men at the tent were to accompany him
back to the ship, with their musical instruments, and the _balloches_
were to be told they were wanted by the lord ambassador to accompany him
with their music on his landing.

Every thing being thus properly arranged, we saw next morning early, the
three boats coming off for the purpose of bringing his lordship on
shore, according to promise. We then manned our skiff, and sent her
ashore to put our plan into execution, by which we hoped to entrap the
_balloches_ in the snare they had laid for us. In the mean time, we
received the people from the three boats into our ship, consisting of
seven or eight persons of some condition, among whom was our friend
_Haji Comul_; all the rest being slaves and fishermen. We kept them in
discourse on various matters, to pass away time till our skiff could get
back. During this conversation, one of them said that the viceroy
earnestly desired we might bring our _slurbow_[114] ashore with us, as
he wished much to see it, which we readily promised, to satisfy them. We
soon after had the pleasure to see our skiff returning, having been
completely successful, as it not only brought away the trunk and the
three men, but also one of the chief men among the _balloches_, whom
Nazerbeg enticed along with him. As soon as he came on board, he and the
rest desired to see our gun-rooms, in which they had been told we had
all our fire-works, of which they were in great dread, particularly of
our _slurbow_ and fire-arrows; and this answered exactly to our wishes,
as we meant to have enticed them below, that we might disarm them of
their long knives or daggers. When all these principal persons were down
below in the gun-room, all our people being armed and in readiness, and
dispersed in different parts of the ship, some on deck, some between
decks, and others in the gunroom, to arrest and disarm the traitors;
and when the concerted signal was given, this was instantly
accomplished, to their great astonishment, yet without resistance.

[Footnote 114: From circumstances mentioned in the sequel, this seems to
have been a species of cross-bow for discharging fire-arrows.--E.]

We then laid open to them our knowledge of their murderous intentions,
saying their lives were now in our hands, as they had themselves fallen
into the pit they had dug for us; and, if we served them right, we
should now cut them in pieces, as they meant to have done by us. Yet
they stoutly denied the whole alleged plot. We detained six of the
chiefest men among them, and two of their boats, sending all the rest
a-shore, being all naked rascals, except one, by whom we sent a message
to the viceroy and governor, That, unless he sent us back all the goods
and baggage we had ashore, without abstracting even the smallest
portion, we would carry off those we had now in our custody. When this
message was delivered to the viceroy and governor, they sent back word
by the same messenger, that, if we would release the _balloches_, all
our goods should be sent to us, and at the same time making many hollow
declarations that no evil had ever been intended against us. On
receiving this message, and in sight of the messenger, all our prisoners
were immediately put in irons; and two letters were wrote to the viceroy
in Persian, one by us and the other by the prisoners, intimating in the
most determined terms, that the prisoners would be all put to death, if
the goods were not safely returned without delay, giving only two hours
respite at the most, the sand-glass being set before them as the
messenger left the ship, that he might be induced to make haste. By
these sharp means, we constrained them to restore every thing in the
most ample manner; and this being done, we released the men and boats,
according to promise, and sent them away. One man named _Malim
Simsadim_, whom we had learnt, from _Haji Comul_, was an experienced
pilot for _Sinde_ and _Cambay_, we detained for that purpose, promising
to reward him according to his merits.

Thus, by God's assistance, to whom be endless praise for our
deliverance, we happily extricated ourselves from this dangerous and
intricate affair, which was entirely concluded by six p.m. of the 20th
September. We set sail that same night with our new pilot and _Haji
Comul_, which last remained along with us, as his life would have been
in danger among that accursed crew, for revealing their diabolical plot.
We now bent out course for Sinde, as willing to avoid all subsequent
dangers which these blood-thirsty balloches might attempt to plot
against us. In our way, we had much conversation with Comul, whom we
much esteemed and respected for the excellent service he had done
towards us. _Comul_ was a native of Dabul in India, his father being a
Persian of the sect of Ali, in which _Comul_ was a churchman, or priest,
having likewise some skill in medicine and surgery, in which capacity he
had resided in the tent of the governor of Guadal, and owing to which
circumstance he had overheard their infernal plot. He had obtained leave
to come aboard our ship, under pretence of procuring certain ointments
or balsams, which he alleged had been promised him by our surgeons. He
said that, on hearing their murderous intentions, his heart yearned
within him, to think we should be led like sheep to the slaughter by
such bloody butchers, and that God willed him to reveal their plot to
us. He farther told us, that to his knowledge, they had already betrayed
three ships in the same manner; that they were all rebels against the
King of Persia, refusing to pay the tribute which they and their
ancestors had been accustomed to; and that the king of Persia had levied
an army, which waited not for from Guadal, with the purpose to invade
the country next winter.

This country of _Macquerona_, or Mekran, is on the main land of Asia,
bordering upon the kingdom of Persia. The port of _Guadal_ is nearly in
the lat. of 25 deg. N, the variation being 17 deg. 15' [lat. 24 deg. 40' N. long.
61 deg. 50' E.]. It has good anchorage in four or five fathoms. At night of
the 21st September, the day after leaving Guadal, our _balloche_ pilot
brought our ship in danger of running on a shoal, where we had to come
suddenly to anchor till next morning. The 24th at night, while laying
to, because not far from Cape Camelo, a Portuguese frigate, or bark,
passed close beside us, which at first we suspected to have been an
armed galley, for which cause we prepared for defence in case of need.

3. _Arrival at Diul-ginde,[115] and landing of the Ambassador: Seeking
Trade there, are crossed by the slanderous Portuguese: Go to Sumatra and
Bantam; and thence Home to England_.

[Footnote 115: This singular name ought perhaps to have been Diul-Sinde,
or Diul on the Indus, or Sinde river, to distinguish it from Diu in
Guzerat.--E.]

The 26th September, 1613, we came to anchor right before the mouth of
the river _Sinde_, or Indus, by the directions of a pilot we had from
one of the boats we found fishing at that place. We rode in very good
ground, in a foot less five fathoms, the mouth of the river being E. by
N. being in the latitude of 24 deg. 38' N.[116] That same day, the
ambassador sent two of his people, to confer with the governor about his
coming ashore, and procuring a passage through that country into Persia.
The governor, whose name was _Arah Manewardus_, who was of _Diul_,[117]
was most willing to receive the ambassador, and to shew him every
kindness, both in regard to his entertainment there, and his passage
through his province or jurisdiction. To this intent, he sent a
principal person aboard, attended by five or six more, to welcome his
lordship with many compliments, assuring him of kind entertainment.
Presently after there came boats from _Diul_ for his accommodation, in
which he and all his people and goods went ashore on the 29th September,
all in as good health as when they embarked in our ship from England. At
his departure we saluted him with eleven guns, and our captain entrusted
him with a fine fowling-piece, having two locks, to present to the
governor of Tatta, a great city, a day's journey from Diul,[118] both
cities being in the dominions of the Great Mogul. We also now set ashore
our treacherous _balloche_ pilot, _Sim-sadin_, though he better merited
to have been thrown into the sea, as he endeavoured twice to have cast
us away; once by his own means, as formerly alluded to, and afterwards
by giving devilish council to the pilot we hod from the fisher boat at
this place.

[Footnote 116: The river Indus has many mouths, of which no less than
_seventeen_ are laid down in Arrowsmith's excellent map of Hindoostan,
extending between the latitudes of 24 deg. 45' and 23 deg. 15' both N. and
between the longitudes of 67 deg. 12' and 69 deg. 12' both east. That mouth
where the Expedition now came to anchor, was probably that called the
_Pitty_ river, being the most north-western of the Delta, in lat 24 deg. 45'
N. and long. 67 deg. 12' E. from Greenwich; being the nearest on her way
from Guadal, and that which most directly communicates with Tatta, the
capital of the Delta of the Indus.--E.]

[Footnote 117: Such is the vague mode of expression in the Pilgrims; but
it appears afterwards that he was governor of Diul, at which place Sir
Robert Shirley and his suite were landed. It singularly happens, that
Diul is omitted in all the maps we have been able to consult; but from
the context, it appears to have been near the mouth of the Pitty river,
mentioned in the preceding note. It is afterwards said to have been
fifteen miles up the river, in which case it may possibly be a place
otherwise called _Larry Bunder_, about twenty miles up the Pitty, which
is the port of Tatta.--E.]

[Footnote 118: Tatta is not less than seventy-five English miles from
the mouth of the Pitty, and consequently sixty from Diul.--E.]

When the lord ambassador left us, we requested he would send us word how
he found the country disposed, and whether we might have trade there;
and for this purpose, we gave his lordship a note in writing of what we
chiefly desired, which was to the following purport: "That our coming to
this port was purposely to land his lordship; yet, as we had brought
with us certain commodities and money, we were willing to make sales of
such and so much of those as might suit, if we could obtain licence and
protection for quiet trade; and, with the governor's permission, would
settle a factory at this place, to which, though now but slenderly
provided, we would afterwards bring such kinds and quantities of goods
us might be most suitable for sale. The commodities we now had, were
elephants and morse teeth, fine fowling-pieces, lead and tin in bars,
and some Spanish dollars. If we could not be permitted to trade, we
requested leave to provide ourselves, with refreshments, and so to
depart."

The 30th September, the ambassador had an audience of the governor
concerning all his business, to whom he shewed the _firmaun_ of the king
of Persia, as also the pass of the king of Spain, thinking thereby to
satisfy the jealousy of the Portuguese residents at that place, who
reported, on pretended intelligence from Ornus, that Don Roberto Shirley
was come from England with three ships to the Indies, on purpose to
steal. They peremptorily refused to give credence to the Spanish pass,
saying it was neither signed nor sealed by their king, in which they
could not possibly be mistaken, knowing it so well, and therefore that
it was assuredly forged. On this, the ambassador angrily said, that it
was idle to shew them any king's hand-writing and seal, as they had no
king, being merely a waste nation, forcibly reduced under subjection to
the king of Spain, and mere slaves both to him and his natural subjects.
Yet the Portuguese boldly stood to their former allegations, insisting
that the ambassador had other two ships in the Indies. Then _Arah
Manewardus_ sharply reproved them for their unseemly contradictions of
the Persian ambassador, and ordered them out of the room.

The ambassador then made a speech to the governor concerning our
admittance to trade at his port, on which the governor expressed his
readiness to do so, all inconveniences understood, and desired the
ambassador to send for one or two of our merchants, that he might confer
with them on the subject. Upon this the ambassador wrote to us on the 2d
October, saying what he had done in our affairs, and sending us
assurance for our safe going and returning. Being thereby in good hope
of establishing trade at this place, if not a factory, and to make sale
of the small quantity of goods we now had, Mr Joseph Salbank and I, by
advice of the captain and others, made ourselves ready and went ashore
that same morning in one of the country boats. Our ship lay about four
or five miles from the mouth of the river, from whence we had fifteen
miles to travel to _Diul_, where the ambassador was, so that it was late
in the evening before we landed there.

In our way we met a Portuguese frigate or bark, bound for Ormus, on
purpose to prevent any of their ships coming till we were gone. This
bark went close past our ship, taking a careful review of her, and so
departed. As soon as we were landed, three or four Portuguese came up to
us, asking if we had brought any goods ashore, and such like questions;
but we made them no reply, pretending not to understand their language,
that we might the better understand them for our own advantage, if
occasion served. There then came another Portuguese, who spoke Dutch
very fluently, telling me many things respecting the country and people,
tending to their ill conduct and character, thinking to dissuade us from
endeavouring to have any trade there. Soon after, the officers of the
customs came, and conducted us to the castle, but we could not have an
audience of the governor that night, as it was already late. The
officers, who were mostly banians, and spoke good Portuguese, searched
every part about us for money, not even leaving our shoes unsearched;
and perceiving that we were surprised at this, they prayed us to be
content therewith, as it was the custom of the country. To this I
replied, that though the Portuguese might give them cause for so bad a
fashion, yet English merchants did not hide their money in their shoes
like smugglers. Then the governor's servants came to us, and lighted us
from the castle to the house in which the ambassador lodged, where we
were made heartily welcome, and were lodged all the time we staid in
Diul, and at no expence to us. Seeing us landed, and hearing we came to
treat with the governor for settling trade at that place, the Portuguese
spread many slanderous and malignant lies against our king, country, and
nation, reporting that we were thieves, and not merchants, and that we
derived our chief subsistence by robbing other nations on the sea.

In the morning of the 3d October, the governor sent word to the
ambassador that he would see and converse with us in the afternoon. In
the mean time, we had notice that the Portuguese were using every effort
with him and others to prevent our being entertained, both by offering
him gratifications if he would refuse us, and by threatening to leave
the place if we were received, pretending that they would not remain
where thieves were admitted. Yet the governor sent for us, commanding
four great horses, richly caparisoned, to be sent to the ambassador's
house, for his lordship, Sir Thomas Powell, Mr Salbank, and me, and sent
also a number of his servants to conduct us to the castle; all the
ambassador's servants went likewise along with him, each carrying a
halbert. In this manner we rode through some part of the city, the
people in all the streets flocking out to see us, having heard talk of
Englishmen, but never having seen any before, as we were the first who
had ever been in that part of the country.

On coming to the castle, we were received in a very orderly manner, and
led through several spacious rooms, where many soldiers were standing in
ranks on each side, all cloathed from head to foot in white dresses. We
were then conducted to a high turret, in which the governor and some
others sat, who rose up at our entrance and saluted us, bidding us
kindly welcome. We then all sat down round the room, on carpets spread
on the floor, according to their fashion. The governor again bid us
welcome, saying he was glad to see Englishmen in that country; but said,
in regard to the trade we desired to have there, that the Portuguese
would by no means consent to our having trade, and threatened to desert
the place if we were received. Yet, if he could be assured of deriving
greater benefit from our trade than he now had from that of the
Portuguese, he should not care how soon they left him, as he thought
well of our nation. In the mean time, however, as he farmed the customs
of that port from the king, to whom he was bound to pay certain sums
yearly for the same, whether they were actually received or not, he was
under the necessity of being circumspect in conducting the business,
lest he might incur the displeasure of the king, to his utter ruin. He
then told us that the customs from the Portuguese trade, together with
what arose from their letting out their ships to hire to the Guzerats
and Banians, amounted to a _lack_ of rupees yearly, which is L10,000
sterling.[119]

[Footnote 119: A rupee is two shillings, or somewhat more, and a _lack_
is 100,000.-_Purch._]

He then desired to know the kinds and quantities of the commodities we
had brought, and what amount we had in money? To all which we gave him
distinct answers, as nearly as we could remember; adding, that though we
now brought but small store, we would engage to furnish his port at our
next coming, which would be in about twenty-two months, with such
commodities as were now brought by the Portuguese, and with such
quantities of each kind as might be requisite to satisfy the demands of
that port. He appeared to approve of this, and concluded by saying, as
our present stock of commodities were so small, the Portuguese would
only laugh at him and us if we were now admitted to trade, wherefore he
wished us to defer all trade till our next coming; but that he was ready
to give us a writing under his hand and seal to assure us of good
entertainment at our next coming, provided we came fully prepared as we
said, and on condition we should leave him a written engagement not to
molest any of the ships or goods of the king of the Moguls, or his
subjects. We agreed to all this, and requested he would allow us to sell
those goods we now had; but which he would by no means consent to, for
fear of offending the Portuguese, as stated before.

We then desired that we might have leave to provide our ship with water,
and other necessary refreshments, for our money, after which we should
depart as soon as possible. To this he said, that as soon as we sent him
the writing he desired, he would send us the one he had promised, and
would give orders to his officers to see our wants supplied; but desired
that the Portuguese might know nothing of all this. Seeing no remedy, we
then desired to know what kinds of commodities he wished us to bring,
and also what were the commodities his country could afford in return.
We were accordingly informed, that the commodities in request in Sinde
were broad-cloths of various prices, and light gay colours, as stammels,
reds, greens, sky-blues, indigo-blues, azures, &c. also elephants teeth,
iron, steel, lead, tin, spices, and money. The commodities to be had
there were, indigo of Lahore, indigo of _Cherques_, calicoes of all
sorts, pintadoes, or painted chintzes of all sorts, all kinds of
Guzerat and Cambay commodities, with many kinds of drugs. We then took
our leave, and returned to the ambassador's house, whence I sent him a
letter, according to his desire, signed by Mr Salbanke and me, on which
he sent us another, in the Persian language, which is written backwards,
much like the Hebrew, and which was interpreted to us by the ambassador,
in English, as follows:

"WHEREAS there has arrived at this port of Diul, an English ship called
the Expedition, of which is captain, Christopher Newport, and merchants,
Joseph Salbank and Walter Peyton, and has landed here Don Robert
Shirley, ambassador of the king of Persia, who has desired us to grant
them trade at this port under my government, which I willingly would
have granted, but not having brought merchandize in sufficient quantity
to begin trade, and the Portuguese, from whom I reap benefit, refusing
their consent, threatening to go away if I receive the English nation,
by which I should be left destitute of all trade, whence arises those
sums I have yearly to pay to the king, and in default whereof I should
incur his majesty's displeasure, to my utter ruin. Yet, from the love I
bear to the king of Persia, by whose ambassador I am solicited, and from
affection for the English, together with the faithful performance of the
writing left with me under their hands and seals by the two merchants
before named, I hereby promise the English nation, under my hand and
seal, if they will come like themselves, so fitted that I may derive
more advantage from them than from the Portuguese, that I will
infallibly grant them trade here, with such reasonable privileges as we
may agree upon."

_Given at Diul, this 3d of October_, 1613.

ARAH MANEWARUS.

Having received this writing on the 4th October, together with orders
from the governor to his officers for our being furnished with water and
refreshments, we made haste to return to our ships. A little before we
went away, the ambassador fell into discourse with us about procuring a
_firmaun_ from the Great Mogul, for which purpose he wished Mr Salbank
to accompany him to Agra, the principal residence of that sovereign,
affirming that he would procure that grant of trade for us in a short
time, for which he alleged there was now a favourable opportunity, both
because he had other business to transact at the court of the Mogul, and
in consequence of the willingness of _Manewardus_ to admit us to trade
at his port. He alleged likewise that we might never have so favourable
an opportunity, and assured us that he would therein shew himself a
true-hearted Englishman, whatever the company of merchants might think
of him; and that Mr Salbank should be an evidence of his earnest
endeavours to serve the merchants in procuring this _firmaun_, not only
for Diul, but for other parts of the Mogul dominions, and should also
carry the grant with him over-land to England. All this seemed
reasonable, and as Mr Salbank had been before in these parts, he was
very willing to go, provided it met with the approbation of the captain
and me, and the other gentlemen in the ship; for which purpose the
ambassador wrote a letter to our captain, to urge his consent, which we
carried with us.

We left Diul that same day about four in the afternoon, and on going to
the river side to take boat, many of the natives flocked about to look
at us. We were likewise joined by about a dozen Portuguese, who began to
talk with us in Dutch, as before, asking many frivolous questions. I now
answered them in their own language, on purpose that the Banians, who
were present, might understand what I said; telling them that they were
a shameless and lying people to spread so many slanderous and false
reports of our nation, while they knew their own to be much inferior to
ours in many respects, and that their scandalous conduct proceeded
merely from malignant policy to prevent us from participating with them
in the trade of India. To this I added, that if they did not restrain
themselves within due peaceful bounds, amending their behaviour both in
words and actions, they should be all driven out of India, and a more
honest and loyal nation substituted in their place. Then one of the
principal men among them stepped forwards, and made answer, that they
had already too many enemies, and had no need of more; but that they had
substantial reasons for speaking of us as they had done, as not long
since one of their ships had been taken near Surat, and, as they
supposed, by an English ship. To which I answered, that this was more
like to have been done by the Hollanders. They then became more civil,
and finally wished that we might trade in all parts of India with them,
and they with us, like friends and neighbours, and that our kings might
enter into some agreement to that effect. They then kindly took leave of
us, and we departed.

We got back to our ship on the 6th, when it was agreed that Mr Salbank
should accompany the ambassador to Agra, as proposed. For which purpose
he got himself in readiness, meaning to have gone ashore next day. In
the mean time, the captain, the purser, and his man, went on shore to
buy fresh victuals and necessaries to take with us to sea; but, on
coming to the city, they were presently ordered away by the governor,
and an express order issued by proclamation, that none of the natives
should hereafter bring any of the English ashore, on pain of death. We
were much astonished at this sudden alteration of affairs, for which we
could not divine any cause: but, on the 9th, finding we could get
nothing done here, nor any farther intercourse, we set sail, directing
our course for Sumatra. All the time we were here in Sinde, we had not
the smallest intimation of trade having been settled at Surat, for if we
had, we might have taken a different course.

We came to anchor in the road of Priaman on the 20th November, going in
between the two northermost little islands, and anchored close by the
northermost of these, in five fathoms. We immediately began to bargain
for pepper, the price of which we beat down from twenty-two dollars, as
first asked, to seventeen dollars the bahar, at which price we got two
bahars, which were brought to us on board: but the governor would not
allow us, although we made him a present of a musket, to hire a house,
or to buy pepper ashore, unless we would consent to bestow presents on
some twenty of the officers and merchants of the place. On the 22d, we
received a letter from Captain Christen, of the Hosiander, then at
Tecoo, earnestly advising us to come there immediately, as we could not
fail to get as much pepper as we wished at that place, and in a short
time; and, as we were not acquainted with the place, Captain Chrisen
sent Richard Hall, one of his master's mates, to pilot us through among
the dangerous shoals that lay about the roads of Tecoo. Accordingly we
went to that place, and anchored in four fathoms, Richard Hall returning
on board the Hosiander, where he died that same night, being ill of the
flux.

Before our arrival, the natives had offered their pepper to Captain
Christen at twelve and thirteen dollars the bahar, taking payment in
Surat commodities; but they now demanded twenty-two dollars in ready
money, refusing to barter with them any longer for goods. They also
demanded at this place as many presents as had been required at Priaman;
beside which, they insisted upon having seventy-two dollars for
anchorage duty. Being now in a worse situation than before, and having
no time to waste in delays, we determined to come to short terms with
them; wherefore we told them roundly, that we would on no account submit
to their unreasonable demands, even though we might not get a single
_cattee_ of pepper. For this purpose I drew out a letter from our
captain, which he signed and sealed, addressed to the head governor,
stating that he had not used our nation so well as we had reason to
expect, both in unreasonable demands of presents, which were not usually
given upon compulsion, but rather from good-will, or in reward of good
behaviour, and likewise by their improper delay in implementing their
promises, so very unlike mercantile dealings; since our ships have at
various times remained at their port for three, four, and even five
months, depending on their promises of having full lading, which might
as well have been accomplished in one month, in so far as respected the
small quantity of pepper they had to dispose of. This letter was
translated by the interpreter in the Hosiander, an Indian, named Johen,
who perfectly understood their language.

The governor, in consequence of this remonstrance, gave orders that we
might purchase pepper from any one who was inclined to sell; but sent us
a message, wishing that one of us might come on shore, that the pepper
might be there weighed. But still doubting that they meant to teaze us
with delay, we sent back word that we could not remain so long as it
would require for weighing the pepper ashore, and therefore if they
would bring it to us on board, we would pay them eighteen dollars a
bahar for their pepper, together with two dollars as custom to the
governor, making exactly twenty dollars. As they still put off time, we
set sail, as if meaning to have gone away, on which the governor sent
another messenger, who spoke Portuguese tolerably, entreating us to come
again to anchor, and we should have as much pepper as we could take in.
We did so accordingly, and they brought pepper off to us in proas as
fast as we could conveniently weigh it, and continued to do so till we
had got about 200 bahars. They then began to grow slack in their
proceedings, on which, fearing to lose the monsoon by spending too much
time at this place, we weighed and proceeded for Bantam.

We left Tecoo on the 8th December, three of our men remaining in the
Hosiander, which needed their assistance, and proceeded towards Bantam,
mostly keeping in sight of Sumatra. At our entrance into the straits of
Sunda, on the 16th of that month, we met the Dragon on her homeward
voyage, by which ship we sent letters to England. Next day, the 17th, we
anchored in Bantam roads, and went immediately ashore to provide our
lodging, and by the 29th our whole cargo was completed.

We set sail from Bantam on the 2d January, 1614, for England, not having
hitherto lost a single man by sickness during our whole voyage, for
which we were thankful to God. This same day, as we were going out by
way of Pulo Panian, we met General Saris in the Clove, then returning
from Japan; and we came to anchor, that we might have his letters for
England, together with four chests. We likewise spared him two of our
hands, of which he was in great need; one being a youth, named Mortimer
Prittie, and the other a carpenter's mate, named Thomas Valens, as he
had not a single carpenter alive in his ship.

Having settled all these matters with the Clove, we resumed our voyage
for England on the 4th January, and came to anchor in Saldanha bay on
the 21st March, where we got a sufficient supply of beeves and sheep
from the natives, with abundance of fish, caught in our own seine. We
left that place on the 9th April, with prosperous winds, which continued
favourable till we were three degrees north of the equator, which we
crossed the 11th May. When in lat. 00 deg. 22' N. many of our men began to
fall sick, some of them of the scurvy, and with swelled legs. On the
10th July, 1614, by the blessing of God, we came to anchor in the Downs.




CHAPTER XI.

CONTINUATION OF THE EARLY VOYAGES OF THE ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY TO
INDIA.

INTRODUCTION.


In the immediately preceding chapter, we have given a series of the
first twelve voyages fitted out by the English East India Company, in
the prosecution of their exclusive trade to India, as preserved by
Samuel Purchas; and we now mean, chiefly from the same source, to
continue the series for a few years longer. At the close of the last
voyage of the foregoing chapter, Purchas informs us, that "The order of
reckoning must be now altered, because the voyages of the company were
for the future set forth by means of a _joint stock_, instead of by
particular ships, each upon a separate subscription, having separate
stocks and factories; the whole proceedings being, in the sequel, at the
general risk of, and accountable to the entire society or company of
adventurers." He farther adds, "That the whole of these joint-stock
voyages had not come into his hands; but that such as he had been able
to procure, and were meet for publication, he had inserted in his
Collection."

The learned historiographer of the East India Company[120] gives rather
a different account of the former series of separate or unconnected
voyages, than that which we have taken from Purchas, terming the last
voyage in our former chapter only the _ninth_, while Purchas denominates
it the _twelfth_.

[Footnote 120: Ann. of the Hon. E.I. Co, I. 162.]

This difference, which is not at all material, may have arisen from
Purchas having considered some of the ships belonging to _single_
adventurers or subscriptions, which made separate voyages or parts of
voyages, as _separate_ adventures. We come now to a new era in the mode
of conducting the English exclusive trade to India, of the motives for
which the Annals give the following account.[121]

[Footnote 121: Id. I. 165.]

"The inconveniences which had been experienced from separate classes of
adventurers, partners in the East India Company, fitting out equipments
on their own particular portions of stock, induced the directors, or
committees, to resolve, in 1612, that, in future, the trade should be
carried on by a joint stock only; and, on the basis of this resolution,
the sum of L429,000 was subscribed: and, though portions of this joint
stock were applied to the equipment of four voyages, the general
instructions to the commanders were given in the name, and by the
authority, of the governor, deputy-governor, and committees of the
company of merchants in London trading to the East Indies, who explained
that the whole was a joint concern, and that the commanders were to be
responsible to the company for their conduct, both in the sale and
purchase of commodities in the East Indies, and for their general
conduct, in extending the commerce, within the limits of the company.
The transition, therefore, from trading on _separate adventures_, which
has been described as an imitation of the Dutch, to trading on a _joint
stock_, arose out of the good sense of the English nation, which, from
experience, had discovered the evil consequences of internal opposition,
and had determined to proceed on a system better calculated to promote
the general interest of the East India Company.

"Notwithstanding this resolution, the proportions of this aggregate sum
were applied to what has been termed the _tenth, eleventh, twelfth_, and
_thirteenth_ voyages, in the following manner: In 1613, the _tenth_
voyage was undertaken, the stock of which was estimated at L18,810 in
money, and L12,446 in goods, the fleet consisting of _eight_ vessels. In
1614, the stock for the _eleventh_ voyage was L13,942 in money, and
L23,000 in goods, the fleet being _eight ships_. In 1615, the stock for
the _twelfth_ voyage was L26,660 in money, and L26,065 in goods, with
_six ships_. In 1616, the stock for the _thirteenth_ voyage was L52,087
in money, and L16,506 in goods, the fleet containing _seven ships_. The
purchase, repair, and equipment of vessels during these four voyages
amounted to L272,544, which, with the specified stock and cargoes,
accounts for the disbursement of the L429,000, the sum subscribed on the
joint stock in 1613.[122]

[Footnote 122: The enumerated particulars amount to L462,060, and exceed
the subscribed joint stock by L33,060.--E.]

"The profits on this joint stock are stated to have amounted, on the
first two voyages, to L120 per cent. on the original subscription; but
they were subsequently much diminished, by the difficulties which the
English trade to the East Indies began to experience, from the
opposition of the Dutch in the Spice Islands; so that, at the conclusion
of this first joint stock, in 1617, the average profits of the four
voyages did not exceed L87:10s. per. cent on the original subscription,
notwithstanding the cargo of one of the vessels (the New-year's Gift)
cost only 40,000 rials of eight, and the sale produce, in England,
amounted to L80,000 sterling."

It is not the purpose of this Collection to enlarge on the history of
the East India Company, any farther than by giving relations of its
early voyages, so far as these have come down to us in the Pilgrims of
Purchas, their only published record; and we now therefore proceed with
such of these voyages as are contained in that curious collection, and
seem to be worth including in this work.--E.




SECTION I.

_Voyage of Captain Nicholas Downton to India, in 1614._[122]

The ships employed on this voyage, the _second_ set forth by the _joint_
stock of the East India Company, were the New-year's Gift admiral, of
650 tons, on board of which Captain Downton sailed as general or chief
commander; the Hector of 500 tons, vice-admiral; the Merchant's Hope,
of 300 tons; and the Salomon of 200 tons. We have thus only_ four_ ships
enumerated by Purchas, as employed in the _second_ voyage of the new
joint stock, instead at _eight_ mentioned in the _Annals_, as before
stated in the introduction to the present chapter. In this voyage, Mr
William Edwards was lieutenant, or next in command under Captain
Downton, being likewise Cape merchant, and commander of the Hector. Mr
Nicholas Easworth was Cape merchant, and commander of the Merchant's
Hope. Mr Thomas Elkington, Cape merchant, and commander of the Salomon.
Mr Peter Rogers minister; Martin Pring. Arthur Spaight, Matthew
Molineux, and Hugh Bennet, masters of the four ships, assisted by sundry
mates,--Purch.

[Footnote 122: Purch. Pilg. I. 500.--Extracted from the journal of
Captain Downton]


Sec.1. _Incidents at Saldanha, Socotora, and Swally; with an Account of
Disagreements between the Moguls and Portuguese, and between the Nabob
and the English._

We sailed from England on the 1st March, 1614, and arrived in the road
of Saldanha, or Table Bay, on Wednesday the 15th June, being saluted on
our arrival by a great storm. While every person was busy in mooring the
ship, John Barter, who had lost his reason in consequence of a long
fever, was suddenly missing, and was supposed to have made away with
himself. The 16th we erected our tents, and placed a guard for their
defence. We landed half our casks on the 17th, to be overhauled and
seasoned; and this day _Choree_, the Saldanian or Hottentot, presented
me a young steer. The 18th we landed more of our beer casks, to be
washed, repaired, and seasoned. This day, _Choree_ departed into the
interior, carrying with him his copper armour, javelins, and all things
belonging to him, promising to be back the third day after, but he never
returned.

The 29th I sent George Downton ashore, to take observations of the
latitude and variation, in consideration of the great difference in the
variations, as observed in this and my former voyage in the Pepper-corn.
We made the latitude exactly 34 deg. S. and the variation 1 deg. 45' W. by an
azimuth, whereas most of the former variations at this place were
easterly. We this night took down our tents, and brought every thing on
board, making our ships ready to depart next day, which we did
accordingly.

We came to anchor in the bay of St Augustine in Madagascar on the 6th
August, when the inhabitants abandoned the place, so that we could have
no intercourse with them, but we afterwards got some refreshments from
them. We here cut down some straight timber for various uses. We set
sail on the 12th August, and anchored in Delisa bay in Socotora on the
9th September. Next day we went ashore to wait upon the king, who was
ready with his attendants to receive me, and gave me an account of the
existing war in India, where the Mogul and the kings of the Deccan had
united to drive the Portuguese from the country, owing to their having
captured a ship coming from Juddah in the Red Sea, in which were three
millions of treasure. He also informed me of two great fights which
Captain Best had with the Portuguese, and of other news in these parts.
I here procured such refreshments as the place could furnish, and bought
2722 pounds of aloes from the king.

Leaving Delisa on the 14th September, we got sight of the Deccan coast
near Dabul on the 2d October, where we found great hindrance to our
navigation, till we learnt by experience to anchor during the ebb tide,
and continue our course with the tide of flood. Continuing this
procedure, we anchored in the evening of the 14th, two and a half miles
short of the bar of Surat; when presently a fleet of fourteen frigates
or barks came to anchor near us, which we discovered by their lights, as
it was quite dark. But as they could easily see us, by the lights at our
ports, that we were in readiness for them, they durst not come any
nearer, so that we rode quietly all night. Early of the 15th, we weighed
with the land-wind, and coming somewhat near the frigates, they also
weighed and stood to the southwards. We held on our course past the bar,
towards South Swally, where we soon after arrived, though much opposed
by contrary winds.

Soon after we were anchored, I sent Molineux in his pinnace, and Mr
Spooner with Samuel Squire in my _gellywatte_,[123] to take the
soundings within the sands. In a channel where we found only five feet
at low water in our former voyage, Mr Molineux had now three fathoms;
and Mr Spooner had now seven or eight feet, where our boats could not
pass at all formerly. Seeing some people on the shore in the afternoon,
whom I supposed might be some of our merchants from Surat, I sent my
pinnace to them; but they were some of the people belonging to _Coge
Nozan_, sent to discover what nation we were of. From them I got farther
information respecting the wars with the Portuguese, being told that the
Moguls were besieging Damaun and Diu, Mocrib or Mucrob Khan being the
general of the Mogul forces against Damaun; and I also learnt to my
sorrow, that Mucrob Khan was governor and viceroy, as it may be called,
not only over Surat, but all the country round, as, from former
experience, I considered him to be a great enemy of our nation, and a
friend to the Portuguese. From these people likewise, I heard of the
health of Mr Aldworth and the rest of our factory, and wrote to hasten
his presence, sending my letters by the servants of Coge Nozan.

[Footnote 123: From this singular term, what is now called the
_jollyboat_ has probably derived its name.--E.]

I sent my purser on shore in the pinnace, early of the 16th, to purchase
such necessaries as I thought might easily have been got; but he
returned about ten o'clock a.m. without buying any thing for our
purpose, bringing with him Mr Aldword, the chief merchant of our factory
at Surat, along with whom was one Richard Steel, who had come over-land
to Surat from Aleppo.[124] Mr Aldworth endeavoured to persuade me that
Mucrob Khan was our friend, and that we had now an excellent opportunity
to obtain good trade and satisfactory privileges while the Moguls were
engaged in war with the Portuguese; and as both the Nabob and all the
natives were rejoiced at hearing of our arrival, they would assuredly
give us a most favourable reception. Pleased with these hopeful
circumstances, I yet still wished some other person here in command
instead of Mucrob Khan, of whom I remained doubtful, and that we should
have no free trade from him, but in his accustomed manner, which I
believed to have been, of his own accord to cross us, and not as so
constrained by direction of his king; and the event turned out
accordingly, though we were wise behind the band, as will appear in the
sequel. Even the name he bore ought to have opened our eyes as to his
influence with the Great Mogul: as _Mocrub_ signifies as much as _his
own bowels, Khan_ meaning _great lord_. Yet I was deluded to believe
that his favour with the king was tottering, and that he might easily be
brought into disgrace, by complaint of any thing done contrary to the
will or humour of the king; so that we were too bold, and injured our
business when we found him opposing us, as we thought unreasonably. On
enquiring into the state of our business, and the health of our factory,
Mr Aldworth informed me that Paul Canning and several others had died;
that Thomas Kerridge had long since been agent in his room at the court
of the Mogul, and that the factory at Surat now only contained himself
and William Bidulph.

[Footnote 124: Mr Richard Stell, or Steel, had gone to Aleppo, to
recover a debt from a merchant of that city, who had fled to India; and,
following him through Persia, Mr Steel had arrived at Surat. On his
report, the factors at Surat made an experiment to open a trade with
Persia, which will form the subject of a future section of this
chapter.--E.]

In the morning of the 17th, I called a council to advise upon the best
manner of conducting our affairs here, and to consider who might be the
best person to send to Agraas resident. Then entering upon the six
interrogatories, inserted in the second article of our commission, I
required Mr Aldworth to give direct answers to every question.--1. In
what favour was Paul Canning with the emperor and his council, and how
did he conduct himself at court in the business entrusted to him? He
answered, That on his first arrival at court, he was well respected by
the emperor, till the Jesuits made known that he was a merchant, and not
sent immediately from our king; after which he was neglected, as he
himself complained: and, as for his carriage and behaviour there, so far
as he knew, it was sufficiently good;--3. Then demanding, whether it
were needful to maintain a resident at court? Mr Aldworth answered, That
it was certainly necessary, as the emperor required that one of our
nation should reside there; and therefore, that the person ought to be a
man of good respect, for preventing and counteracting any injuries that
might be offered by the Jesuits, our determined adversaries; as he might
also be extremely useful in promoting and directing the purchase and
sale of various commodities.--6. Being questioned as to the expences of
a resident at court? he said, according to the estimate of Paul Canning,
it might be about L300 per annum; but, some time afterwards, his
estimate was found to extend to five, six, and seven hundred pounds a
year.--Being afterwards questioned, Whether he thought it fit that Mr
Edwards should proceed to court under the designation of a merchant,
according to the strict letter of the company's commission? his opinion
was, by the experience of the late Mr Canning, that such a resident
would not be at all respected by the king.

In the morning of the 24th, Coge Nozan came down to the water side, and
rested in my tent till I landed. I repaired to him, accompanied by all
our merchants, and attended by a strong guard, armed with halberts,
muskets, and pikes, having a coach to carry me from the landing place to
the tent. On alighting from my coach, Coge Nozan came immediately to
meet me. Before entering on business, he was told that a present for the
Nabob was to be delivered to him, which was brought in. This consisted
of a case containing six knives, two pair of knives, six sword-blades,
six Spanish pikes, one case of combs, one mirror, one picture of Mars
and Venus, one ditto of the Judgment of Paris, two Muscovy hides, and
one gilded case of bottles filled with strong rich cordials. I then made
the following present to himself: Six knives in single sheaths, four
sword-blades, two pikes, one comb-case, a mirror, a picture of Moses,
and a case of bottles, in consideration of the promise made by the nabob
to our people, that whatever Coge Nozan agreed to, he the nabob would
perform.

I then moved for the enlargement of our privileges, and lessening of our
customs, especially at Baroach, and that we might have a daily bazar or
market at the water side, where we might purchase beef for our people,
according to the _firmaun_ already granted by the Mogul, and because
other flesh did not answer for them. He answered, that the nabob would
shew us every favour in his power, if we would assist him against the
Portuguese; that the customs of Baroach were out of his power to
regulate, as the king had already farmed these to another person at a
stipulated rent; and that we should have a regular market, but that
bullocks and cows could not be allowed, as the king had granted a
firmaun to the Banians, in consideration of a very large sum of money,
that these might not be slaughtered. In fine, I found he had no power to
grant us any thing; yet, willing to leave me somewhat contented, he
proposed that I should send some of our merchants along with him to the
nabob, where our business might be farther discussed.

I accordingly sent along with him, Mr Aldworth, Mr Ensworth, Mr
Dodsworth, Mr Mitford, and some others. Two or three days afterwards,
they had access to the nabob, to whom they explained our desires, as
before expressed. He then desired to know whether we would go with our
ships to fight for him against Damaun, in which case, he said, we might
count upon his favour? To this it was answered, that we could not on any
account do this, as our king and the king of Spain were in peace. He
then asked if we would remove our ships to the bar of Surat, and fight
there against the Portuguese ships, if they came to injure the subjects
of the Mogul? This likewise was represented to be contrary to the peace
between our kings. On which he said, since we would do nothing for his
service, he would do nothing for us. Several of the merchants of Surat
endeavoured to persuade our merchants, that I ought to give way to the
reasonable request of the nabob, and might still do what I thought
proper; as, notwithstanding of our ships riding at the bar, the
Portuguese frigates could go in and out on each side of me, owing to
their light draught of water. To this I answered, that the proposal was
utterly unfit for me to listen to; as whatever I promised I must
perform, though at the expence of my own life and of all under my
command, and that I could not possibly lend myself to fight against the
Portuguese on any account whatever, unless they first attacked me, as it
was absolutely contrary to my commission from my own sovereign. I added,
that, if the Portuguese provoked me by any aggression, I would not be
withheld from fighting them for all the wealth of the nabob: But he made
small account of this distinction, and, seeing that we refused to fulfil
his wishes, he opposed us in all our proceedings as far as he could, so
that we nearly lost all our former hopes of trading at this place. In
this dilemma, I made enquiry respecting _Gengomar_ and _Castellata_, and
also of _Gogo_:[125] but could get poor encouragement to change for
better dealing, so that we remained long perplexed how to act, and
returned to our business at the ships.

[Footnote 125: Gogo is on the west shore of the gulf of Cambay. In an
after passage of this voyage, what is here called Gengomar _and_
Castellata, is called Gengomar _or_ Castelletto, which may possibly
refer to Jumbosier, on a river of the same name, about sixty miles north
from Surat. Castelletta must have been a name imposed by the
Portuguese.--E.]

The 27th, in the morning, when Nicholas Ufflet went ashore, he found all
the people belonging to Swally had gone away from the water-side in the
night, as also all those who used to stay beside the tents, in
consequence of an order from the nabob; and was farther informed that
our merchants were detained at Surat, having been stopped by force when
attempting to cross the bridge, and had even been beaten by the guard
set there by the nabob. The gunner's boy and his companion, formerly
supposed to have run away, and who were in company at the time with our
merchants, being on their return to the ships, were also well beaten,
and detained with the rest. The 31st we began to take in fresh water, to
be ready for departing, as our stay here seemed so very uncertain. This
day, Thomas Smith, the master's boy, had most of the outer part of one
of his thighs bitten off by a great fish, while swimming about the ship.
The ravenous fish drew him under water, yet he came up again and swam
to the ship, and got up to the bend, where he fainted. Being brought
into the gun-room, the surgeon endeavoured to do what he could for his
recovery; but he had lost so much blood that he never recovered out of
the swoon, and shortly died.

In the evening of the 2d November, Mr Aldworth and Mr Elkington came
down from Surat, where they left Mr Ensworth very sick. They reported to
me their proceedings with the nabob, as formerly stated; but said they
were now reconciled, and that he had made fair promises of future
respect, with a free trade through all the country under his government.
I do not attribute his severe proceedings hitherto to any hatred or
ill-will to our nation, but to his fears lest we might unite with the
Portuguese against him, owing to my refusing to assist him against
Damaun. These his doubts and fears were increased by a knavish device of
the subtle and lying Jesuits; who, taking advantage of my refusal to
fight against the Portuguese without cause, at Damaun or elsewhere,
pretended with the nabob that they had a letter from the viceroy,
saying, That he and his friends the English meant to join their forces
and come against Surat. This devilish device gave much hindrance to our
business, by occasioning continual doubt in the nabob's mind of our
friendly intentions; and unfortunately likewise, Mr Aldworth had
strengthened these doubts and fears, though ignorant of the lying
inventions of the jesuits; for, thinking to mollify their rigour, he
rashly advised them to beware, lest their ill usage might force us to
join with the Portuguese against them. We likewise believed that the
order of the nabob, forbidding the people to trade with us on board,
proceeded entirely from his desire to thwart us: But we afterwards
learnt, by letter from Thomas Kerridge, that Mucrob Khan, and all other
governors of sea-ports, had express orders from the Mogul, not to allow
any trade with us till they had first chosen and purchased, for the
king's use, all kinds of strange and unusual things we might have to
dispose of.

On the 3d I called a council to deliberate concerning our business, and
especially how far we might proceed in aid of the natives against the
Portuguese, for which purpose we carefully examined our commission and
instructions. We also arranged the appointments of the merchants for
their several places of employment, both such as were to remain in the
factory at Surat, and those who were to proceed on the voyage. This day
likewise, sixty bales of indigo, and eleven packs of cotton-yarn, came
aboard from Surat, being goods that belonged to the _twelfth_ voyage.
It was my desire to have been ashore among our merchants, that I might
assist in arranging our business at Surat; and this the rather because
of the turbulent, head-strong, and haughty spirit of----,[126] who was
ever striving to sway every thing his own way, thwarting others who
aimed at the common good, and whose better discretion led them to more
humility. But such was the uncertain state of our business, partly owing
to the nabob and his people, and partly to the Portuguese, who I heard
were arming against us; and besides, because I understood that the nabob
proposed to demand restitution for the goods taken by Sir Henry
Middleton in the Red Sea, at under rates, as they say, though I know
they had goods for goods even to the value of a halfpenny. On all these
accounts, therefore, I thought it best to keep nearest my principal
charge, referring all things on shore to the merchants of my council, in
most of whom I had great confidence.

[Footnote 126: This name is left blank in the Pilgrims, probably because
Purchas, a contemporary, did not wish to give offence.--E.]

The 22d November, I finished my letters for Persia; being one for the
company, to be forwarded over land, one for Sir Robert Shirley, and one
of instructions for Richard Steel. The 23d, _Lacandus_, the Banian, came
down to us, with news of discontent and hard speeches that had passed
between the nabob and our merchants, but who were now again reconciled.
This was occasioned by Mr Edwards refusing to let him see the presents,
which he was at last obliged to consent to. All these merchants wrote me
at this time separately, that the viceroy was certainly arming against
us. At this time Mr Ensworth and Timothy Wood died within an hour of
each other. John Orwicke, Robert Young, and Esay But, were now
dispatched to provide such cloths and cotton-yarns as we had formerly
agreed on. The 25th Mr Edwards wrote me of the coming of three great
men, bringing seven firmauns from the Great Mogul; in whose presence the
nabob bestowed upon him 850 _mahmudies_, ten fine _basties_, thirty
_top-seels_, and thirty _allizaes_; at the same time he gave ten
_top-seels_ to Mr Elkington and Mr Dodsworth, a cloak to Mr Aldworth and
another to Mr Elkington, Mr Dodsworth having had one before. He likewise
promised free trade to all places under his command, and abundant
refreshments for our people in the ships.

The 27th, John Crowther came from Surat, to inform me he had been
appointed by the chief merchants at Surat to accompany Mr Steel into
Persia, and had therefore come to take leave of me, and to fetch away
his things from the ship. This day also Mr Edwards wrote to me, by
Edmund Espinol, to send him fifty elephants teeth, indifferently chosen
as to size, as a banian merchant was in treaty for them all, if they
could agree on terms. The 6th December, the nabob seemed ashamed that he
had not shewn me the smallest respect since my arrival, and, being
desirous to excuse himself, he this day entreated Mr Edwards to go on
board along with the great banian who had bought our ivory, and
Lacandas, the banian merchant of the junk belonging to the king of
_Cushan_.[127] He chose this last, on account of his former familiarity
with our people, and commissioned him to buy sword-blades, knives, and
mirrors. By them he sent me a present, consisting of two _corge_ of
coarse _bastas_, ten fine _bastas_, ten _top-seels_, ten _cuttonies_,
and three quilts, together with a message, certifying that the nabob
proposed to come down to visit me in a day or two at the most. At their
going ashore, I gave them a salute of five guns.

[Footnote 127: Kessem, on the coast of Arabia Felix, is probably here
meant.--E.]

They told me, that the nabob had certain intelligence from Goa, that the
viceroy was fitting out all the force he could muster to come against
us; and expressed a wish, on the part of the nabob, that I would convoy
one or two of his ships for two or three days sail from the coast, which
were bound for the Red Sea. To this I answered, that I could not do
this; as, if once off the coast, the wind was entirely adverse for our
return: But, if he would further our dispatch, so that we might be ready
in any convenient time, I would do any thing reasonable that he could
desire. The 9th, the nabob's son came to the shore, but would not
venture on board, wherefore I went ashore to him. He had a horse ready
for me on landing to fetch me, and desired me to sit down beside him,
which I did. He then commanded some horsemen, who accompanied him, to
amuse me, by shewing their warlike evolutions on the sands, chasing each
other after the fashion of the Deccan, whence they were; and at his
desire I caused eleven guns to be fired, to do him honour. Though he
refused to drink any wine at this interview, he sent for it after his
departure, as also for a fowling-piece he had seen in the hands of one
of our people, both which I sent him, together with a bowl from which to
drink the wine.

Sec.2. _Account of the Forces of the Portuguese, their hostile Attempts,
and Fight with the English, in which they are disgracefully repulsed_.

On the 16th of December, 1613, Mr Elkington wrote me, That the nabob had
told him the Portuguese frigates had burnt Gogo, with many _gouges_ or
villages in its vicinity, together with ten large ships, of which the
_Rehemee_ was one, and an hundred and twenty small vessels. He said
likewise, that the nabob was much displeased with me for not having
fired upon the Portuguese vessels, as they passed our anchorage, which
circumstance had renewed his suspicions of our friendly intelligence
with the Portuguese; and, although Mr Elkington had said every thing he
could to explain the reason of our conduct, as stated formerly, he could
not satisfy the nabob of its propriety. The 23d two boats came off to us
for lead; and on the same day we saw twenty-two Portuguese frigates,
which came to anchor in the night between, us and the mouth of the
river, where they continued most part of next day.

The 24th, in the morning, we saw four boats coming down the river
towards us; but, on seeing the Portuguese frigates, they immediately
turned back, and were chased up the river by two of the frigates.
Finding they could not get up with the boats, the Portuguese landed and
set fire to two or three poor cottages, and carried off two or three
cattle, and then returned to their squadron at the mouth of the river.
In the afternoon, they all went up the river in company. In the morning
early of the 25th, we saw five or six frigates under sail. An hour or
two after, we saw a boat standing towards us, which was presently chased
by two frigates, on which the men in the small boat ran her a-ground and
forsook her; but as the frigates could not float near where the boat
was, and the tide was ebbing fast, they departed without farther harm.
The 26th in the morning, I sent the Hope a good way to the northward
from the rest of our fleet, to see whether the Portuguese would assail
her.

Early in the morning of the 27th, the Portuguese frigates came and made
a bravado before our ship, and then before the Salomon, which was next
us; and from thence went directly against the Hope, which rode a great
way from us, in which manoeuvre they had all their men close stowed
below, and not one to be seen. The master of the Hope hailed them twice,
but they would give no answer; on which they let fly at them from the
bow-chases of the Hope, which only could be brought to bear, and by
which they were forced with some loss to stand away. The master of the
Hope was satisfied, if he had not shot at them, that they would have
attempted to board, or to have set his ship on fire, as they had the
advantage of both wind and tide, and were so directly a-head of his ship
that he could hardly get any of his guns to bear upon them, while the
rest of our ships could not have come up to his rescue. In the
afternoon, I sent the Salomon to keep company with the Hope; and, going
to the northwards of her, she made several shots at the frigates, but we
did not perceive that any harm was done. I therefore ordered a gun to be
fired, as a warning to desist, on which the Salomon stood in again and
came to anchor.

In the morning of the 28th, I went in the pinnace aboard the Hope and
Salomon, to enquire the reason of their firing. And the Portuguese,
seeing our boats pass to and fro, removed in the afternoon, and anchored
a little way without us, obviously for the purpose of cutting off our
intercourse. In the meantime, the boat which had been chased ashore on
the 25th, came aboard the Gift, bringing some letters from Mr Elkington,
which our master sent to me, as I was then in the Hope. Having answered
Mr Elkington's letter, I sent back the _gelliwat_ to the Gift, with
directions to go thence to Surat in the night. But, as the _gelliwat_
[galivat] returned, she was chased by the frigates; which perceiving, I
waved her to return, but she held on her way, not observing my signal.
The frigates held her so close in chase, that they got within shot of
her, and even fired one gun; and had not the Gift slipped one cable and
veered another, and plied her ordnance at the Portuguese, they had
surely taken or sunk the _gelliwat_. This forced the Portuguese to give
over the chase, not without damage. Late at night, on the tide of ebb, I
made the Hope and Salomon set sail and come near the other two ships,
and then returned on board the Gift.

Perceiving on the 29th, that my continuing off the bar of Surat was
quite unavailing, as the Portuguese frigates could pass and repass to
and from the river, by going across the sands, where there was not
water to float my ships; and that no boats could come to us to fetch
away our goods, for fear of the frigates, neither could we have any
intercourse with our friends ashore, to know what passed; I therefore
set sail for Swally roads, where I arrived next day, having very little
wind.

On the 14th January, 1614, we heard of many frigates being arrived,
which rode at the bar of Surat all next day till night; and, leaving
that place after dark, they came and rode within shot of us till next
morning, when they weighed and stood back to the southwards. While they
remained at anchor, supposing they might be the Mallabars, which the
nabob had formerly promised to send me, I put forth a flag of truce, and
sent Mr Spooner, one of our master's mates, towards them, directing him
to keep a watchful eye to our signals, which we should make if we saw
any reason of suspicion. Seeing our gallivat draw near, and no sign of
friendship in answer to ours, I hoisted my flag and fired a shot to
recall our boat, which immediately came back. At this time, our sentinel
at the mast-head descried another fleet of frigates, which afterwards
assembled at the bar of Surat, and went all into the river. By this I
was satisfied they were all Portuguese, and was glad our men and boat
had escaped their hands. Thinking these frigates were forerunners of a
greater force, I ordered the decks to be cleared, all our guns thrown
loose, and every thing to be in readiness for action, both for the great
guns and small arms, and to fit up barricades for close quarters. In the
night of the 17th, all the frigates came out of the river, and in the
morning were all at the point of the bar.

The 18th, Maugie, the banian captain formerly mentioned, accompanied by
another great man, who was son to _Clych Khan_, came to the water side
to speak with me, to whom I went ashore. Not long after, word was
brought from on board, that they had descried a fleet of ships far off,
which looked very big, but which we could not see from the shore, owing
to its being very low. Taking leave of my visitors, I returned aboard,
and made every thing be put in readiness, which was done immediately.
Towards night, we made them out to be six galleons, with three smaller
ships, besides the sixty frigates which were here before. Two gallies
belonging to this armament were not yet come up. The tide being spent,
they came to anchor till next day. The 19th, they plied up to the
entrance of our new channel, where they came to anchor, and where they
were joined by the two gallies. One of their great ships, being too
forward, came too near the sands and grounded, but was soon got off
again.

On this occasion, Mucrob Khan, the nabob of Surat, sent the sabandar and
several others of the principal men of Surat, with a great present of
provisions to the Portuguese, and to endeavour to enter into terms of
peace; but though great policy was used on both sides, they broke off
without coming to any terms. This was done by the nabob to my great
mortification, for he and all the country despaired of my being able to
resist such disproportionate force, and he was therefore willing before
hand to conciliate the viceroy by presents; considering, if I were once
overthrown, his own turn would come next, either to endure a severe
assault, or to make such a peace as the enemy chose to dictate. Peace
was certainly most desirable for the viceroy, that he might restore
trade with the Moguls. Yet, seeing the tractableness of the nabob, and
his apparent earnestness for peace, the viceroy made light of it for the
present, expecting to bring it to bear with great advantage after he had
overthrown us, which he made no doubt easily to accomplish. When this
was performed, he expected to receive great presents, and great
submission from the Moguls to the dictates of the conqueror. But it
pleased God, who beheld the injustice of his attempt, to turn the event
contrary to the expectations both of the viceroy and the nabob. After
failing in all his attempts against me, and finding he could not even
gain a _boats thole_ from me in all the time he spent here, with loss
and disgrace, the viceroy was fain to revive the former despised proffer
of peace with the nabob: While the nabob on the other hand, confirmed by
the experience of a month, and seeing that the viceroy, after all his
boastful threatenings, and with so vast an armament, was unable to
prevail against our four merchant ships, or even to remove our small
force one foot from their place, gave for answer, that he would not make
peace with the viceroy. Thus was the viceroy frustrated in both his
hopes, of an easy victory over us, and an advantageous peace with the
Moguls. After this digression, I now return to our proceedings.

When we formerly heard of the force which the viceroy was fitting out
against us; we had no conception it would be so formidable as it now
appeared, and therefore deemed it expedient to consult how, by God's
help, we might best resist. The odds and advantages on their side, made
me calculate every thing that made against me. Being far out-numbered
by his forces, which I esteemed the principal ships and means belonging
to the Portuguese in India, and having all the people of greatest rank
and valour, I considered it might be too hazardous for us to put out
into deep water, as by their numbers they would be able to intercept and
overcharge me, and to force me irrecoverably aground, on one side or
other. Such were my apparent disadvantages in going out to sea; while I
knew, on the other hand, that their numerous smaller vessels might much
annoy us with fire-works, or put us otherwise into great hazard, in the
place where we now rode at anchor, where I was hopeful their great ships
could not or durst not come, owing to the shoal water. Though my numbers
were considerably lessened by sickness and deaths, all my people, from
the highest to the lowest, seemed quite courageous, yet ignorant both of
our danger and how it was to be prevented; but their brave spirit gave
me great hope. Yet my anxiety was not small, how I might best act in
maintaining the honour of my country, and not neglect the valuable
property entrusted to my care by my friends and employers; as not only
was the present charge to be put in hazard, but all hopes also of future
benefits, if I were now overthrown; as the enemy, if he now got the
mastery, would be able to make peace with the Moguls on his own terms,
to the expulsion of our nation for ever.

Besides these considerations, I leave to such parents as are tender for
the safety of their dutiful and obedient children, to imagine how great
was my anxiety for the safety of the people under my command. So great
was my cares all this time, that I had little time for conversation, or
even almost to shew myself sensible of the approaching dangers. Whenever
I could get free from others, I very earnestly craved the aid and
direction of the almighty and ever merciful God, who had often delivered
me before from manifold dangers, praying that he would so direct me that
I might omit nothing having a tendency to the safety of my charge, and
our defence against the enemy. I had strong confidence that the Almighty
would grant my request, and yet was often led to doubt, through my
manifold and grievous offences. I resolved at length what to do, by
God's assistance, providing the masters of the ships would agree to
second me. Being satisfied, if we should-receive a defeat while at
anchor, our disgrace would be great, and our enemies could in that case
be little injured by us; while by setting sail, the viceroy, in his
greediness and pride, might do himself some wrong upon the sands, by
which he might cripple his own force, and thereby open a way for our
getting out through the rest. Yet this plan seemed only fit for ultimate
necessity, considering that much of our goods were now on their way, and
others were expected from day to day; and, if once out, unless it
pleased God to make us the conquerors, so as to drive the viceroy clean
away, I should on no account be able to return to my anchorage, where
only I could get in my lading. Considering also that the viceroy would
hold his honour in such high estimation, that he would rather die than
give way; and besides, that my people would be tired and half spent with
labour, before going to fight, by heaving at the capstan to get up our
anchors, setting the sails, and so forth, which in this hot country
makes them both weary and faint, to the great diminution of their
courage; while the viceroy and his soldiers being troubled with no
labour, which among them is done by slaves and inferior mariners, would
come fresh into the battle. Likewise, even supposing the viceroy to lose
many men in the fight, he could be again supplied from the nearest towns
belonging to the Portuguese, by means of his frigates; whereas we could
not have a single man replaced, whatever number we might have slain or
disabled.

Having none of our merchants aboard, as they were all employed in the
country, or with Mr Elkington in our factory at Surat, I sent for all
the masters, on the night of this Thursday the 19th January, desiring
them and some of the mates to come to supper with me on board the Gift.
I then made them a speech on our present situation, desiring every one
to give his opinion freely, how we might best proceed in our present
straits. I declared to them my confidence in God, notwithstanding all
the force of these bragging Portuguese, that their injurious attempts
would not prevail against us, who had been careful not to wrong them in
the Indies. I represented also to them, the jealousy entertained of us
by the nabob and other chief men of the country, because we had
refrained from firing at the saucy bragging frigates.

I found all the masters willing and tractable to my heart's desire. We
had some few discourses about our provident mooring, as also about
removing a little lower down. I then proposed my plan to them, desiring
to have their free opinion. I represented that our ships were now in as
good condition for battle as we could make them, yet our danger by
night, if we continued where we were, was not small, however provident
we might be. Wherefore, I thought it fit in the morning at low water, to
send one ship to ride as far down as we could have water for all our
ships at the lowest ebb, at which time none of the enemies ships could
come to annoy her. This, as I thought, might induce the viceroy to make
some attempt at high water, when our other three ships might bear down
against the stream, the springs being now at the highest, when we should
see what efforts the viceroy might make, and might attend to the same
and act accordingly, in the hope that the viceroy might commit some
error to the weakening of his own force and our advantage. And if such
should happen, it would then be proper for us to put out to sea, in the
darkness of the following night, when the viceroy would not be in
condition to make sail to hinder us. Or, if we saw reason, we might make
sail daily on the flood, working to and again, which would somewhat
dismay the Portuguese, and encourage our own men. My proposal was
unanimously agreed to, as the best way of proceeding; and finding Mr
Molineux quite willing to fall down with the Hope at low water next
morning, this was directed accordingly.

In the morning of the 20th, at low water, the Hope went down to induce
the enemy to make some attempt against her when the tide rose, and then
we in the other ships stood after her. The viceroy, and all the worthy
knights about him, thinking I was about to flee, hastened as soon as the
flood would permit to stop the passage, and prevent our getting out. We
all came to anchor short of the Hope, yet not so as to leave her
destitute of our help, but rather doubting of sufficient depth for our
ships at low water so far down. On coming to anchor, I went down into my
cabin, meaning to have given our friends ashore notice of my purposes,
that they might know it proceeded from no rashness, but in good
discretion to wait upon advantages to the prejudice of our enemies. But
presently I had notice, that three of the Portuguese ships and most of
their frigates were coming stem on before the wind upon the Hope,
followed by all the galleons.

We endeavoured to weigh our anchor, but having no time for that, we cut
our cables, and made sail for the rescue of the Hope. Before we could
get sufficiently near, the enemies ships were close aboard of her, and
had entered their men, boarding her with great appearance of resolution.
But they had no quiet abode there, nor could they rest in their own
ships, neither could they cast them loose from the Hope, so greatly were
they annoyed by our great guns and small arms. At length, their
principal officers being slain, the rest in great numbers leapt into the
sea, whence many of them were taken up by their frigates. But, before
quitting their ships, they set them on fire, thinking to have burnt the
Hope along with them. But, praised be the Lord of Hosts, they were burnt
without harm to the Hope; for, so soon as the fire had well kindled, the
flaming ships were cast loose and drifted on the sands, where they
continued burning till quenched by the flowing tide. So long as
day-light lasted, we continued exchanging shots from all our ships with
the galleons, they being on the outside of a spit of sand, and we on the
inside. They did us little injury in our hulls, but much to our ropes
and sails overhead. In this conflict, besides those who were wounded, we
had five men slain. By a great mischance, the main-top-sail, top-mast,
and shrouds got afire, communicated from the main-top, in consequence of
the fire-works lodged there taking fire, the man being slain who had the
charge there. All these were burnt quite away, together with a great
part of the main-mast; and this misfortune prevented us from going out
into deep water to try our fortune with the viceroy in close fight. We
were likewise put to our shifts, not knowing by what means we might get
the mast replaced.

The 21st I got the anchor weighed, which we had been obliged to cut from
the day before. On the 22d, I was informed that many great men,
accompanied by a Portuguese friar, and escorted by five or six hundred
horse, had come down to Swally, meaning to send the friar next day, with
three or four principal Moors, to negociate a peace with the viceroy.
But the nabob sent me word, that he sought for no such thing, and was
resolved to conclude no peace, unless we were included. He also granted
me what timber we might need, of which we availed ourselves, and
promised to supply us with provisions. The Portuguese remaining quiet on
the 25th, the _muccadam_ of Swally came to me, saying that the
before-mentioned friar had sent to entice him to poison the well whence
we had our water, which he would not consent to, and had therefore put
some live tortoises into it, that these might shew by their deaths, if
poison should be put therein by the Portuguese. At night, part of the
120 bales of indigo we had purchased came to the water side, and was
presently got aboard. This day _Isaac Beg_ sent me a present of fruit
from his own garden; and this day likewise the rest of the timber for
repairing the Hope's mast was brought down to us.

The 27th, I sent all our boats to sound the _Swash_ at low water, being
chiefly on purpose to keep the Portuguese in ignorance of my real
intentions. They sent one galley and five frigates, thinking to have cut
off our boats; but in this they failed, as in every thing else they
attempted against us. The 28th, the nabob sent great store of provisions
to the viceroy, as goats, bread, plantains, and the like, together with
a banquet of sweetmeats. Coge Nozan sent me a present of five bullocks.
Several of our men died about this time of fluxes and other diseases.
The 31st, we received aboard from Cambay, fifty bales of indigo. In the
afternoon, one _Coge Arson Ali_ came aboard, and presented me with
several goats, a large supply of bread, roast-meat, plantains, sugar,
and other such things. Along with him came an old acquaintance of mine,
a Persian, who said there were news from Damaun, that the Portuguese had
sent there 350 men to be buried; and we computed, that there could not
be less than 100 more, killed and burnt in their ships, besides those
who were drowned. They also told me, that not only were the Portuguese
opposed here in India, but also by the Persians at Ormus, and that the
Malays were in arms against them at Malacca. They likewise assured me,
that the negociations between Mucrob Khan and the viceroy were entirely
at an end, and that no peace would take place between them.

I had long wished to see this man, who, till now, could never get leave
of the nabob, without which no one dared use that freedom. This jealousy
of the nabob proceeded, as he said, from a great charge enjoined by the
king to procure for his use all curious things of value, and he is
fearful lest any of these should pass through other hands, to his
disgrace, which forces him to employ strange and severe means to prevent
this happening. Day being nearly spent, I sent them ashore, making them
a present, and giving money to all their people, having first shewn them
how far some of our great guns could throw a ball. They then took their
leave and departed.

Sec.3_Supplies received by the Portuguese, who vainly endeavour to use
Fire-boats. They seek Peace, which is refused, and depart. Interview
between the Nabob and Captain Downton, and Departure of the English_.

On the 3d February, 1615, there arrived at the waterside twenty-four
bales of indigo, seven packs of white, seven of black, and four of blue
_bastas,_ six packs of cotton yarn, three of _candikens,_ and one pack
of _crecany,_ all of which were brought immediately on board. This day
also the supplies for the viceroy came in sight, being two ships of
burden, two junks, and eight or ten of the country boats. The nabob sent
me a message by _Lacandas,_ that these were not for the purpose of
fighting, but were full of combustibles, meant to be set on fire, and
allowed to drift with the tide upon our ships in the night. I was glad
of this information, and took immediate measures to prevent the
consequences of such an attempt, as well as to defend ourselves from the
smaller vessels. The spring-tides were now near the highest, and were
consequently fittest for their attacks, so that I expected them every
tide; and to let them see I was ready for their reception, and how
little I cared for them, I directed the setting and clearing our watch,
mornings and evenings, to be announced by a volley of shot from every
ship, pointing the best piece in my ship at the prow of the viceroy's
ship, to try his temper, and to daunt the courage of his people. It
pleased God this morning, when I had least leisure for mourning, to call
my only son, George Downton, to his mercy, who was buried next morning
ashore, and the volleys intended to insult the viceroy, served also to
honour his obsequies.

This morning also, while expecting an assault from the Portuguese, I was
visited by one _Mousa Attale,_ a Malabar captain, together with his
troop, from whom I got a description of the principal ports and harbours
of his country, expressing my anxious desire to become acquainted with
them, and to have league and intercourse between them and the English,
with mutual trade and friendship. He seemed willing to encourage this
proposal, and requested letters to that effect from me, which their
ships might shew to my countrymen when they happened to meet, which I
gave him, as also a letter for his king, requesting kind usage for my
countrymen if any of their ships should come into his harbours. After
some conference, he departed, and I presented him with a sword-blade,
and three or four knives.[128] This day the master of the Hope
represented that he had several men killed in the former engagement, and
many hurt, bruised, and disabled from service, on which I sent him three
men from my ship, four from the Hector, and four from the Salomon.

[Footnote 128: These knives, so often mentioned as presents in India,
were probably daggers.--E.]

The 5th I had letters from Mr Aldworth, informing of his arrival at
Baroach with his companions, and saying that he had been set upon by 200
Rajput thieves, nine _coss_ from Baroach, the day before, the thieves
being armed with pikes, matchlocks, and bows and arrows; but, after some
skirmishing, they fled, three of them being slain, and more wounded. In
this affair Humphrey Elkington was shot through the thigh with an arrow,
one of the horsemen sent by Surder Khan to guard our people was killed,
and Mr Aldworth's horse sore wounded. The nabob sent me word that the
viceroy proposed to assault me this day, and therefore sent Coge Nozan
to guard the land. Nozan came accordingly to the water side, and sent
his son, _Mamud Iehad,_ to visit me on board, accompanied by a chief
named _Kemagee,_ the son of _Leckdarsee, rajput_ chieftain of _Guigamar_
or _Castelletto,_[129] who had for a long time maintained war with the
Moguls and Portuguese. These chiefs entreated permission to see and
partake in the fight, and as no assault was made that day, they remained
all night on board. The _rajput_ chief went ashore next morning, but the
other remained on board two or three days, and seeing the enemy would do
nothing, he went likewise ashore.

[Footnote 129: On a former occasion supposed to have been
Jumbosier.--E.]

On the forenoon of the 8th, we received more indigo aboard, and in the
afternoon all the Portuguese frigates, with the two junks, and two
gallies, came driving up with the flood, as if for some attempt against
us, either by fire, which I most doubted, or otherwise. We therefore got
under weigh and advanced to meet them, upon which they all made off as
fast as they could, and we came again to anchor. This was merely a
device, to make us believe their fire-boats were to come against us
from the south, and that we might have no suspicion of their coming from
the northwards; wherefore they again assembled all their junks,
frigates, and galleys next night, a little without the sands, to call
our attention from the northern quarter. But I was aware of that being
the place of greatest danger; and though I commanded a careful outlook
to be kept both ways, I especially enjoined to be watchful in the north
quarter, as it fell out accordingly. A little within the night, between
us and a great light to the westwards, upon the island of Gogo, we could
discern them creeping up to the north upon the flood; and then, about
ten o'clock at night, when very dark, and before the moon rose, upon the
last quarter of the ebb tide, there came down towards us two fire-boats,
towed by two frigates, which we happily descried before they came nigh,
and plied them heartily both with great guns and small arms. By this we
soon beat off the frigates, which set the fire-boats adrift, and made
sail from us.

One of the fire-boats drifted clear of the Gift, Hector, and Salomon,
but got athwart the cable of the Hope, and presently blew up; but,
blessed be God, the Hope received no harm, having cut her cable and got
clear. The other fire-boat came up likewise on the quarter of the Hope,
all in flames, but did no harm, as she drifted past with the ebb. She
came up again with the tide of flood, and was like to have got foul of
us; but our boats towed her ashore continually burning. The former one
floated likewise back with the flood, but sank near us in the morning.
This day I had a letter from Thomas Kerridge, specifying that Nicholas
Whittington had gone distracted, and expressing some doubts of Richard
Steel.

The 10th, at night, about the same time as before, two other fire-boats
came against us, towed by four or five frigates, bearing directly on the
Hector. Immediately on perceiving them, the Gift and Hector let drive at
them with great guns and small arms, so that the frigates threw them
adrift, firing them sooner than they otherwise would. The burning boats
floated toward the Hector, but having a stiff breeze, drifted past to
leewards. Within half an hour after, we perceived many boats drifting
towards the Hector, against which we again let drive, forcing the
frigates to abandon them in such a hurry that they only set two of them
on fire, there being four of them chained together. Fortunately we had
a stiff gale, and by edging up to windward, they all floated clear to
leeward. While passing, our gunner made a shot at one of the boats that
was unfired, which struck her and set her on fire. The vehemence of the
flames reached the fourth boat, and set her likewise on fire; so they
all drifted ashore in flames, hard by our landing-place. My pinnace took
three of the actors in a small canoe, in which they thought to have
escaped. Two of these men were brought aboard my ship, the third being
left in the Hector. Besides these, our _gelliwat_ picked up another,
which she brought with her. Thus did God disappoint all the malicious
practices of our enemy.

Seeing himself foiled in all his injurious attempts, the viceroy set
sail on the 11th, and fell down to the bar of Surat, where he anchored.
Being suspicious that he meant to attempt taking Surat, I resolved, in
that case, to have gone with my ships to set upon his fleet, which must
have constrained him to desist from his enterprise against Surat, as I
was desirous to assist in defending a place where we had so great a
stock, and so many of our merchants. But the viceroy durst not trust me
so far as to unman his ships, lest I should come against him. In the
night he sent all his frigates into the river, and sent some person to
propose peace, but received a flat denial. The 12th, the nabob sent
_Lacandas_ to inform me that five or six frigates had gone to the
northwards, having four or five fire-boats, which they meant to let
drive upon us in the night, and therefore wished me to keep a good
look-out. I acknowledged his kindness, and was glad of his care, though
needing no such admonition, as I was equally suspicious of their
practices when out of sight as when they rode near us. The nabob had
this intelligence from the Jesuits, with whom he kept on fair terms, for
his better security, if he should have been put to the worst. As the
frigates, or other vessels in the offing, could not well discern the
place where our ships rode during the darkness of the night, by reason
of the shadow of the shore, they had lights made for them ashore for
guiding them where to find us during their hellish incendiary plans.
Having observed this light, night after night, always in the same place,
and seeing it as before on the night of the 13th, I sent William Gurdin
ashore with twenty men, armed with muskets and pikes, directing them to
endeavour to surround this fire-blazer, supposing him to be some traitor
inhabiting the neighbourhood. But, on coming near, the fire was
presently put out, and was again seen at another place, quite contrary
to the direction of their pursuit; and so going up and down for a long
time, they gave it over, esteeming it some delusion of the devil. This
night the viceroy set sail from the bar of Surat, leaving about twenty
of his frigates in the river to keep in check the Malabar frigates which
were there for the defence of the town.

The 14th, the nabob sent a great man, who, in token of friendship, was
called his brother, to visit me. This person gave as his opinion that
the viceroy was gone with all his fleet to Goa, leaving some frigates to
keep possession of the river, and others to return to Diu and Ormus. But
my own opinion is, that the viceroy has only gone somewhere to refresh
his people, and to reinforce his ships, against our putting to sea, when
no sands will be in the way of his greatest ships coming against me. He
also told me that the king had sent down forces for the purpose of
conquering Damaun and all the sea coast. He said likewise, that they
were more willing to give entertainment and trade to our nation than the
Portuguese, which I thought very reasonable, as the Portuguese had
always been injurious, and had done many vile things against them. Yet,
unless we continue able to resist the Portuguese, they will soon unsay
that speech for their own ease. When he had viewed our ship, with our
ordnance and defensive preparations, we sent him and his train on shore
in oar boats, in all courtesy.

We now set seriously to work in clearing and loading the Hope for
England, having hitherto taken in our goods confusedly and by hasty
snatches, some into one ship, and some into others, not deeming it
proper to hazard all in one bottom while exposed to so much danger from
the Portuguese. I had resolved to send home the Hope, not that I
esteemed her burden the fittest for the goods we had provided, but
because of the many impediments and disabilities of that ship, as daily
complained of by the master and carpenter; in particular, that her
stern-post within the rudder was unsheathed, a strange and dangerous
neglect and unaccountable oversight, on which account it was fitting she
should soonest return; besides, we were in danger of losing our
quicksilver which was in her, and lay on her keel and bilges.

The 18th, the nabob sent to me Cage Arson Ali, the sabandar, and other
merchants of Surat, requesting me to remain for fifteen days, which I
would in no sort consent to. They then importuned me to stop for ten
days, which likewise I refused, shewing them how prejudicial so long
delay might be to my voyage. The cause of their request was, lest the
viceroy might come with all his forces against Surat after my departure.
Seeing them discontented at my denial, and loth to give displeasure to
the nabob, which might be prejudicial to our affairs afterwards, and
considering that it would require six days of the ten before we could
get the Hope ready, I at last consented to their request, to their great
satisfaction. At night on the 22d I had a letter from Surat, informing
me that the nabob meant to visit me next day, and accordingly two
elephants and six camels came down in the morning of the 23d, bringing
his tents and other matters for his reception. The 24th, Mr Aldworth
came down with the rest of the merchants to finish all business with me
previous to our departure.

In the morning of the 25th, the nabob came down with a great train, with
six other elephants, and was two hours at the water side before I knew
of his arrival. When told, I was sorry for the neglect, and sent Mr
Aldworth, Mr Elkington, and Mr Dodsworth ashore to compliment him, and
to keep him in discourse till I could go on shore, which I did soon
after. I proposed to have gone to him as a son to his father, in my
doublet and hose, without arms or any great train, according to custom,
to shew the trust and confidence I reposed in him; but my friends
persuaded me to the contrary, insisting that I should go well appointed,
and attended by a sufficient guard, to which I consented, though I
afterwards repented that I had not followed my own way. I went
accordingly ashore with about 140 men, part pikes, and part firelocks,
who gave me a volley of small arms as I entered the nabob's tent. The
nabob received me with much kindness, seeming much pleased at my coming
ashore to him. We sat for some time under a very fair tent, open on all
sides, and surrounded by many people, both his attendants and mine.

At length he brought me into a more private room, near adjoining, having
only along with him Ali Khan, a great Persian captain, with Henie the
Banian as his interpreter; while I was accompanied by Messrs. Aldworth,
Elkington, and Dodsworth. We there conferred about the state of his
country, and about our affairs. At last I invited him to go on board to
view our ship, to which he readily consented. He then presented me with
his own sword, with many complimentary speeches, saying it was the
custom of his country to honour with arms such captains as had deserved
well. This sword, as he said, was made in his own house, the hilt being
of massy gold. In return, I presented to him my own arms, being sword
and dagger, together with my girdle and hangers, by me much esteemed,
and making a much finer shew than his, though of less value. We came
forth together from the private tent, and I walked down to the shore to
wait for his coming, whither he sent me a present of ten _cuttonee_
quilts and twenty _topseels_.

Soon after the nabob came to the shore, and we took boat together, going
on board my ship. Having shewn our ordnance, and the manner of pointing
the guns, and explained all our other preparations for defence, I
presented him with a very handsome gilt cup and cover, some fair knives,
a rundlet of Muscadine wine, and some other toys. Desiring to see some
of our ordnance shot off, and how far they could carry their balls on
the water, I caused three guns to be fired. He would then have taken
leave, but I accompanied him ashore, and ordered him to be saluted at
his departure with eleven guns. When we parted at the water side, the
nabob gave me four baskets of grapes. He likewise gave among the gunners
and trumpeters 200 mahmoodies, and 500 among the ship's company,
together with 100 _books_ of white _bastas_, worth two mahmoodies each.
Thus, after some compliments, we took leave of each other and parted.
While rowing up along shore for my better getting on board, as the tide
ran very swiftly, _Lacandas_ came running towards the boat, bearing a
message from the nabob to ask if he should erect a tomb over the grave
of my son. I returned my hearty thanks for the kind offer, desiring
Lacandas to say that I had already begun to do so. The nabob then went
away to Surat, and not long after his tent was taken down and went after
him, with all the rest of his carriages.

The 26th, the nabob's son and son-in-law, a very ingenious young man,
came to visit me, upon whom I bestowed some knives and other things,
such as I had left, which could not be much, as I had every now and then
some great man or other to visit me, to all of whom I had to give
something. The 27th, the three sons of Ali Khan came to visit me, the
eldest of whom, named Guger Khan, presented me with two antilopes, a
male and a female, of which I was very glad, having endeavoured before
ineffectually to send some home to Sir Thomas Smith. After viewing all
our ship, with our ordnance and warlike preparations for defence, I gave
him four Spanish pikes, and some other things of my own, and saluted him
with eleven guns at his departure.

In the afternoon of the 3d March, upon the tide of ebb, and having a
light gale from the north, sufficient to give steerage-way to our ships,
we hastened to get up our anchors, meaning to set sail in the
prosecution of our voyage, though our friends, the Malabars, who had
desired to go with us, made no attempt to come out. At this time we saw
another fleet of Portuguese frigates standing in from the westwards, and
being willing to do my best to hinder them from going into the river of
Surat, were it only to shew our good-will to the country people, we shot
at the nearest of them, though without hope of doing them any hurt, as
there was room for them to pass on either side of us, beyond reach of
our shot. I was willing also to shew our friends on land, as also to
those who I made no doubt would go down the coast to give notice to the
galleons of our coming, that we shot at their frigates going into Surat,
that they might also expect that we cared little for their greater
strength.

In our passage this night we had various flaws of inconstant winds,
which obliged us to come to anchor for some time. As the wind became
afterwards steady, though faint, we again made sail, continuing our
course S. by E. along shore. At day-light nest morning we began to
descry, between us and the shore, the Portuguese galleons and two
gallies; all of which made sail on perceiving us, following with a light
breeze, while we stood somewhat out of our course with all our sails,
partly to gain time to prepare ourselves perfectly for battle, and
partly to give rest to my people, who had taken much fatigue the night
before, as also to draw the enemy farther from the coast, and from
having the convenience of fresh supplies. Ere long, the tide of flood
obliged us to anchor, not having sufficient wind to stem the current.
The enemy, resting his hopes on the wind, kept longer under sail, to his
great disadvantage. But as I did not consider this at the time as an
error in them, I was is great doubt lest they might intend going against
Surat with all their force, now that we were at sea, and there work
their wills upon our friends and goods, which I could only prevent by
following them. Yet the season was now so far advanced that I doubted,
even with our best haste, we should hardly get off the coast before the
foul weather set in; and this gave me hope that the viceroy would not
expose himself to the danger of the approaching winter. While
considering these things, the tide of flood was spent, and it was time
for us to use the ebb, when, to my great satisfaction, I saw the viceroy
and his whole fleet standing towards us, with a fresh breeze. We
likewise made sail, and stood our course before him all that ebb, and so
spent that night to the best advantage, partly at anchor, and partly
under sail, according as wind and tide served.

In the morning of the 5th, the enemy had gained very little way upon us.
We spent this day, as before, in riding or sailing, as the tide
answered. This night the viceroy gained much ground upon us, and by this
time we had got a good way from the coast, and had advanced well to the
southwards, so that I was now satisfied the Portuguese forces could not
this year give any annoyance to Surat. I considered that my purposes in
these parts, both by the authority of my king, and to fulfil the designs
of my employers, were, in merchant ships, fitted indeed for defence, to
seek honest commerce, without striving to injure any; wherefore I held
it fit for me to proceed soberly and discreetly, neither basely to flee
from the enemy, nor to tempt danger by proudly seeking it, if it might
be honourably avoided. The viceroy was quite differently situated. He
had been sent by his master with the principal ships of all India, and
all the gallants and braggarts of these parts, not only to disturb and
intercept the peaceable trade of the English with the subjects of the
Mogul, but to take and burn them in the harbours of that great king. The
viceroy was furnished with abundance of all things the country could
afford, and only wanted an upright cause. He found what he was in search
of,--four poor merchant ships, having few men, many being dead, and more
sick; and these bragadocios, measuring our hearts by their own, thought
we could never stand against what they esteemed so superior a force;
and, seeing their intent, I baited my hook, which the fish presently ran
after.

The Hope, being heavily laden, was in tow of the Hector, and being
sternmost, three of the Portuguese ships, and thirty or forty of their
frigates, as I had expected, boarded her with the flower of all their
chivalry. But, by the hand of God, and to their great amazement, they
received such a blow that few of them escaped, and these by
extraordinary chance, and three of their ships were burnt.[130] Thus it
pleased God to baffle this their first assault. Ever after, though they
beleaguered us round about for many days together, with all sorts of
ships, our people still in action, and sadly worn out with continual
labour, even shifting goods from ship to ship in that time, yet did they
never gain from us even the value of a _louse_ in all that time, except
our bullets, which we most willingly gave them roundly, their fire-boats
always failing, and nothing prospering in all their efforts. For many
days together I sent the viceroy a defiance once every twenty-four
hours, which must needs lie heavy on the stomach of so courageous a
gentleman. Craving pardon for this digression, I now proceed with my
narrative.

[Footnote 130: I strongly suspect this to be a mere recapitulation of
what happened in Swally roads, as already related, as this second attack
on the Hope by the Portuguese is entirely omitted by Elkington and
Dodsworth.--E.]

The 6th, in the morning, I sent for my master, letting him know that I
proposed, when the viceroy should come up near us, to cast about and
charge him suddenly, that we might strike unexpected terror in his
people, who now bragged us, seeing us flee before them. To this end I
went on board all the ships, giving them directions how to act, and gave
orders to the Hector, by means of her pinnace and mine, to take in an
hundred bales of goods from the Hope, to lighten her, and even staid to
see it done. By this time it was mid-day, when my ship struck sail for
my better getting on board; at which, the viceroy thinking it staid for
him in contempt, as we imagined, be and his consorts bore up with the
shore, and gave up all hope of mending their fortunes by following us
any farther; which course I very well liked, as there is nothing under
his foot to make amends for the loss of the worst man's finger in all
our ships. Besides, I wished for no occasion of fighting unless for the
honour of my king and country as I would rather save the life of one of
my poorest sailors than kill a thousand enemies.

Having now finished with the viceroy, I set myself to write letters for
the dispatch of the Hope, yet still thinking to have stood in for the
bar of Goa to endeavour to have left some compliments there for the
viceroy at his return. This was my earnest desire, but we were so long
delayed in dispatching the Hope, that by the time we had finished, we
were far beyond Goa.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The rest of this journal is wanting, as he is also wanting who should
have finished it. But, alas! this is the imperfection of man's best
perfections; death lying in ambush to entrap those whom by open force he
could not devour. He dying in this voyage, and following his son, hath
left this glorious act, _memoriae sacrum_, the memorable epitaph of his
worth, savouring of a true heroic disposition, piety and valour being in
him seasoned by gravity and modesty."--_Purch._


SECTION II.

_Relations by Mr Elkington and Mr Dodsworth, in Supplement to the former
Voyage_.[131]

"Since writing the voyage of Captain Downton, I have obtained the
journal of Captain Elkington, in which the reader may proceed with this
worthy captain to Bantam, and thence to his grave; this history
succeeding the former, as its author did in command."--_Purch._

[Footnote 131: Purch. Pilgr. I. 514.]

In employing the journals of Mr Elkington and Mr Dodsworth, to continue
the account of the voyage set forth under the command of Captain
Downton, only so much of both are here inserted as answers that purpose,
to avoid prolix repetition of circumstances, already sufficiently
related. The journal of Elkington breaks off abruptly, like that of
Downton, and probably from the same cause; as we learn from Purchas, in
the preceding notice, that Elkington died at Bantam. The journal of
Dodsworth entirely relates to the voyage of the Hope to England, after
parting company with the other two ships, except that it mentions
several incidents of the transactions previous to the departure of that
ship, most of which are here omitted, as already sufficiently
explained.--E.

Sec.1. _Continuation of the Voyage from Surat to Bantam, by Captain Thomas
Elkington_.

On the 4th March, 1615, we descried the Portuguese fleet, which
immediately gave us chace, which it continued all that day and the next.
On the 6th, the general came aboard us, wishing us to make ready, as he
proposed to turn suddenly round and give an onset upon the enemy: But,
about noon that day, the Portuguese bore up and stood for the coast, and
in three hours after we lost sight of them. At night of the 10th, the
Hope departed from us. The 15th we saw three water-spouts at no great
distance; one of them, which was very large, continued for the space of
half an hour. The 19th we doubled Cape Comorin.

The 10th May, the wind and current both against as, the general went to
a green island, to the north or the salt hill, where we came to anchor
in twenty fathoms on good sand. We here sought fresh water, but found
none. There were plenty of bogs and pigs on this island, where likewise
we gathered abundance of cocoa-nuts. All about this island is good
anchorage, within a stone's throw of the shore, in twelve fathoms. The
pinnace brought water from another island, about four leagues off but it
was brackish.[132] The 2d June we came to anchor in Bantam road.

[Footnote 132: So vaguely is this journal expressed, or rather so
miserably abbreviated by Purchas, that there are no indications by which
to guess even where this island lay, except that it was on the way
between Cape Comorin and Bantam.--E.]

The 3d July we weighed mace, and received silk towards furnishing the
Salomon for Masulipatam, to which place we agreed to send the following
merchants: George Chancie, Ralph Preston, Humphry Elkington, Timothy
Mallory, George Savage, and Robert Savage. The 8th we loaded porcelain
into the Salomon. This day we had news by a junk from the Moluccas, that
the Thomasine was there; and that there were twelve sail of Hollanders
at Ternate, who endeavoured to prevent all others from trading. The 11th
our old house very narrowly escaped burning, in conscience of a fire
very near. The 20th, Mr Jordan had letters from. Mr Ball at Macasser,
complaining of violent ill usage from the Hollanders, who had driven him
from thence, and stating that they proposed coming with all their force
to take possession of Bantam, and to place the king of _Motron_ in the
government. The 21st Mr Bennet set sail in the Salomon. The 25th, the
Advice and Attendance arrived from England, after a voyage of eight
months. They met the Globe and James at the Cape, to which ships they
spared eighteen men. These ships departed for England on the 17th July,
and the Advice and her consort on the 18th, meeting a ship near the
Cape, which we suppose might be either the Samaritan or the Hope, bound
for England.

The 5th of August I went aboard to visit the general, Captain Nicholas
Downton, who was then very ill, and we got word of his death next
day.[133] Mr Evans the preacher, and Mr Hambdon, followed him, on the
8th, as we supposed by taking laudanum, as they were both well a little
before. On the 11th the Advice was sent to Japan, having a complement of
twenty-two Englishmen, together with five blacks, and Fernando the
Spaniard. The Concord returned on the 14th from Succadanea in Borneo and
Macasser. That night we had a prodigious tempest of rain, with thunder
and lightning, and the mosque of Bantam was split in two by a
thunderbolt, on which occasion the chief priest was nearly slain, which
the king and people took for a bad omen, and therefore determined to
make peace with Jacatra. The 16th the boat belonging to the Thomasine
came to Bantam, with twenty-two English and five blacks, bringing
intelligence of that ship having been lost on certain flats the night
before, twenty-two leagues from Macasser, owing to the carelessness of
Wilson the master, while all the people were asleep, he only being at
the helm. They saved all the money, which they brought along with them;
and as Mr Bailey told us that his wrecked crew had compelled him to pay
them their wages, we caused them to restore the money.

[Footnote 133: By order in the box, Mr Elkington succeeded in the
command.--_Purch._]

On the 19th, the Hollanders clapped three blacks into the bilboes, whom
Mr Bailey had brought with him from Celoar, pretending they were caught,
climbing over the rails of their house, and also, as they were brought
from a place under their protection, they refused to give us them back.
We are in various ways most vilely abused by these Hollanders, neither
do I see any means to right ourselves, unless we go to war with them;
for we believe this matter to have been done on purpose, and these
blacks enticed by them to it, as if taken by force. I was much offended
with Mr Bailey for his conduct in taking away these blacks, as the
means of making us hated as man-stealers, in, places where we used to be
well received, which the Hollanders will take care to blaze abroad to
our disgrace.

In the night of the 13th September, the watch discovered a fire in the
thatch over the house in which Mr Jordan lodged, which was soon
extinguished; but we could plainly perceive it had been done apurpose,
as we found the cane by which it had been kindled sticking in the
thatch, for which we suspected a Spaniard named Francisco, who had
appostatized and turned Javan. The 2d October, Sophonee Cossock, a
merchant, came in a small pinnace from Puloway, accompanied by an
_Orancay_, to confer on trade with that place. The 22d, I went ashore,
accompanied by Mr Pring and Mr Bailey, to confer with the Dutch general,
concerning certain idle complaints made by them against our mariners. I
found him and the president of their factory very impatient, calling us
insolent English, threatening that our pride would have a fall, with
many other disgraceful and opprobrious words.[134] Such was the
entertainment we received from that boorish general, named Garrat
Reynes, in his own house. He had formerly shewn the like or worse to Mr
Ball, on going aboard his ship at Banda: And four of our men, who took
passage with him from thence to _Cambello_, were brought all the way in
the bilboes, for no cause.

[Footnote 134: Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? It was
Dutch policy to cry _rogue_ first.--_Purch._]

I went ashore on the 3d November, when Captain Jordan called together
the merchants, and sent for the _orancay_ of Banda, whose letter he got
translated; the purport of which was, that, in regard to the ancient
friendship between them and the English, especially with Captain
Keeling, and provoked by the cruelty and injustice of the Hollanders,
their earnest desire was to trade only with the English for the spices
of Puloway, Puleron, and Nera, on condition that the English would
supply them with provisions, ordnance, and ammunition, and help them to
recover the castle of Nera, desiring that some person might be sent to
Banda, to confer with the orancays. To this we answered, That we could
not give them assistance to recover the castle of Nera, without orders
from England, and that at present we had no ordnance to spare; but would
willingly supply them with provisions, and every thing else in our
power, till we had farther orders from England, and would trade with
them for spices, for which purpose we proposed to send a ship, and a
person to confer with the _orancays_, and particularly to know how we
might have security, and whether they would grant us permission to build
a fort for that purpose.

The 23d five Hollanders anchored in the outer road, four of which came
last from the Mauritius, having been nineteen months on the voyage from
Holland. At that island they found that General Butt had been cast away
with three ships, two being totally lost, the men and goods of the third
being saved. A fourth, which was in company, went home under jury-masts,
along with a pinnace that came there by chance. One of these ships that
was at the Mauritius came away before the rest, and they found her
driving up and down off the mouth of the straits, having lost 160 men,
and having only eight remaining. The 25th, by letters from Priaman, we
had notice of the death of Mr Ozewicke and Samuel Negus.

Sec.2. _Brief Observations by Mr Edward Dodsworth, who returned to England
in the Hope_.

The 16th October, 1614, while in the bay of Surat, Mr Aldworth and Mr
Steel came on board, and next day Mr Aldworth was examined, according to
the company's commission and instructions,[135] concerning the behaviour
of Paul Canning to the king, and the king's conduct towards him. To
which he answered, That his behaviour was right, and the king's
entertainment of him satisfactory, till the Jesuits insinuated he was
only a merchant, and not sent immediately by the king of England. After
this he was neglected, and died since.[136] Also, that he thought it fit
that some one of our nation of good respect should remain at court, to
procure redress of any wrongs that might be offered; to which function
Mr Edwards was chosen to go to Agra, as the person most answerable to
the company's instructions, on which occasion some question was made,
whether it would be proper he should proceed in the character of a
merchant, according to the strict letter of the instructions, which Mr
Aldworth conceived would procure him disrespect with the king; and,
after some contest, some way was given to Mr Edwards in this affair,
lest they should disagree in their proceedings, especially as it had
been reported by some already, that he was a messenger from the king of
Britain.

[Footnote 135: This commission had six questions, of which I only
insert what is fit for the public eye.--_Purch._]

[Footnote 136: It has been said on a former occasion, that he died of
poison, given, as was thought, by the jesuits.--_Purch._]

After much opposition to our desire of trade, there came a _firmaun_
from the king on the 24th November, which, according to custom, the
nabob met in state two miles from the city, attended by 600 horse. Next
day we were kindly entertained, and the nabob gave Mr Edwards 850
mahmoudies, thirty pieces of _topseels_, ten of fine calicoes, and other
things. The money being to bear the charges of carrying up the present
to the king, who was not willing we should incur any expence on that
account, and the stuffs as a gratification to those who carried them up.
To the merchants also he gave fifteen pieces of _topseels_, five to
each, with his _chop_ or licence for our departure, and promises of kind
usage, all this being done in presence of those who brought the
_firmaun_. The 30th, Mr Edwards and we set out for _Amadavar_
[Ahmedabad.]

The 2d of December we reached Broach, whence the governor sent a guard
of horse with us to _Demylode_, and there we had a new escort of horse
and foot to _Charmondo_;[137] whence we departed on the 7th with
twenty-five soldiers, all notorious thieves, as we afterwards found.
With these we went ten coss, when we pitched our tents in a plain,
barricading ourselves as usual with our carts. While at supper, we had
nearly been assaulted by fifty horse, who passed close by us, but they
found us well provided for our defence, and it appeared that the charge
we carried was well known in all the country through which we travelled.
The 8th we came to _Brodera_, [Brodrah] and made a present to the
governor, who received it very kindly, and particularly requested to see
our mastiff dog. Brodrah stands in a plain, which seemed fertile, and is
well watered, a thing rather uncommon in those parts. We departed thence
with an escort of 100 horse and foot, voluntarily offered from respect
for the king's present, yet were they a considerable charge to us. We
came next to Arras,[138] a town mostly inhabited by banians, and where
their superstition of not killing any thing occasioned us to have very
bad fare. On the 13th we came to Ahmedabad, whence we gave a commission
to Richard Steel and John Crowther to proceed on their journey to
Persia; and hence Mr Edwards departed from us for Agra.

[Footnote 137: On this part of the indicated route, between Broach and
Brodrab, no stations are to be found in our best maps resembling these
two names, unless Simlode may have been corrupted into Demylode by
typographical error.--E.]

[Footnote 138: No such name is now to be found in the road between
Brodrah and Ahmedabad, neither is it of much importance in any view, as
the route is so vaguely indicated in the text.--E.]

All this time, the merchants at Ahmedabad, being in hopes of peace with
the Portuguese, held up the price of their indigos, on which we resolved
to proceed for _Sarques_ [Sarkess,] to make trial with the country
people who are the makers of that commodity. We did so on the 7th, and
found plenty of employment, packing in four days no less than 400 bales:
after which Mr Edwards returned to Ahmedabad, where he found the
merchants greatly more tractable. _Sarkess_ is a town of no great size,
three coss from Ahmedabad, its territory being considered the best soil
in all these parts for the production of indigo. All of the dealers in
this commodity are apt to put tricks upon us, by mingling or otherwise.
At Sarkess there are two of the most ancient monuments that are to be
found in all that country; one being the tomb of a saint or prophet who
was buried there, to which many pilgrims resort from great distances;
and the other is the sepulchres of their ancient kings. To the north of
the town, is the place where _Khan-Khana_ first put the Guzerates to
flight, who were the original inhabitants of the country, all the rest
of the kingdom being shortly after reduced under the subjection of
Akbar, father to the present Great Mogul. This field of victory is
strongly walled round with brick, about a mile and half in circuit, all
planted within with fruit-trees, and delightfully watered; having a
costly house called by a name signifying _Victory_; in which Khan-Khana
resided for some time, but he now resides at Burhanpoor.

The 24th of December we had leave from the governor of Ahmedabad to
depart; but hearing that several persons had been robbed and murdered
that night close by the city, order was given for us to wait till a
sufficient guard could be provided for us. The 26th we departed, having
with us forty carts, loaded with indigo and other goods, and came on the
27th to _Mundeves_,[139] where the gates were shut upon us by order of
_Sarder Khan_. This put us in much doubt, and we procured a person to
speak with the governor, who told him of letters he had received from
Mucrob Khan, nabob of Surat, informing of the gallant action of our
general at Swally and the safety of Surat from the Portuguese, through
the bravery of the English. It was therefore agreed that we should not
depart without a sufficient guard, which was to be ready for us next
day. We did not however depart till the 29th; and, at Brodrah, the men
belonging to Sarder Khan procured more soldiers to assist them, as there
were several companies of rajputs lying in the way to intercept us, and
many robberies and murders were committed daily in that part of the
country.

[Footnote 139: This name also is so corrupted as not to have any
resemblance in the modern geography of Hindoostan.--E.]

On the 2d of February, while passing through a narrow lane inclosed on
both sides with hedges, we were assaulted by above 300 rajputs, where we
could not hurt them, as they did our caffila or caravan by their arrows
and shot. We therefore made all the haste we could to gain the plain,
while they in the mean time cut off two of our carriages. Having got to
the open ground we made a stand; but the rajputs betook themselves again
to their hedges, to look after their prey, lest one thief should rob
another. Many of our party were hurt on this occasion, among which was
Humphrey Elkington. Next day we got to Baroach, and on the 5th to Surat,
where we returned thanks to Macrob Khan for the care he had taken of our
safety.

Hearing of an assault to be made next day on our ships by the
Portuguese, we got his leave to go down to Swally and went aboard, but
the Portuguese deceived our expectation. On occasion of the last attempt
of the Portuguese to set our ships on fire, by means of four fire-boats
chained together, four of them were taken in smaller boats, which
captives confessed that this was the last attempt of the viceroy for
this year, as he was now under the necessity of returning to Goa, for
want of water and provisions. One of these captives, taken in Swally
roads, and carried aboard the New-year's Gilt, emitted the following
declaration:--


_Examination of Domingo Francisco, on the 20th of February_, 1615.

"He saith, that he was born in Lisbon, being the son of a mariner, and
served under Nunna d'Acunha in the seafight against Captain Best, in
one of the four galleons. He afterwards went to Macao on the coast of
China, and returned thence to Goa; where, after remaining ten months, he
was ordered on board a galleon called the St Antonio, in this expedition
for the road of Swally, where he was made prisoner on the 8th of this
month. The purpose of the viceroy, _Don Jeronimo de Savedo_, in this
expedition, as the examinant says, was to destroy the English at Surat.
The viceroy's ship was called the All-saints, of 800 tons, with 300 men,
and twenty-eight cannon. Michael de Souza was captain on the St Bennet
of 700 tons, 150 men, and twenty guns. John Cayatho of the St Lawrence,
of 600 tons, 160 men, and 18 guns. Francisco Henriques of the St
Christopher, of 600 tons, 155 men, and 18 guns. Francisco de Mirande of
the St Jeronymo, of 500 tons, 180 men, and 16 guns. Gaspar de Meall of
the St Antonio, of 400 tons, 140 men, and 14 guns. These were the
galleons: The ships were, the St Peter of 200 tons Captain Francisco
Cavaco, 150 men and eight guns; the St Paul of 200 tons, Captain Don
Juan de Mascarenha, 150 men and eight guns; a pinnace of 120 tons,
Captain Andrea de Quellio, eighty men and four guns. Lewis de Bruto was
captain of one galley, and Diego de Suro of the other, each having fifty
men. There were sixty barks or frigates, each having twenty soldiers,
and rowing eighteen oars of a side. The reinforcement which joined
afterwards, consisted of two ships of 200 tons each, two India junks,
and eight small boats, which were employed to endeavour to set us on
fire. In the viceroy's ship, the ordnance were all of brass, those in
the other galleons being half brass and half iron:" Against all which
the Almighty protected us, blessed be his name for ever.

On the 11th March, 1615, we parted from the general, he and the other
two ships being bound for Acheen and Bantam, and we in the Hope for
England. On the 12th we passed by the north end of the Maldives, where
we found many shoals and islands most falsely laid down in the charts,
as if purposely to render the navigation of these seas more dangerous.
We arrived on the 17th of June in Saldanha bay, where we found a fleet
of four English ships bound for Surat, under the command of Captain
Keeling; which fleet, after consultation held with us, and receiving
intelligence of the state of affairs there, departed on its voyage. On
the 20th I met with _Crosse_ and his company, left there for
discovery,[140] and entreated some of them to acquaint _Coree_ with my
arrival. These were set upon by the savages and wounded, wherefore I
delivered four muskets to Crosse at his earnest request; after which he
procured Coree to come down with his whole family, and we afterwards got
some cattle. He told me that there was discord among the savages,
through which the mountaineers had come down and robbed them. We
departed on the 26th June, leaving our longboat with Crosse, together
with powder, shot, and provisions.

[Footnote 140: Of Crosse and his company of condemned persons, set on
shore at the Cape of Good Hope, see afterwards in Peyton's
voyage.--_Purch._]

In the latitude of 29 deg. N. we fell in with a Dutch ship from the
Mauritius, having gone there to cut timber, which seemed a bastard
ebony. Contrary to their expectation, they found there the lamentable
wreck of four ships come from Bantam and the Moluccas, which had gone to
pieces on the rocks. The goods and men of two of these were totally
lost, most of the goods of the third were saved, with part of which this
ship was laden. The fourth was driven out to sea in a storm, and
returned under jury-masts. The master of this ship promised to keep us
company, but finding us a hindrance, he left us after ten days, without
so much as a farewell or offering to carry a letter, which I imputed to
their inbred boorish disposition. Ill weather followed, and we were much
weakened; yet, I thank God, we lost none till my arrival in Ireland off
the river of Limerick on the 27th October, 1615; where also we had to
endure a storm, till we hired a Scottish bark, detained by contrary
winds, to pilot us into harbour. There also, a remainder of Captain M.
his ungodly crew, who had lately obtained their pardon, put me in great
fear; till Sir Henry Foliat secured us by a supply of men, and I sent
off letters for London.


SECTION III.

_Journey of Richard Steel and John Crowther, from Ajmeer in India, to
Ispahan in Persia, in the Years_ 1615 _and_ 1616.[141]

Having been detained at Agimere[142] from February, Mr Edwards received
a letter on the 17th March, 1615, from the Great Mogul, of which he
delivered a copy, together with his other letters, to Richard Steel,
promising to procure the king's firmaun for our safety and furtherance,
and to send it after us to Agra, where he directed us to wait for its
reception. We went that night two coss to _Mandill_.[143]We had four
servants, two horses, and a camel. The 18th we went twelve coss to
_Bander Sandree_, [Bunder-Sanory,] a small _aldea_.[144] The 19th, ten
coss to _Mosobade_, [Morabad.] The 20th to _Pipelo_, [Peped,] thirteen
coss. The 21st to a town called _Chadfoole_, [Gohd?] seven coss. The 22d
to _Lalscotte_, thirteen coss. The 23d to _Mogolserai_, twelve coss. The
24th to _Hindone_, fourteen coss. the 25th to _Bramobad_, twelve coss.
The 26th to _Futtipoor_, twelve coss. This has been a fair city, which
was built by Akbar, and contains a goodly palace belonging to the king.
It is walled round in a handsome manner, and has many spacious gardens
and sumptuous pleasure houses; but is now falling to ruin, and ranch
ground within the walls is now sown with corn, the king having carried
off much of the best stone to his new city of Agra. The 27th we went
twelve coss to Agra. In the English house there, we found one Richard
Barber, an apothecary, who came over with Sir Robert Shirley, and had
been sent here by Mr Kerridge to take care of Nicholas Whithington.

[Footnote 141: Purch. Pilgr. I. 519.--In the title of this article in
the Pilgrims, Agimere, or Azmere, as it is there called, is said to have
been the residence of the Great Mogul at the commencement of this
journey, and Spahan, or Ispahan, the royal seat of the kings of
Persia.--E.]

[Footnote 142: This place, named Azmeer in the Pilgrims, is known in
modern geography under the name of Ajmeer, or Agimere.--E.]

[Footnote 143: A coss, or course, as it is uniformly denominated in the
Pilgrims, is stated on the margin by Purchas, to be equal to a mile and
a half, and in some places two English miles. As more precisely
determined in modern geography, the Hindoostanee coss is equal to 1
4/7th English miles, and the Rajput coss to 2 1/6th miles nearly. It
would overload this article to attempt critically following all the
stations in the present journal, in which the names of places are often
so corrupt as to be unintelligible. Such corrections of the text as can
be ventured upon are included within brackets.--E.]

[Footnote 144: This is a Spanish or Portuguese term, signifying country
village.--E.]

Within two days journey of Agra, we passed by the country and city of
Biana, where the finest indigo is made, the best being then worth
thirty-six rupees the maund at Agra, but much cheaper in the country.
Finding the promised firmaun came not, and the hot season of the year
fast approaching, we departed on the 3d April in the prosecution of our
journey, leaving directions with Richard Barber to send it after us. We
came that night to a serai called Boutta, six coss. The 4th to the town
of _Matra_, fourteen coss, where we lay in a fair _serai_,[145] and
there we received the firmaun. The 5th we went twelve coss to a serai
called _Chatta_, [Chautra.] The 6th to a serai built by Azam Khan, nine
coss. The 7th to a serai built by Sheic Ferreede, called _Puhlwall_,
eleven coss. The 8th to a serai built by the same person, ten coss. The
9th to _Dillee_, [Delhi,] nine coss. This being a great and ancient
city, formerly the seat of the kings, where many of them are interred.
At this time, many of the great men have their gardens and pleasure
houses here, and are here buried, so that it is beautified with many
fine buildings. The inhabitants, who are mostly Banians or Hindoos, are
poor and beggarly, through the long absence of the court.

[Footnote 145: These are fair buildings for the accommodation of
travellers, many of which were erected by great men._Purch._]

The 10th we went ten coss from Delhi to _Bunira_. The 11th to
_Cullvower_, twelve coss. The 12th to _Pampette_, [Paniput,] twelve
coss. This is a small handsome city, where they manufacture various
sorts of girdles and sashes, and great quantities of cotton-cloth, and
have abundance of handicrafts. The 13th to _Carnanl_, twelve coss. The
14th to _Tanisera_, [Tahnessir,] fourteen coss. The 15th to _Shavade_,
[Shahabad,] ten coss. The 16th to _Mogol-Sera_, or _Gaugur_, fifteen
coss. The 17th to _Sinan_,[146] fourteen coss, which is an ancient city,
where they manufacture great store of cottons. The 18th to _Duratia_,
fifteen coss. The 19th to _Pullower_, [Bullolepoor,] eleven coss. We
this day passed in a boat over a great river called Sietmege[147] which
is very broad, but full of shoals, and runs westward to join the Sinde,
or Indus. The 20th we came to a small town called _Nicodar_, eleven
coss. The 21st to _Sultanpoor_, an old town having a river which comes
from the north, over which is a bridge of six arches. At this place
great store of cotton goods are made. Four coss beyond this place we
passed another small river. The 22d to _Chiurmul_,[148] eleven coss. We
were this day boated across a river as broad as the Thames at Gravesend,
called _Vian_, which runs westwards to join the Sinde. On its banks
Allom Khan, ambassador from the Great Mogul to the king of Persia, had
pitched his camp, which looked like a little city. The 23d we went to
_Khan Khanum Serai_, seventeen coss, and the 24th we reached Lahore,
seven coss.

[Footnote 146: This is probably Sirhind, which is directly in the route,
but so disguised in the text as to defy emendation.--E.]

[Footnote 147: This is clearly the Sutuluge, or Setlege, called likewise
the Beyah-Kussoor, and Chato dehr, being the easternmost of the Punjab
or five rivers, which form the Indus. It was called Hesudrus by the
ancients.--E.]

[Footnote 148: From the river mentioned in the text as passed, on this
day's journey, this may have been what is now called Gundwall, a little
beyond the river Beyab, which is here 100 yards broad.--E.]

All the country between Agra and Lahore is exceedingly well cultivated,
being the best of India, and abounds in all things. It yields great
store of powdered sugar, [raw sugar] the best being worth two 1/2 to two
3/4 rupees the great _maund_ of forty pounds. The whole road is planted
on both sides with trees, most of which bear a species of mulberry. In
the night, this road is dangerously infested with thieves, but is quite
secure in the day. Every five or six coss, there are serais, built by
the king or some great man, which add greatly to the beauty of the road,
are very convenient for the accommodation of travellers, and serve to
perpetuate the memory of their founders. In these the traveller may have
a chamber for his own use, a place in which to tie up his horse, and can
be furnished with provender; but in many of them very little
accommodation can be had, by reason of the banians, as when once any
person has taken up his lodging, no other may dispossess him. At
day-break the gates of these serais are opened, and then all the
travellers prepare to depart; but no person is allowed to go away
sooner, for fear of robbers. This made the journey very oppressive to
us, as within two hours after the sun rose we were hardly able to endure
the heat.

Lahore is a great and goodly city, being one of the fairest and
ancientest in India. It stands on the river Indus or Sinde;[149] and
from this place came the most valuable of the Portuguese trade when they
were at peace with the Moguls, as it formed the centre of all their
traffic in Hindoostan. They here embarked their goods, which were
carried down the river to Tatta, and were thence transported by sea to
Ormus and Persia; and such native merchants as chose to go that way
between India and Persia, paid them freight. They had also a great trade
up this river, in pepper and other spices, with which they furnished
that part of India. At this time, the merchants of India assemble at
Lahore, where they invest a great part of their money in commodities,
and, joining in caravans, they pass over the mountains of Candahar into
Persia; by which way it is computed there now pass yearly twelve or
fourteen thousand camel loads, whereas formerly there did not go in this
way above three thousand, all the rest going by way of Ormus. These
merchants are put to great expences between Lahore and Ispaban, besides
being exposed to great cold in winter and fervent heat in summer, and to
bad and dangerous roads, usually spending six or seven months in the
journey, and they estimate the charges of each camel's load at 120 or
130 rupees. In this way Persia is furnished with spiceries, which are
brought all the way from Masulipatam by land. We remained in Lahore from
the 24th of April to the 13th of May, refreshing both ourselves and our
horses, and providing servants and necessaries for the journey. We also
procured here recommendatory letters from an ambassador to the king of
Persia.

[Footnote 149: Lahore is upon the Ravey, the second of the five rivers
forming the Indus, counting from the east, and was the Hydroates of the
ancients. The Indus proper, or Nilab, is considerably farther west.--E.]

We left Lahore on the 13th May, proposing to overtake a caravan which
set out two months before, and went that day eleven c. to a small town
named _Chacksunder_. The 14th to _Non-serai_, fifteen c. The 15th to
_Mutteray_, eight c. The 16th to _Quemal khan_, nineteen c. The 17th to
_Herpae_, sixteen c. The 18th to _Alicasaca_, twelve c. The 19th
_Trumba_, twelve c. and this day we overtook a small caravan that left
Lahore eight days before us. The 20th to _Sedousehall_, fourteen c. The
21st to _Callixechebaut_, fifteen c. The 22d to _Multan_,[150] twelve c.
This is a great and ancient city, having the river Indus at the distance
of three coss. All caravans must remain here ten or twelve days, before
leave can be procured from the governor to proceed, on purpose that the
city may benefit by their stay. It yields white plain cotton cloth and
diaper. We remained five days, and were then glad to get leave to
depart, by means of a present.

[Footnote 150: In the whole of this itinerary, from Lahore to Multan or
Mooltan, down the Ravey river, not a single name in the text, except the
two extremities, bears the smallest resemblance to any of those in
modern geography.--E.]

We passed the river on the 28th, and went twenty c. to a small village
named _Pettoallee_. The 29th we passed another great river by a boat,
and came that same night to a small river called _Lacca_, where we
found the caravan we wished to overtake.[151] We presented the caravan
_basha_ with a mirror and knife, when he directed us to pitch our tent
near his own, that we might be more immediately under his protection.
This caravan had been here ten days, and remained till the 2d of June,
waiting for an escort of cavalry to convoy them to _Chatcza_,[152] a
small fort in the mountains, having received information that a former
caravan had been injured by the mountaineers. The 2d June we resumed our
journey, and travelled twelve c. entering into the mountains, where we
were much distressed for want of fresh water, what water we met with
being brackish. The 3d and 4th we travelled all night, climbing high
mountains, and following water-courses with various turnings and
windings, insomuch that in travelling twelve coss our direct course did
not exceed six c. The 5th we again followed the bed of a water-course or
river, full of large pebbles, travelling eight c. The 6th we rested. The
7th we went four c. still along the water-course, the 8th eight c. the
9th twelve c. and the 10th three c. when we came to _Chatcza_, [Chatzan]
a small fort with mud walls, inclosed with a ditch, where the Mogul
keeps a garrison of eighty or 100 horse, to scour the road from thieves,
yet these are as great thieves as any, where they find an opportunity.
The captain of this castle exacted two _abacees_ for each camel in the
caravan, though nothing was legally due, as he and his troops have their
pay from the king. In the whole of our way, from the river Lacca to
Chatzan, we found no sustenance for man or beast, except in some places
a little grass, so that we had to make provision at Lacca, hiring a
bullock to carry barley for our horses. The _Agwans_ or _Afgans_, as the
people of the mountains are called, came down to us every day at our
resting place, rather to look out what they might steal, than to buy as
they pretended.

[Footnote 151: The great river passed on the 29th must have been the
Sinde, Indus, or Nilab, and from the circumstance of falling in next day
with the _Lacca_ or Lucca, Pettoallee in the text may possibly be what
is named _Joghiwallah_, on the east side of the Indus, almost opposite
the mouth of the Lacca.--E.]

[Footnote 152: Chatzan, a town or fortress in Sewee, or the country of
the Balloges; to the west of a ridge of rocky mountains, described as
consisting of hard black stone, which skirt the western side of the vale
of the Indus, and on the north join the mountains of Wulli in Candahar.
Chatzan is in lat. 31 deg. 3' N. and long 69 deg. 42' W. from Greenwich--E.]

Having made provision for three days at Chatzan, we went thence on the
12th June, and travelled fourteen c. The 13th ten c. The 14th ten c.
This day the mountaineers brought down to us sheep, goats, meal, butter,
and barley, in abundance, sufficient both for us and our cattle, all of
which they sold at reasonable prices; and from this time forwards, they
did the same every day, sometimes also bringing felts and striped
carpets for sale. The 15th we went six c. the 16th four c. the 17th ten
c. the 18th nine c. the 19th nine c. when we came to a small town of the
Afgans called _Duckee_, [Dooky], where the Mogul keeps a garrison in a
small square mud fort, the walls of which are of a good height. This
fort is a mile from the town. We stopt here three days, as the caravan
could not agree with the captain of the fort, who demanded a duty on
every camel, and at last an _abacee_ and a half was paid for each camel.
The 23d we went six c. the 24th we passed a place called _Secotah_, or
the three castles, because of three villages standing near each other on
the side of a hill, forming a triangle. We this day went eight c. The
25th we rested, on account of bad weather. The 26th we went ten c. The
27th fourteen c. This day we passed through the _durues_ or gates of the
mountains, being narrow straits, with very high rocks on both sides,
whence with stones a few men might stop the passage of a multitude, and
where many caravans have been accordingly cut off. We this night, where
we lodged, suffered much insolence from the Afgans; and next day, as we
passed a small village called _Coasta_, they exacted from us two 1/2
_abacees_ for each camel. The 28th we went five c. the 29th, passing a
village called _Abdun_, eight c. the 30th six c. The 1st. July in seven
c. we came to a place called _Pesinga_ [Pusheng or Kooshinge], where
there is a small fort like that at _Dooky_ in which is a garrison for
securing the way. At this place the captain exacted half an _abacee_ for
each camel. The 3d we left the caravan and went forwards six c. The 4th
we passed over a mighty mountain, and descended into the plains beyond,
having travelled that day fourteen c. The 5th we went twenty c. and were
much distressed to get grain for our cattle. The 6th, in like distress
both for them and ourselves, we went twelve c. and on the 7th, after
eight c. we got to the city of Candahar.

These mountains of Candahar are inhabited by a fierce people, called
_Agwans_ or _Potans_, [Afgans or Patans] who are very strong of body,
somewhat fairer than the natives of Hindoostan, and are much addicted to
robbery, insomuch, that they often cut off whole caravans. At present
they have become more civil, partly from fear of the Mogul, and partly
from experiencing the advantages of trade, by selling their grain,
sheep, and goats, of which they have great store, and by purchasing
coarse cotton goods and other necessaries. Still, however, if they find
any one straggling or lagging behind, they are very apt to make them
slaves, selling them into the mountains, and houghing them to prevent
their running away, after which they are set to grind grain in
handmills, or to other servile employments. The chief city, called
likewise Candahar, is very ancient, and was in old times inhabited by
Banians. At this place the governor of the whole country resides, who
has a garrison of twelve or fifteen thousand horse, maintained there by
the Great Mogul, in regard of the neighbourhood of the Persians towards
the north. To the west, the city is environed by steep and craggy rocks,
and to the south and east by a strong wall. In consequence of the
frequent passage of caravans, it has been considerably increased of
late, so that the suburbs are larger than the city. Within the last two
years, in consequence of the Persian trade by way of Ormus being
stopped, through war with the Portuguese, all the caravans between
Persia and India must necessarily pass through this place; and here they
hire camels to go into India, and at their return for Persia have to do
the same. They cannot return without leave of the governor, who causes
them to stop a month here, or at the least fifteen or twenty days; owing
to which, it is inhabited by many lewd people, as all such places of
resort commonly are.

Victuals for man and beast are to be had in great abundance at Candahar,
yet are very dear owing to the great concourse of trade, occasioned by
the meeting at this place of many merchants of India, Persia, and
Turkey, who often conclude their exchanges of commodities here. At this
place the caravans going for India usually unite together, for greater
strength and security in passing through the mountains of Candahar; and
those that come here from India generally break into smaller companies,
because in many parts of the route through Persia, a greater number
would not find provisions, as all Persia, from hence to Ispahan, is
extremely barren, so that sometimes not a green thing is to be seen in
two or three days travel; and even water is scarce, and that which is to
be got is often brackish, or stinking and abominable. We remained at
this city for fourteen days, partly to procure company for our farther
journey, and partly for refreshment after the fatigues and heats of our
late journey, especially on account of John Crowther, who was so weak
that he at one time doubted being able to proceed any farther.

We joined ourselves to three Armenians and a dozen Persian merchants,
along with whom we left the city of Candahar on the 23d July, and went
ten c. to a village called _Seriabe_.[153] The 24th we came in twelve c.
to _Deabage_, a small _dea_ or village. The 25th in eight c. to
_Cashecunna,_ a small castle in which the Mogul has a garrison, being
the utmost boundary of his dominions westwards, and confining with
Persia. The 26th we travelled seventeen c. and lodged in the open fields
by the side of a river. The 27th, after four c. we came to a castle
called _Greece_, the first belonging to the king of Persia. Here we
delivered to the governor the letter we had got from the Persian
ambassador at Lahore, and presented him a mirror and three knives. He
would take nothing for our camels, while the others had to pay five
_abacees_ for each camel. He promised to give us a safe conduct under an
escort of horse to the next governor, but we saw none; neither were we
sorry for the omission, for he was little better than a rebel, and all
his people were thieves.

[Footnote 153: We here lose the almost infallible guide of Arrowsmith's
excellent map of Hindoostan, and are reduced to much inferior helps in
following the route through Persia.--E.]

The 28th we departed at night, going two _parasangs_, and lodged at a
_dea_ or village called _Malgee_. A _farcing_ or parasang is equal to
two Indian cosses and a half.[154] The 29th we went ten p. and lodged in
the open fields, where we could get nothing but water. The 30th we went
five p. to a small castle named _Gazikhan_. The 31st other five p. to an
old ruined fort, where we could get nothing but water, and that was
stinking. The 1st August we proceeded other five p. to an old fort
called _Dilaram_, where we paid an _abacee_ and a half for each camel.
We staid here one day to rest our cattle, which was termed making
_mochoane_; and on the 3d we went seven p. to an old castle called
_Bacon_. The 4th four p. and lodged in the open fields, where we found
nothing but water. The 5th four p. and the 6th five p. to _Farra_.[155]

[Footnote 154: In a side-note, Purchas says a parasang consists of sixty
furlongs. This is a most egregious error, as the parasang or farsang is
exactly equal to 2.78 English miles, or twenty-two two-5ths
furlongs.--E.]

[Footnote 155: Farra, the capital of a district of the same name in the
north of Segistan, is in lat 33 deg. 40' N. long. 62 deg. 40' E.--E.]

_Farra_ is a small town, surrounded by a high wall of bricks dried in
the sun, as are all the castles and most of the buildings in this
country, and is of a square form, about a mile in circuit. It has a
handsome bazar or market-place, vaulted over head to keep out the rain,
and in which all kinds of necessaries and commodities are sold. It is
situated in a fertile soil, having plenty of water, without which
nothing can be raised in this country; and it is wonderful to see with
what labour and ingenious industry they bring water to every spot of
good ground, which is but seldom to be found here, often carrying it
three or four miles in trenches under ground. At this town, all
merchants going into Persia must remain for seven, eight, or ten days;
and here the king's treasurer sees all their packs weighed, estimating
the value of their commodities at so much the maund, as he thinks fit,
and exacts a duty of three per cent. ad valorem on that estimate. On
their way into Persia, merchants are used with much favour, lest they
should make complaints to the king, who will have merchants kindly
treated; but on their return into India, they are treated with extreme
rigour, being searched to the very skin for money, as it is death to
transport any gold or silver coin from Persia, except that of the
reigning king. They likewise look narrowly for horses and slaves,
neither of which are allowed to be taken out of the country.

We remained here two days waiting for certain Armenians, with whom we
travelled the rest of the journey, leaving our former companions. The
9th of August we went only one parasang to a river. The 10th we
travelled seven p. and lodged in the open fields. The 11th, four p. to a
small village, where we had plenty of provisions. The 12th, four p.
where we had to dig for water. The 13th, eight p. and the 14th five p.
to a village named _Draw,_ [Durra,] where we remained a day, as it is
the custom of those who travel with camels to rest once in four or five
days. The 16th, we advanced three p. The 17th, four p. The 18th, five p.
to _Zaide-basha,_ [Sarbishe,] where abundance of carpets are to be had.
The 19th we came to a village named _Mude,_ [Moti,] where also are
carpets. The 20th, five p. to _Birchen,_ [Berdjan,] where are
manufactured great quantities of fine felts, and carpets of camels hair,
which are sold at the rates of from two to five abacees the _maund._ At
this place we rested a day. The 22d, we went to _Dea-zaide,_ [Descaden,]
where all the inhabitants pretend to be very religious, and sell their
carpets, of which they have great abundance, at a cheap rate. The 23d,
three p. The 24th, five p. to _Choore,_ [Cors or Corra,] an old ruined
town. The 25th, three p. The 26th, seven p. when we had brackish
stinking water. The 27th we came to _Dehuge,_ [Teuke,] where is a
considerable stream of hot water, which becomes cool and pleasant after
standing some time in any vessel. The 28th we went seven p. to
_Dea-curma._

The 29th we went five p. to _Tobaz,_[156] where we had to pay half an
abacee for each camel. At this plce all caravans take four or five days
rest, the better to enable them to pass the adjoining salt desert, which
extends four long days journey, and in which many miscarry. We found
here a small caravan of an hundred camels, which set off the next day
after our arrival. Here, and in the former village, there is great store
of dates; and 3000 maunds of the finest silk in Persia are made here
yearly, and is carried to _Yades_, [Yezd,] a fair city, where likewise
they make much raw silk, and where it is manufactured into taffaties,
satins, and damasks. The king does not allow the exportation of raw
silk, especially into Turkey; but the Portuguese used to carry it to
Portugal. _Yades_, [Yezd,] is about twelve days journey from Ispahan,
and is twelve p. out of the way from the Indian route to the capital.

[Footnote 156: Tabaskili, or Tobas Kileke, in Cohestan, is probably the
place here meant, in which case the route appears to have passed from
Farra by the south of the inland sea or lake of Darrah, but which is not
noticed by our travellers. Our conjectural amendments of the names of
places on the route are placed within brackets.--E.]

The 30th of August we advanced nine p. into the desert, and lay on the
ground, having to send our beasts three miles out of the way for water,
which was very salt. The 31st, after travelling ten p. we came to water
which was not at all brackish. The 1st September we went five p. and had
to send two miles for water. The 2d we went nine p. to a small castle,
where we procured a small quantity of provisions. The 3d, five p. and
lay in the fields, having to send far for water. The 4th, ten p. to
_Seagan_. The 5th, four p. The 6th, ten p. to a castle called _Irabad_,
[Hirabad,] where we paid half an _abacee_ for each camel. The 7th, six
p. The 8th, eight p. to _Ardecan_, where we rested till the 10th, when
we went four p. to _Sellef_. The 11th, three p. to a small castle named
_Agea Gaurume_. The 12th, nine p. to a spring in the fields. The 13th,
three p. to _Beavas_. The 14th, four p. to _Goolabad_, whence Richard
Steel rode on to Ispahan, without waiting for the caravan. The 15th we
came to _Morea Shahabad_, five p. The 16th, to _Coopa_, five p. The
17th, to _Dea Sabs_, five p. The 18th, four p. and lay in the fields.
And on the 19th, after three p. we came to _Ispahan_.

Richard Steel reached this city on the 15th, at noon, and found Sir
Robert Shirley already provided with his dispatches from the king of
Persia as ambassador to the king of Spain. Sir Robert, attended by his
lady, a bare-footed friar as his chaplain, together with fifty-five
Portuguese prisoners, and his own followers, were preparing in all haste
to go to Ormus, and to embark thence for Lisbon. The purpose is, that
seeing the Portuguese not able to stand, the Spaniards may be brought
in.[157] Six friars remain as hostages for his safe return to Ispahan,
as otherwise the king has vowed to cut them all in pieces, which he is
likely enough to do, having put his own son to death, and committed a
thousand other severities.

[Footnote 157: The meaning of this passage is quite obscure in the
Pilgrims, and the editor does not presume upon clearing the
obscurity.--E.]

On his arrival at Ispahan, Richard Steel delivered his letters to Sir
Robert,[158] who durst hardly read them, except now and then, as by
stealth, fearing lest the Portuguese should know of them. He afterwards
said it was now too late to engage in the business of our nation, and
seemed much dissatisfied with the company, and with the merchants and
mariners who brought him out. But at length he said he was a
true-hearted Englishman, and promised to effect our desires. On the
19th, the friars being absent, he carried both of us to the master of
the ceremonies, or _Maimondare,_ and took us along with him to the Grand
Vizier, _Sarek Hogea_, who immediately called his scribes or
secretaries, and made draughts of what we desired: namely, three
_firmauns_, one of which John Crowther has to carry to Surat, one for
Richard Steel to carry to England, and the third to be sent to the
governor of _Jasques_, all sealed with the great seal of the king. The
same day that these firmauns were procured, being the last of September,
Sir Robert Shirley set out for Shiras in great pomp, and very honourably
attended.

[Footnote 158: Of the landing of Sir Robert Shirley, see Peyton's first
voyage before; and of the rest of his journey see the second voyage of
Peyton, in the sequel.--_Purch._]

_Copy of the Firmaun granted by the King of Persia._

"Firmaun or command given unto all our subjects, from the highest to the
lowest, and directed to the _Souf-basha_, or constable of our country,
kindly to receive and entertain the _English Franks_[159] or nation,
when any of their ships may arrive at Jasques, or any other of the
ports in our kingdom, to conduct them and their merchandize to what
place or places they may desire, and to see them safely defended upon
our coasts from any other Franks whomsoever. This I will and command you
to do, as you shall answer in the contrary. Given at our royal city,
this 12th of _Ramassan_, in the year of our _Tareag_, 1024. [October,
1615.]"

The chief commodities of Persia are raw silks, of which it yields,
according to the king's books, 7700 _batmans_ yearly. Rhubarb grows in
Chorassan, where also worm-seed grows.

[Footnote 159: Frank is a name given in the East to all western
Christians, ever since the expedition to the Holy Land, because the
French were the chief nation on that occasion, and because the French
council at Clermont was the cause of that event.--Purch.]

Carpets of all sorts, some of silk and gold, silk and silver, half silk,
half cotton, &c. The silver monies of Persia are the _abacee, mahamoody,
shakee_, and _biftee_, the rest being of copper, like the _tangas_ and
_pisos_ of India. The _abacee_ weighs two _meticals_, the _mahmoody_ is
half an abacee, and the _shahee_ is half a _mahamoody_. In the dollar or
rial of eight there are thirteen shahees.[160] In a shahee there are two
_biftees_ and a half, or ten cashbegs, one _biftee_ being four
_cashbegs_, or two _tangs_. The weights differ in different places; two
_mahans_ of Tauris being only one of Ispahan, and so of the _batman_.
The measure of length, for silks and other stuffs, is the same with the
pike of Aleppo, which we judge to be twenty-seven English inches.

[Footnote 160: Assuming the Spanish dollar at 4s. 6d. sterling, the
shahee ought therefore to be worth about 4d. 1-6, the mahamoody,8d. 1-3,
and the abecee, 1s. 4d. 2-3.--E.]

John Crowther returned into India, and Richard Steel went to England by
way of Turkey, by the following route. Leaving Ispahan on the 2d
December, 1615, he went five p. to a serail. The 3d, eight p. to another
serail. The 4th, six p. to a village. The 5th, seven p. to _Dreag_. The
6th, seven p. to a serail. The 7th, eight p. to _Golpigan_,
[Chulpaigan.] The 8th, seven p. to _Curouan_. The 9th, seven p. to
_Showgot_. The 10th, six p. to _Saro_, [Sari.] The 11th, eight p. to
_Dissabad_. The 12th, twelve p. to a fair town called _Tossarkhan_,
where he rested some days, because the country was covered deep with
snow. The 15th, six p. to _Kindaner_. The 16th, eight p. to _Sano_. The
17th to _Shar nuovo_, where I was stopped by the _daiga_; but on shewing
him letters from the vizier, he bade me depart in the name of God and of
Ali. The 18th we passed a bridge where all travellers have to give an
account of themselves, and to pay a tax of two _shakees_ for each camel.
The 19th we came to _Kassam-Khan_, the last place under the Persian
government, and made a present to the governor, that he might give me a
guard to protect me from the Turkomans, which he not only did, but gave
me a licence to procure provisions free at his villages without payment,
which yet I did not avail myself of.

The 21st of December I began to pass over a range of high mountains
which separate the two empires of Persia and Turkey, which are very
dangerous; and, on the 22d, at the end of eight p. I arrived at a
village. The 23d, after travelling seven p. I lay under a rock. The 24th
I came to _Mando_, eight p. a town belonging to the Turks. The 25th,
eight p. to _Emomester_. The 26th, eight p. to _Boroh_, passed over a
river in a boat, and came that night to Bagdat. I was here strictly
examined and searched for letters, which I hid under my saddle; but
observing one trying there also, I gave him a sign, on which he
desisted, and followed me to my lodging for his expected reward. I fared
better than an old Spaniard, only a fortnight before, who was imprisoned
in chains in the castle, and his letters read by a Maltese renegado. I
found here a Portuguese, who had arrived from Ormus only two days before
me. The pacha made us wait here twenty days for a sabandar of his.

The 16th of January, 1616, we passed the river Tigris, and lay on the
skirt of the desert. The 17th we travelled five _agatzas_, being leagues
or parasangs. The 18th we came to the Euphrates at _Tulquy_, where
merchandize disembarked for Bagdat, after paying a duty of five per
cent. passes to the Tigris, and thence to the Persian gulf. After a
tedious journey, partly by the river Euphrates, and partly through the
desert, and then by sea, we arrived at Marseilles, in France, on the
15th April, and on the 10th May at Dover.


SECTION IV.

_Voyage of Captain Walter Peyton to India, in 1615._[161]

This voyage seems to have been under the command of Captain Newport, who
sailed as general in the Lion; but is called, in the Pilgrims, The
_Second_ Voyage of Captain Peyton to the East Indies, because the former
voyage of Newport was written by Peyton, who, though he occasionally
mentions the general, never once names him. In this voyage Peyton sailed
in the Expedition; the fleet consisting of three other ships, the
Dragon, Lion, and Pepper-corn. The journal appears to have been
abbreviated by Purchas, as he tells us it was _gathered out of his
larger journal_. This voyage is chiefly remarkable as introductory to
the embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to India, contained in the subsequent
section, as Sir Thomas and his suite embarked in this fleet. Instead of
giving the remarks of Sir Thomas Roe in his own journal, so far as they
apply to the voyage between England and Surat, these have been added in
the text of the present voyage, distinguishing those observations by
T.R. the initials of his name, and placing them all in separate
paragraphs.

[Footnote 161: Purch. Pilgr. I. 528.]

We learn by a subsequent article in the Pilgrims, I. 603, That Captain
William Keeling was general, or chief commander of this fleet, and
sailed in the Dragon, Robert Bonner master. The other two ships were the
Pepper-corn, Captain Christopher Harris, and the Expedition, Captain
William Peyton.--E.

Sec.1. _Occurrences during the Voyage from England to Surat_.

We sailed from Gravesend on the 24th January, 1615, and on the 2d
February Sir Thomas Roe, ambassador from his majesty to the Great Mogul,
repaired on board the Lion, with fifteen attendants. At the same time,
Mr Humphry Boughton embarked in the Pepper-corn, being recommended by
the king to the company for a passage to India. We carried out in the
fleet eleven Japanese, who were brought to England in the Clove, divided
proportionally among the ships; likewise fourteen Guzerates, brought
home in the Dragon, together with nineteen condemned persons from
Newgate, to be left for the discovery of unknown places, the company
having obtained their pardons from the king for this purpose. On the
20th, some of the Dragon's men, among whom were the _Newgate birds_,
attempted to run away with the pinnace, but were prevented: Yet next
night one of these condemned men, and two of the crew of the
Pepper-corn, carried away her pinnace. Two of my men conspired to carry
away my boat that same night, but were discovered.

The 23d February we set sail from the Downs, and on the 6th March we
lost sight of the Lizard. The 26th we saw land, supposed to be the
western part of Fuerteventura, but it proved to be part of Barbary. One
of the points of land at the mouth of the river _Marhequena_, we found
to be laid down wrong, a whole degree more northerly than it ought to
be; as likewise cape Bajadore is misplaced a whole degree, which we
found by experience, escaping great danger caused by that error in our
charts. The 26th of April we got into the trade wind; and on the 10th
May, being by estimation 620 leagues west of the Cape of Good Hope, we
saw many _pintadoes, mangareludas_, and other fowls.

The 5th June we came to anchor in Saldanha bay, having only buried three
or four men since leaving England, out of our whole fleet, and had now
about thirty sick, for whom we erected five tents ashore. _Corey_[162]
came down and welcomed us after his manner, by whose means the savages
were not so fearful or thievish as at other times. They brought us
cattle in great abundance, which we bought for shreds of copper. Corey
shewed his house and his wife and children to some of our people, his
dwelling being at a town or _craal_ of about an hundred houses, five
English miles from the landing place. Most of these savages can say _Sir
Thomas Smith's English ships_, which they often repeat with much pride.
Their wives and children came often down to see us, whom we gratified
with bugles, or such trifles; and two or three of them expressed a
desire to go with us to England, seeing that Corey had sped so well, and
returned so rich, with his copper suit, which he preserves at his house
with much care. Corey also proposed to return with us, accompanied by
one of his sons, when our ships are homeward-bound. On the east side of
the _Table_ mountain there is another village of ten small houses, built
round like bee-hives, and covered with mats woven of bent grass.

[Footnote 162: Corey, or Coree, was a savage, or Hottentot chief; who
had been in England.--_Purch._]

"The land at the Cape of Good Hope, near Saldanha bay, [Table bay] is
fertile, but divided by high and inaccessible rocky mountains, covered
with snow, the river Dulce falling into the bay on the east side. The
natives are the most barbarous people in the world, eating carrion,
wearing the guts of sheep about their necks, and rubbing their heads,
the hair on which is curled like the negroes, with the dung of beasts
and other dirt. They have no clothing, except skins wrapped about their
shoulders, wearing the fleshy side next them in summer, and the hairy
side in winter. Their houses are only made of mats, rounded at the top
like an oven, and open on one side, which they turn as the wind
changes, having no door to keep out the weather. They have left off
their former custom of stealing, but are quite ignorant of God, and seem
to have no religion. The air and water here are both excellent, and the
country is very healthy. The country abounds in cattle, sheep,
antilopes, baboons, pheasants, partridges, larks, wild-geese, ducks, and
many other kinds of fowls. On the Penguin isle [Dassen or Robber's
island,] there is a bird called penguin, which walks upright, having no
feathers on its wings, which hang down like sleeves faced with white.
These birds cannot fly, but walk about in flocks, being a kind of
mixture, or intermediate link, between beast, bird, and fish, yet mostly
bird. The commodities here are cattle and _ningin_ roots; and I believe
there is a rock yielding quicksilver.[163]The Table mountain is 11,853
feet high.[164] The bay is full of whales and seals, and is in lat. 33 deg.
45' S."--T.R.

[Footnote 163: Ningin, or Ginseng, is mentioned afterwards. The
quicksilver rock has not been found.--E.]

[Footnote 164: This height is probably an exaggeration, or was measured
up its slope or talus, not ascertained perpendicularly.--E.]

On the 16th of June, after a consultation, we set ashore ten of our
condemned persons to remain at the Cape. These were John Crosse, Henry
Cocket, Clerke, Brand, Booth, Hunyard, Brigs, Pets, Metcalf, and
Skilligall. These men agreed that Crosse should be their chief, and we
gave them weapons for their defence against men and wild beasts,
together with provisions and clothes. The natives at this place are
especially desirous of brass, and care not much for copper, chiefly
wishing to have pieces of a foot square. They care little for iron
hoops. We caught seven or eight hundred fishes in the river, at one haul
of our seyne. The country people brought us for sale a root called
_Ningin_,[165] of which we bought a handful for a small piece of copper
an inch and half long. Our men got some of this, but not so good, this
not being the season when it is ripe; for, when in full perfection, it
is as tender and sweet as anise-seeds.

[Footnote 165: A medicinal root, much prized at Japan, somewhat like a
_skerrit_.--_Purch._ Probably that named Ginseng, in high repute in
China and Japan for its fancied restorative and provocative powers, like
the mandrake of holy writ, but deservedly despised in the Materia Medica
of Europe. Its whole virtues lay in some supposed resemblance to the
human figure, founded on the childish doctrine of signatures; whence,
at one time, every thing yellow was considered specific against
jaundice, with many other and similar absurd notions.--E.]

We sailed from Saldanha on the 20th June, and on the the 21st we had
sight of land in 34 deg. 28' S. being the land to the west of cape _de
Arecife_, laid down 28' more northwardly than it ought in the charts of
_Daniel_. On the 6th July we ought to have seen the coast of Madagascar,
by most of our computations, and according to Daniel's charts, upon
Mercator's projection, which proved false by seventy leagues in distance
of longitude between the coast of Ethiopia at cape Bona Speranza and the
isle of St Lawrence, as is evident from the charts projected _in plano_
by _Tottens_. The 22d all the four ships anchored at _Mohelia_, where we
had water from wells dug a little above high-water mark, eight or nine
feet deep, close by the roots of trees. _Doman_ is the chief town of
this island, where the sultan resides, to whom we gave a double-locked
piece and a sword. For very little money we were plentifully supplied
with provisions, as poultry, goats, bullocks, lemons, oranges, limes,
tamarinds, cocoa-nuts, pines, sugar-canes, and other fruits. Among the
inhabitants of this island there are Arabs, Turks, and Moors, many of
whom speak tolerable Portuguese. From them I had a curious account of
the current at this place, which they said ran alternately fifteen days
westerly, fifteen days easterly, and fifteen days not at all; and which
I partly observed to be true: For, at our first coming, the current set
westerly, and on the 28th it set easterly, and so continued during our
stay, which was six days, but we went away before trial could be
perfectly made of this report.

I learned here that the king of _Juanni_ [Joanna or Hinzuan] was
sovereign of this island, but entrusted its government to the sultan,
who resides here. The 29th, a vessel arrived at _Doman_ from
_Gangamora_, in the island of Madagascar, and I was desired by the
general to examine what were its commodities, which I found to consist
of rice, and a kind of cloth manufactured of the barks of trees, which
makes very cool garments. I enquired from the pilot, who spoke good
Portuguese, respecting Captain Rowles and the other Englishmen who were
betrayed on that island. He knew nothing of all this, but said that two
or three years before, an English boy was at Gangamora along with the
Portuguese, whom he now thought dead, but knew not how he came there.
This town of _Doman_ contains about an hundred houses, strongly built of
stone and lime, and its inhabitants are orderly and civil. They carry
on trade with the coasts of Melinda, Magadoxa, Mombaza, Arabia, and
Madagascar, carrying slaves taken in their wars, which they sell for
nine or ten dollars each, and which are sold afterwards in Portugal for
100 dollars a-head. At Mombaza and Magadoxa, they have considerable
trade in elephants teeth and drugs; and it was therefore agreed to
advise the honourable company of this, that they might consider of
sending a pinnace yearly to make trial of this trade. In Mohelia, we
bought two or three bullocks for a bar of iron of between twenty and
twenty-five pounds weight. We bought in all 200 head of cattle, and
forty goats, besides poultry, fruits, &c.

"_Malalia_ [Mohelia] is one of the Commora islands, the other three
being _Angazesia_, [Comoro] _Juanny_, [Joanna or Hinzuan] and Mayotta,
stretching almost east and west from each other. _Angazesia_ [Comoro]
bears N. by W. from Mohelia, and is the highest land I ever saw. It is
inhabited by Moors trading with the main and the other three eastern
islands, bartering their cattle and fruits for calicoes and other cloths
for garments. It is governed by ten petty kings, and has abundance of
cattle, goats, oranges, and lemons. The people are reckoned false and
treacherous. _Hinzuan_ lies east from Mohelia and Mayotta. All these
three islands are well stored with refreshments, but chiefly Mohelia,
and next to it Hinzuan. Here lived an old woman who was sultaness of all
these islands, and under her there were three deputies in Mohelia, who
were all her sons. The sultan in whose quarter we anchored is so
absolute, that none of his people dared to sell a single cocoa-nut
without his leave. Four boats were sent to his town to desire this
liberty, which was granted. Captain Newport went ashore with forty men,
and found the governor sitting on a mat, under the side of a junk which
was then building, and attended by fifty men. He was dressed in a mantle
of blue and red calico, wrapped about him to his knees, his legs and
feet bare, and his head covered by a close cap of checquer work. Being
presented with a gun and sword, he returned four cows, and proclaimed
liberty for the people to trade with us. He gave the English cocoa-nuts
to eat, while he chewed betel and areka-nut, tempered with lime of burnt
oister shells. It has a hot biting taste, voids rheum, cools the head,
and is all their physic. It makes those giddy who are not accustomed to
its use, producing red spittles, and in time colours the teeth black,
which they esteem handsome, and they use this continually. From the
governor they were conducted to the carpenter's house, who was a chief
man in the town. His house was built of stone and lime, low and little,
plaistered with white lime, roofed with rafters, which were covered with
leaves of the cocoa-nut tree, the outsides wattled with canes.

"Their houses are kept clean and neat, with good household stuff, having
gardens inclosed with canes, in which they grow tobacco and plantains.
For dinner, a board was set upon tressels, on which was spread a fine
new mat, and stone benches stood around, on which the guests sat. First,
water was brought to each in a cocoa-shell, and poured into a wooden
platter, and the rinds of cocoa-nuts were used instead of towels. There
was then set before the company boiled rice, roasted plantains, quarters
of hens, and pieces of goat's flesh broiled. After grace said, they fell
to their meat, using bread made of cocoa-nut kernels, beaten up with
honey, and fried. The drink was palamito wine, and the milk of the
cocoa-nuts. Those who went to see the sultan, named _Amir Adell_, found
all things much in the same manner, only that his behaviour was more
light, and he made haste to get drunk with some wine carried to him by
the English. The people of these islands are strict Mahomedans, and very
jealous of letting their women or mosques be seen. For, on some of the
English coming near a village, they shut them up, and threatened to kill
them if they came nearer. Many of them speak and write Arabic, and some
few of them Portuguese, as they trade with Mosambique in junks of forty
tons burden, built, caulked, and rigged all out of the cocoa-nut tree.
Here we bought oxen and cows, fat but small, Arabian sheep, hens,
oranges, lemons, and limes in abundance, paying for them in calicoes,
hollands, sword-blades, dollars, glasses, and other trifles."--T.R.

We sailed from Mohelia on the 2d August, and on the 17th got sight of
cape Guardafui, where the natives seemed afraid of us. The 20th we
anchored in the road of _Galencia_ in Socotora, where the fierceness of
the wind raised the sea into a continual surf all round about us, and by
the spray, blown about us like continual rain, our masts, yards, and
tackle were made white all over by the salt, like so much hoar-frost;
The 23d we anchored at _Tamara_, the town where the king resides, and on
the 24th at _Delisha_. They here demanded thirty dollars for the quintal
of aloes, which made us buy the less. The _Faiking_ told us that Captain
Downton had bought 100 quintals, and it was still so liquid, either
from newness, or because of the heat, that it was ready to run out of
the skins. The quintal of this place, as tried by our beam, weighed 103
1/2 pounds English. Aloes is made from the leaves of a plant resembling
our sempervivum, or house-leek, the roots and stalk being cut away, the
rest strongly pressed, and the juice boiled up to a certain height,
after which it is put into earthen pots, closely stopped for eight
months, and is then put into skins for sale. The north part of Socotora
is in 12 deg. 30', and the body in 120 deg. 25'.[166] It is fourteen leagues
from this island to _Abdul Curia_, and as much more from thence to cape
Guardafui. Such as mean to sail for Socotora, should touch at that cape,
and sail from thence next morning a little before day-break, to lose no
part of the day-light, the nights here being dark and obscure, with fogs
and boisterous winds, during the months of August and September. On
getting into _Abdul Curia_, they may anchor on the west side in seven or
eight fathoms, under the low land; or, if they cannot get to anchor,
should keep close hauled in the night to the southward, lest the wind
and northerly current put them too much to leeward before day.
Notwithstanding the monsoon, the winds do not blow steadily, being
sometimes S. by W. and S.S.W. but seldom to the east of south.

[Footnote 166: These two numbers unquestionably relate to the longitude
and latitude respectively, though strangely expressed. The true lat. is
13 deg. 20'N. and long. 53 deg. E. from Greenwich.--E.]

"Socotora is an island not far from the mouth of the Red Sea, being the
_Dioscuria_ or _Disoscordia_ of the ancients, in lat. 13 deg. 20' N. It was
governed when we were there by a sultan, named Amir Ben-said, son of the
king of Fartaque, in Arabia Felix, which lies between the latitudes of
15 deg. and 18 deg. N. on the coast of Arabia. This king was in peace with the
Turks, on condition of assisting them with 5000 men when required, and
then these troops to be paid and maintained by the Turks, to whom he
paid no other acknowledgement. Near to the sea about Dofar, there is
another petty Arab sovereign, whom he of Fartaque dare not meddle with,
because he is under the protection of the Grand Signior.

"The sultan of Socotora came down to meet us at the shore, accompanied
by 300 men, and had a tent set up for his accommodation. He was on
horseback, as were two of his principal attendants, and a third on a
camel, the people running before and behind him shouting. He had two
companies of guards, one composed of his own subjects, and the other
consisting of twelve hired Guzerates, some armed with Turkish bows, some
with pistols, and some with muskets, but all having good swords. He had
also a few kettle-drums, and one trumpet. He received the general in a
courteous manner, and was so absolute, that no person could sell any
thing except himself. His people sat about him very respectfully; his
clothes were of Surat cloths, made in the Arabian fashion, with a
cassock of red and white wrought velvet, and a robe of which the ground
was cloth of gold. He wore a handsome turban, but his legs and feet were
bare.

"Every night these people all stand or kneel towards the setting sun,
the _zerife_ throwing water on their heads, being all Mahomedans. The
king's town, named Tamara, is built of stone and lime, all whited over,
the houses built with battlements and pinnacles, and all flat-roofed. At
a distance it looks well, but within is very poor. Mr Boughton had leave
to see the king's house, and found it such as might serve an ordinary
gentleman in England. The lower rooms were used as warehouses and
wardrobe, a few changes of robes hanging about the walls, and along with
them were some twenty-five books of their law, religion, history, and
saints lives. No person could be permitted to go up stairs to see his
three wives, or the other women; but the ordinary sort might be seen in
the town, their ears all full of silver rings. In the mosque the priest
was seen at service. Mr Boughton had for his dinner three hens, with
rice, his drink being water, and a black liquor called _cahu_, [coffee]
drank as hot as could be endured.

"On a hill, a mile from Tamara, there is a square castle, but we could
not get leave to see it. The inhabitants are of four sorts. The first
are Arabs, who have come in by means of conquest, who dare not speak in
presence of the sultan without leave, and kissing his hand. The second
sort are slaves, who kiss his foot when they come into his presence, do
all his work, and make his aloes. The third sort are the old inhabitants
of the country, called Bedouins, though I think these are not the oldest
of all, whom I suppose to have been those commonly called Jacobite
Christians: For, on Mr Boughton going into a church of theirs, which the
Arabs had forced them to abandon, he found some images and a crucifix,
which he took away. The Mahomedans would not say much about these
people, lest other Christians might relieve or support them. These
Bedouins, having had wars with the Arabs, live apart from them in the
mountains. The fourth kind of people, or original natives, are very
savage, poor lean, naked, and wear their hair long. They eat nothing but
roots, ride about on buffaloes, conversing only among themselves, being
afraid of all others, having no houses, and live more like wild beasts
than men, and these we conjecture to have been the original natives of
the place.

"The island is very mountainous and barren, having some beeves, goats,
and sheep, a few dates and oranges, a little rice, and nothing else for
the food of man. All its commodities consist of aloes, the inspisated
juice of a plant having a leaf like our house-leek. The only manufacture
is a very poor kind of cloth, used only by slaves. The king had some
dragon's blood, and some Lahore indigo, as also a few civet cats and
civet. The dead are all buried in tombs, and the monuments of their
saints are held in much veneration. The chief of these was one _Sidy
Hachun_,[167] buried at Tamara, who was slain about an hundred years
before we were there, and who, as they pretend, still appears to them,
and warns them of approaching dangers. They hold him in wonderful
veneration, and impute high winds to his influence."--T.R.

[Footnote 167: Sidy, or Seid, signifies a descendant or relative of
Mahomet, and Hachem, a prophet.--E.]

The 31st of August we sailed from Socotora. The 10th September we had
quails, herons, and other land-birds blown from the land, and unable to
return. The 14th we had sight of Diu, and the 16th of Damaun, both
inhabited by the Portuguese, and strongly fortified. On the 18th we
passed the bar of Surat, and came to anchor in the road of Swally. Next
day we sent a messenger on shore, and our boat returned the same night,
bringing off Mr William Bidulph, who told us of all the affairs of the
country, and that _Zulphecar Khan_[168] was now governor of Surat. At
this place we bought sheep for half a dollar each, and got twenty hens
for a dollar. On the 22d Mr Barker and other merchants were sent to
Surat to provide furniture for a house to accommodate the lord
ambassador, Sir Thomas Roe. They were searched most narrowly, even their
pockets, and the most secret parts of their dress, according to the base
manner of this country, in which a man has to pay custom for a single
dollar in his purse, or a good knife in his pocket; and if one has any
thing rare, it is sure to be taken away by the governor, under pretence
of purchase.

[Footnote 168: In the Pilgrims this person is named Zuipher-Car-Chan,
but we believe the orthography in the text is more correct.--E.]

The lord ambassador landed on the 25th, accompanied by our general, all
the captains and merchants, and eighty men under arms, part pikes, and
part muskets. Forty-eight guns were fired off from the ships, which were
all dressed out with colours and streamers, flags and pendants. On
landing, he was received in a splendid tent by the chief men of Surat,
who welcomed him to India. There was much to do about their barbarous
search, which they would have executed on all his attendants, which he
strenuously resisted, and at length he and three or four of his
principal followers were exempted, while the rest were only slightly
handled for fashion-sake. A great deal passed on this occasion between
the governor and the ambassador, about these rude and barbarous
exactions, Sir Thomas justly contending for the honour and immunity of
an ambassador from an independent king; while they insisted to make no
difference between him and others of similar rank in those parts, and of
our own likewise, who had formerly assumed the name of ambassadors.
Their barbarous usage not only perplexed him there, and detained him
long till an order came from court, but gave him much plague all the
time he remained in the country, as will appear afterwards from his own
journal. They could not easily be persuaded to allow of any difference
between him and Mr Edwards, who had been considered by them in the same
light with Sir Thomas.

Mr Barwick's man, who had been inveigled to run away by a deserter from
Captain Best who had turned Mahomedan, was brought back from Surat on
the 1st of October. Others afterwards ran away to Damaun, and wrote to
their comrades to induce them to do the same. The 2d, two Hollanders
came on board, who had travelled by land from Petapulli, on the
Coromandel coast. On the 10th, the governor's brother came on board,
making many fair speeches, and had a present given him. The governor
impudently urged us to give him presents, though he had already received
three, but found fault with them, and even named what he would have
given him, being beggar and chooser both at once. We had this day news
of Mr Aldworth's death; and on the 5th November we received intelligence
of the lord ambassador having fallen sick at Burhanpoor, and that Mr
Boughton was dead.

The most current coin at Surat is rials of eight, or Spanish dollars, of
which the old with the plain cross passes for five mahmoodies each. The
new dollars, having flower-de-luces at the ends of the cross, if not
light, are worth four 3/4 mahmoodies. The _mahmoody_ is a coarse silver
coin, containing thirty _pice_, and twelve _drams_ make a _pice_. The
English shilling, if full weight, will yield thirty 1/2 pice. Larines
are worth much the same with mahmoodies.[169] There are sundry kinds of
rupees, some of which are worth half a dollar, and others less, by which
one may be easily deceived. The trade at Surat is conducted by brokers,
who are very subtle, and deceive both buyer and seller, if not carefully
looked after. In weights, each city of India differs from another. The
commodities are infinite, indigos being the chief, those of Lahore the
best, and those from Sarkess inferior. Great quantities of cloths made
of cotton, as white and coloured calicoes, containing fourteen yards the
book or piece, from 100 to 200 mahmoodies each. Pintadoes, chintzes,
chadors, sashes, girdles, cannakens, trekannies, serrabafs, aleias,
patollas, sellas, quilts, carpets, green ginger, suckets or confections,
lignum aloes, opium, sal amoniac, and abundance of other drugs. Vendible
commodities are knives, mirrors, pictures, and such like toys; English
cloth, China wares, silk, and porcelain, and all kinds of spices. The
Guzerates load their great ships, of nine, twelve, or fifteen hundred
tons, at Gogo, and steal out unknown to the Portuguese.

[Footnote 169: From this explanation, the _mahmoody_ and larine may be
assumed as worth one shilling; the _pice_ as equal to a farthing and a
half, and the dram at about 1-10th of a farthing.--E.]

The chief places for trade on the river Sinde, or Indus, are Tatta,
_Diul-sinde_, Mooltan, and Lahore. The Expedition, on her former voyage,
had landed the Persian ambassador, Sir Robert Shirley, at _Diul-sinde_;
and of him I have thought it right to give the following particulars, as
an appendix to my former voyage, having learnt them from some of his
followers at Agra. Being weary of _Diul-sinde_, through the evil conduct
of the governor, and the attempts of the Portuguese to molest him, who
even used their endeavours to cut him off, for which purpose twelve of
them had gone there from Ormus, he asked leave to proceed to Tatta; but,
being refused permission, he went without leave, and having by the way
to pass a river where none durst ferry him over, because prohibited by
the governor on pain of death, he constructed a raft of timber and
boards, on which he and Nazerbeg embarked. They were no sooner shoved
off than twenty or thirty horse came from the governor in great haste to
detain them. And as Nazerbeg was unable to guide the raft against the
tide, some men swam to the raft and brought them back, on which occasion
they narrowly escaped being drowned. Some of his followers being
indignant at this rude dealing, one Mr John Ward shot off his pistol in
their faces, and was instantly slain by another shot, and all the rest
were carried back prisoners to _Diul-sinde_, being pillaged by the
soldiers on their way. After some time in prison, they were permitted to
proceed to Tatta, where they were kindly entertained by the governor of
that place, who was a Persian. Before leaving Diul-sinde, Sir Thomas
Powell and Mr Francis Bub died. Sir Robert Shirley remained at Tatta
till a fit opportunity offered of proceeding to Agra, where he went at
last, finding the way long and tedious, and much infested by thieves. He
went there however in safety, going in company with a great man who had
a strong escort, and for whom he had to wait two months.

In this time Lady Powell was delivered of a son, but both she and her
child died soon after, together with Mr Michael Powell, brother to Sir
Thomas, losing their lives in this tedious waiting in boats for the
great man. On his arrival at Agra, Sir Robert was favourably entertained
by the Great Mogul, who sent for the Banian governor of Diul-sinde to
answer at court to the complaint, and promised Sir Robert to have his
own revenge if he would stay; but he hasted away to Persia, after
receiving many presents from the Mogul, who gave him an escort, and all
necessaries for his journey, in which he had not a single English
attendant, as John Heriot died at Agra, and Mr Richard Barber, his
apothecary, returned to Surat. Of all his company, three only remained
with him, his lady and her female attendant, two Persians, the old
Arminian, and the Circassian. His Dutch jeweller came to Surat along
with Mr Edwards.

Sec.2. _Occurrences at Calicut and Sumatra, Miscarriage of the English
Ships, Abuses of the Dutch, and Factories in India_.

We took a Portuguese prize on the 29th of February, 1616. The 3d March,
while at anchor in the road of Calicut, the deputy of the Zamorin came
aboard, attended by many boats, signifying the joy of his master at our
arrival, and his earnest desire to confer with our nation, and entreated
therefore that we would tarry a few days, that he might send to the
Zamorin, who was then at Cranganore besieging a castle belonging to the
Portuguese. We had here abundance of provisions brought to us on board,
and at reasonable rates. That same evening, there came a messenger from
the Zamorin, entreating us to anchor for two or three days off
Cranganore, which we accordingly did on the 5th, anchoring two leagues
off shore. About noon the Zamorin sent to request the general would come
ashore, to visit him, but this was not deemed right without a pledge,
and Mr George Barkley went ashore to wait upon him; but the Zamorin
refused to reveal his intentions to any one except our general, and
seemed much displeased at his not coming ashore.

The general accordingly landed on the 8th, and had an audience of the
Zamorin, who wished the English to establish a factory in his dominions,
for which purpose he offered a good house rent-free, freedom from custom
or other exactions, for all goods brought there or carried thence, and
made many protestations of affection for our nation. This was for the
present declined, because most of our goods had been left at Surat, and
because we were now bound for Bantam. To this the Zamorin answered, that
it was no matter whether any goods were left for the present, as he only
desired we might leave two or three Englishmen there, who should want
for nothing, as he only wanted to be assured of our return next year
with a supply of men and goods. He assured us we might be sure of
loading one ship yearly with pepper, and might make sale of our
commodities to a considerable extent. Upon this it was agreed to leave a
factory at this place, with such goods as we could spare, which went
accordingly on shore on the 9th; George Woolman being appointed chief of
this new factory at Cranganore, Peter Needham and Roger Hares
under-factors, together with Richard Stamford, and a boy named Edward
Peake, who was appointed to learn the language. The name of the king is
_Pendre Quone[170] Zamorin_, to whom was given, as a present, a minion
or small cannon, and a barrel of powder; on which he promised, if he won
the fort of Cranganore, to give it up to the English.

[Footnote 170: Named _Underecon Cheete_ in a subsequent article.--E.]

The 10th we received the Zamorin's letter of agreement for our
privileges, with many fair protestations of love. We sailed the same
day, passing before Cochin, which we could see distinctly. Next day we
had a view of the town and castle of Coulan, where was a ship riding at
anchor under the guns of the castle, which we boarded and brought forth
without any hurt from the guns, all the crew having fled ashore. This
was a Portuguese ship of four or five hundred tons, lately arrived from
Bengal and Pegu, laden with rice, grain, Bengal cloths, butter, sugar,
gum lack, hard wax, drugs, and other things. The 12th we espied another
ship, to which we gave chase, and came up with about midnight, when she
surrendered at the first shot.[171] I sent for her chief men on board my
ship, the others being three or four miles a-stern, and set some of my
people on board the prize, with strict charges to hurt no person. There
were in this ship eighteen or twenty Portuguese, and about eighty
others, men, women, and children. Her chief loading was rice, butter,
sugar, lack, drugs, and Bengal cloths. We offered these people our first
prize, with victuals to carry them ashore, which they refused, as
fearing to be ill-used by the Malabars, having lately escaped with
difficulty from a fleet of theirs of fourteen sail. Next day we landed
them where they desired, and allowed them to go away unsearched for
money or jewels. We had now three English ships[172] and three prizes.

[Footnote 171: These prizes were taken from the Portuguese in part
satisfaction for their unjust vexations and hostilities at Surat and
other places.--_Purch._]

[Footnote 172: No notice is taken of the fourth ship, the Lion, probably
left at Surat; indeed, the whole of this relation is exceedingly vague
and unsatisfactory, the name even of the general never being once
mentioned.--E.]

The 14th we arrived at _Brinion_, in lat. 8 deg. 30', where we took out of
the first prize what we thought useful, and then set her adrift. At
_Brinion_ there is a small town in a round bay, which may be known by a
long white beach to the north, and to the south is all high land, having
a red cliff two leagues to the south, close to the sea. From thence to
cape Comorin is sixteen leagues, the course being S.E. by S. along a
bold free coast. The inhabitants of Brinion[173] are no way subject to
the Portuguese. The 1st of April the island of Ceylon bore E. by S.
seven leagues off. On the 10th the Peak of Adam bore north. I this day
took my leave of the general, the Dragon and Pepper-corn being bound for
Acheen, while I, in the Expedition, went for Priaman, Tecoo, and Bantam.

[Footnote 173: In 8 deg. 22' N. at the distance indicated from cape Comorin,
is a place called Billingham, which may possibly be the Brinion of the
text.--E.]

It is good to remain in Brinion till the end of March, when the easterly
monsoon ends, and not to pass cape Comorin sooner, on account of calms,
and because the southerly current sets towards the Maldives. All who
come from the west for Priaman and Tecoo, ought to continue so as to
have sufficient day-light for passing between _Nimptan_[174] and the
other adjacent islands, the best channel being to the north of that
island. On the 30th of April I met the Advice going for Tecoo; but, at
my request, she returned for Bantam, whence she was sent to Japan. I
arrived at Bantam on the 1st of May, where I found the Hosiander newly
arrived from Japan, and the Attendance from _Jambo_, most of their men
being sick or dead. I here learnt the death of Captain Downton, and of
the arrival of Captain Samuel Castleton with the Clove and Defence,
which, with the Thomas and Concord, were gone to the Moluccas, the
Thomas being appointed to proceed from thence to Japan.

[Footnote 174: Pulo Mintaon, off the S.W. coast of Sumatra, nearly under
the line, is probably here meant.--E.]

The 19th of May I sailed from Bantam, and the 10th June I put into
Tecoo. The 3d July I hove my ship down on the careen to sheath her. It
is of great use to double sheath such ships as go to Surat, as though
the outer sheathing may be eaten like a honey-comb by the worms, the
inner is not at all injured. It were also of great use to have the
rudder sheathed with thin copper,[175] to prevent the worms from eating
off its edges, which is very detrimental in steering, and cannot be
easily remedied, being so deep in the water. The natives of Sumatra
inhabiting Priaman are barbarous, deceitful, and continually craving
presents or bribes; and sometimes I have been in imminent hazard of
being murdered, a hundred of them drawing their crisses upon us at once,
because we refused to let them have our goods on trust, or at prices of
their own making. The 20th, Thomas Bonnar, master of the Expedition,
died, and was succeeded by John Row, who was the third master in this
voyage.

[Footnote 175: We had formerly occasion to notice a ship sheathed with
iron at Japan, and this is the first indication or proposal for using
copper in that way. Iron sheathing has never been adopted into British
practice, while copper sheathing is now universal. Captain Peyton does
not appear to have been aware that copper sheathing is incompatible
with iron fastenings, which indeed was only learnt long after, by woeful
experience, and the loss of many ships and men. In consequence of a
strong predisposing chemical afinity, exerted by the contiguity of the
copper and iron in the sea water, the muriatic acid corrodes the iron
bolts and other fastenings, all of which are now made of copper in ships
that are to be copper sheathed.--E.]

The 26th, the Dragon and Pepper-corn arrived from Acheen, where they had
purchased pepper, carried there from Tecoo in large junks and praws,
which navigate between these places, but never out of sight of land. The
king of Acheen commands the people of Tecoo to bring their pepper to his
port, and allows none to purchase it there, but those who barter their
Surat goods at such rates as he pleases to impose. Often likewise, he
sends to Priaman and Tecoo the Surat commodities procured by him in that
manner, obliging the merchants there to buy at rates by him imposed, and
no person is allowed to buy or sell till his goods are sold. This makes
our trade with them the better.[176] _Jambo_ is on the east side of
Sumatra, and yields a similar large-grained pepper with what is procured
at Priaman, but is not under the dominion of the king of Acheen, as are
Baruse, Passaman, Tecoo, Priaman, Cottatinga, and other places on the
western side of that island. _Baruse_ is to the north of Passaman, and
yields considerable quantities of benzoin; _Cottatinga_ yields gold, and
the other places pepper. Our general brought the king of Acheen's letter
to these places, where the chief men received it with great submission,
each of them kissing it and laying it on his head, promising to obey its
injunctions, yet all failed in performance. It were proper, in these
letters from the king, to procure all the particulars of the trade to be
inserted. I set sail from Tecoo for Bantam on the 4th September.

[Footnote 176: It is so expressed in the Pilgrims; yet it would seem
that such arbitrary proceeding in the sovereign, assuming the character
of merchant, would be destructive of all trade.--E.]

The best gold, and the largest quantity, is to be had at the high hill
of Passaman, where likewise is the best, cheapest, and most abundant
produce of pepper. But the air is there so pestiferous, that there is no
going thither for our nation without great mortality among the men.
Fortunately this is not necessary in procuring pepper, as the Surat
commodities at Tecoo are sufficiently attractive. I have even observed
many of the natives to labour under infectious diseases, the limbs of
some being ready to drop off with rottenness, while others had huge
wens or swellings under their throats, as large as a two-penny loaf;
which they impute to the bad water.[177] Though a barbarous people, they
are yet acquainted with the means of curing their diseases. The people
of Tecoo are base, thievish, subtle, seeking gain by every kind of
fraud, or even by force when they dare; using false weights, false
reckonings, and even attempting to poison our meats and drinks while
dressing, and crissing our men when opportunity serves: But it is to be
hoped they may be inforced to keep better order, by the influence and
authority of the king of Acheen. At Acheen our Portuguese prizes were
disposed of, and shared according to the custom of the sea, a sixth part
being divided among the captors, and the rest carried to the account of
our employers. There were only five left in the factory. Many of our men
were sick, owing to their immoderate indulgence in drinking arrack.

[Footnote 177: The _goitre_ was long ignorantly imputed in Europe to
drinking snow water; but is now well known only to affect the
inhabitants of peculiar districts, as Derbyshire in England, and the
Valais in Switzerland, and this district in Sumatra, where certain
mineral impregnations render the water unwholesome.--E.]

When at Bantam, in October 1616, there were four English ships, and five
Hollanders at Jacatra, which raised the price of pepper; and that the
more, because the Dutch boasted of having brought this year in ready
money 1,600,000 dollars, which is probably a great exaggeration to brave
our nation. Their last fleet of six ships took two or three ships of the
Portuguese, of which they made great boasts. They endeavour to depress
our nation by every manner of abuse throughout the Indies, acting
towards us in a most unfriendly and unchristian manner. Even in Bantam,
where they acknowledge our equal right, they threaten to pull our people
out of our factory by the ears, sometimes picking quarrels with them in
the streets, and even imprisoning them; and when they themselves have
caused an uproar, complaining to the king of Bantam of our unquietness,
and bribing him to take their parts. He receives their money, and tells
us of their dealings, taking advantage of this disagreement to fleece
both sides. Even at Pulo-way, an island freely surrendered to the king
of England, they abused our people, leading them through the streets
with halters round their necks, carrying an hour-glass before them, and
proclaiming that they were to be hanged when the sand was run out. And
though they did not actually proceed to that extremity, they kept them
three or four days in irons, and afterwards sent them aboard the Concord
and Thomasine, under a forced composition never to return. Likewise, at
the return of the Hosiander from Japan, which brought thirty tons of
wood for them, free of freight and charges, they reported she would have
returned empty, but for their timber; which also they might have said of
my ship, which brought for them, from Surat to Bantam, thirty-one
_churles_ of indigo and a chest of pistoles, freight-free.

Captain Castleton went to the Moluccas with four ships, the Clove,
Defence, Thomas, and Concord, that he might be better able to defend
himself against the Hollanders; yet, being threatened by eleven of their
ships, they returned without doing much business, having only a few
cloves in the Clove. The captain died there of the flux; and the bad
success of that expedition, together with other faults, was laid to his
charge. The Trades-increase was twice set on fire by the Javans, and the
fire quenched by our people; but on a third attempt, she was fired in so
many places at once, that it was impossible to save her. The Darling was
laid up at Patane, in June 1615, by order of Mr Larkine and the factory,
as incapable of repair. Herrold, her master, was reported of having a
design to carry her off to the Portuguese; and, being prevented, he went
himself. The Thomasine was cast away, in September 1615, upon a shoal in
the night, seventeen leagues W. from Macasser, while returning from the
Moluccas. On this occasion her goods were lost, which were not of much
value, but they saved the money, being 2000 dollars, and all their
provisions, remaining fourteen days on a desolate island, where they
fitted up their boat, which brought themselves and their money to
Bantam. All their goods and other things were left behind, and seized by
the king of Macasser, who refused to make restitution. At Jacatra the
Hector sunk in three fathoms water while careening, her keel being
exceedingly worm-eaten. The Concord is there also laid up, so rotten
and leaky that they had to take out her provisions, and let her sink
close to the shore. The Hosiander, on the 15th October 1616, was
appointed to sail for the Coromandel coast.

The factories which are at present established for our company in the
East Indies, so far as I could hear, are these: Bantam, Jacatra,
Ahmedabad, Agra, Agimere, Burhanpoor, Calicut, Masulipatam, Patepulli,
Patane, Siam, Banjermassen, Succodania, Macasser, Acheen, Jambo, Tecoo,
Banda, and Firando in Japan. At Bantam, Mr George Barclay was chief,
with John Jordan, George Ball, Ralph Copendale, and several other
factors and assistants. The principal purpose of the factory at Acheen,
is to solicit for our better proceedings at Priaman and Tecoo. The place
is unwholesome, more especially for such as indulge in the use of hot
fiery drinks, as _arack_ and _aracape_, which bring many to untimely
graves; and throw discredit on the voyage. It is not to be imagined at
home, how unruly are the common men abroad, never being satisfied unless
when their brains are reeling with liquor. Even the king of Acheen is
said to have a strange habit of getting drunk when the English resort to
him, as if thereby to do them honour, and it seems dishonourable to them
not to conform with him, in sitting in the water, drinking hard, and
many other strange customs. He is very tyrannical and cruel to his
subjects, daily cutting off the hands, arms, and legs of many, on very
small and frivolous causes; or causing them to be thrown to the
elephants, he himself commanding a sagacious elephant to toss the
culprits so high and so often, as either to bruise or kill them,
according to his caprice at the time. No one that arrives at his port
may land without his _chop_ or licence. On one occasion, a Dutch general
came on shore without his licence, by desire of the principal factor,
who presumed on his favour with the king. When the general came to the
palace-gate, where another chop is necessary, the king found this
irregularity to have proceeded from the presumption of the resident,
whom he sent for and laid before the elephant, who tossed him three
times, but so gently as not to bruise him much, giving him thus a
warning how he should neglect the king's commands another time. The
Dutch general stood by the while, fearing to come in for his share of
this strange discipline; but the king forgave him, as ignorant of the
law. The poor factor, being called into the king's presence, humbly
acknowledged his punishment to have been merited, yet fled with the rest
of the factory at the departure of the ships; on which the king placed
us in their house.

We sailed from Bantam, homeward bound, on the 1st November 1616. The 5th
January 1617, I was unable to weigh our anchor, owing to the violence
of the wind, to follow the Dragon to Penguin island. Ships that go round
the Cape of Good Hope from India, at this season of the year, ought not
to anchor short of Saldanha road, [Table Bay,] but ought to bear to
leeward for Penguin island, and anchor there with two anchors at once,
till the wind serve. In December, January, and February, the S.S.E. wind
blows there with great violence from new to full moon. Yet I hold it
dangerous to neglect this place, trusting to refreshments at St Helena,
a certainty for an uncertainty; as the obscurity of the sun and moon,
owing to thick mists at this season, may disappoint the most experienced
navigators, and occasion the loss of ship, cargo, and men. While at the
Cape, Corey came down with three sheep, and promised more, but went away
in great haste to his wife and family, who dwelt now farther from the
bay than formerly. It appears that the Hollanders had frightened the
natives, by landing and going up the country with above an hundred men
at once. Owing to this, our chief refreshment here was fresh fish.

The 9th April 1617, we passed through great quantities of sea-weeds,
called _seragasso_, which float in long ridges or rows along with the
wind, and at considerable distances from each other. This plant has a
leaf like samphire, but not so thick, and carries a very small yellow
berry. It reaches from 22 deg. 20' to 32 deg. both of N. latitude. We anchored
in the Downs on the 29th of May 1617.


3. _Brief Notice of the Ports, Cities, and Towns, inhabited by, and
traded with, by the Portuguese between the Cape of Good Hope and Japan,
in_ 1616.

The river of _Quame_, or _Cuamo_, on the eastern coast of Africa, where
they are said to trade yearly for gold, elephants teeth, ambergris, and
slaves. _Mozambique_, an island on the same coast, where they trade for
gold, ambergris, and slaves, in barter for iron, lead, tin, and Cambay
commodities, _Magadoxo_, which has abundance of elephants teeth, some
ambergris, and various kinds of drugs. From these ports they trade
yearly to Cambay, the Red Sea, and other places, observing the monsoons,
which blow W. in April, May, June, July, August, and part of September,
and the E. monsoon prevails an the other months. A few days between the
cessation of one monsoon and the commencement of the other, the winds
are variable, attended by calms, but become regular in a few days. To
the east of Sumatra, however, the two monsoons continue only five months
each way, the two intermediate months having variable winds.

_Ormus_ in the gulf of Persia, whence the Portuguese trade to Persia,
Diul-sinde, Arabia, &c. They fetch much pearl from Bassora;[178] and
they load a ship or two with Persian commodities for Diul-sinde, where
they arrive between the end of August and middle of September, taking
likewise with them great store of dollars. Ormus is their best place in
the Indies except Goa. At _Muskat_ they have a fort and some small
trade, keeping the natives in such awe by land and sea, that they dare
not trade without their licence, and this practice they follow in all
parts of India where they are strong. _Diul-sinde_ on the Indus in the
dominions of the Great Mogul. _Diu_, where they have a strong castle.
Damaun, where they have a castle, and are said to have an hundred
villages under their authority. _Basseen_, or _Serra de Bazein_, a
little south from _Damaun_, and bordering on the Deccan; between which
and _Chaul_ they have three ports, _Gazein, Banda_, and _Maia_. _Chaul_
is a great city with a castle. At _Dabul_ they have a factory, but no
fort.

[Footnote 178: This is a mistake for the isle of Bahrein.--E.]

_Goa_ is their metropolitan city in India, which stands in a small
island, being the seat of their viceroy, and the anchoring place of
their caracks. _Onore_ has a small fort. _Barcellore_, a town and
castle, yields pepper, ginger, and many kinds of drugs. _Mangalore_, a
town and castle. _Cananore_, a city and castle, yielding similar
commodities with Barcellore. From _Calicut_ they have been expelled by
the Zamorin, who endeavours to do the same at _Crangator_, [Cranganore,]
where they have a fort. _Cochin_ is a strong city and castle, pleasantly
situated on the sea in a wholesome air, with a fine river for the
reception of ships. _Coulan_, a town with a small castle; near which is
a village named St Lawrence, chiefly inhabited by friars and jesuits.
_Quiloan_, a small city with a castle. _Tuckatra_, a town and castle,
the inhabitants being mostly Christians.

_Manaar_ is on the island of Ceylon, between Cape Comorin and
Point-de-Gale, where they have a town inhabited by Portuguese. In this
island also they have _Columbo_, and many other small places, having
conquered most of the island, which yields cinnamon and various drugs.
_Negopatnam_ is a city of great trade, on the coast of Coromandel, where
they have only a factory. St Thomas, or _Meliapoor_, is a walled town
inhabited by the Portuguese. In Bengal, up the river Ganges, they have a
town, besides some factories and many small habitations. They have a
factory in Pegu, another in Aracan, and one in the river of Martaban.
Also at _Junkceylon_ they have a great factory, whence they fetch
considerable quantities of tin to the Malabar coast.

_Malacca_ is a strong city and castle belonging to the Portuguese, and
the centre of a great trade in those parts of India. From this place the
king of Acheen has long sought to root them out, and has burnt and
plundered some of their ships this year, 1619. At _Macao_, an island on
the coast of China, they have a city with a castle, where they are said
to carry on much trade with the Chinese. They have a factory in Japan,
but neither town nor fort; and trade thence with the coast of China. The
Dutch are said to make much spoil of the vessels employed on this trade,
Portuguese, Chinese, and others, accounting all fish that fall into
their net.

SECTION V.

_Notes, concerning the Proceedings of the Factory at Cranganore, from
the Journal of Roger Hawes.[179]_

[Footnote 179: Parch. Pilgr. I. 608.--Hawes sailed in the fleet under
Keeling, in 1615, which carried out Sir Thomas Roe, already related in
Sect. IV. of this chapter; and the present short article almost
exclusively relates to the new factory at Cranganore on the Malabar
coast, in which Hawes was left as one of the factors. This is a very
imperfect and inconclusive article, yet gives some idea of the manners
and customs of the Malabars.--E.]

On the 4th of March 1615, we chased a Portuguese frigate, which ran into
a creek and escaped. While on our way towards Cape Comorin, a Tony came
aboard of us, with messengers from the Zamorin to our general, Captain
William Keeling. Next day, the governor sent a present, and entreated
the general to proceed to Cranganore, which we did next day, taking with
us the messengers sent from the Zamorin, who requested the general to
come on shore to speak with him. But, while he was doing so, some
frigates came and anchored near the shore, by which he was constrained
to go on board the Expedition, Captain Walter Peyton. On this occasion
some shots were exchanged, but little harm was done. The general went
ashore on the 8th, accompanied by Mr Barclay, the cape merchant, and
several others. They were well used, and agreed to settle a factory in
the dominions of the Zamorin, the following being the articles agreed
upon:--

_"UNDERECON CHEETE, Great Zamorin, &c. to JAMES, King of Britain, &c._
Whereas your servant and subject, William Keeling, arrived in my kingdom
at the port of Cranganore, in March 1615, with three ships, and at my
earnest solicitation came ashore to see me; there was concluded by me
for my part, and by him for the English nation, as followeth.

"As I have ever been at enmity with the Portuguese, and propose always
so to continue, I do hereby faithfully promise to be and to continue in
friendship with the English, both for myself and my successors: And, if
I succeed in taking the fort of Cranganore, I engage to give it to the
English, to possess as their own, together with the island belonging to
it, which is in length along the sea-coast nine miles, and three in
breadth; and I propose to build therein a house for my own people, to
the number of one hundred persons.

"I shall hereafter endeavour, with the aid of the English, to conquer
the town and fort of Cochin, which formerly belonged, to my crown and
kingdom, and shall then deliver it to the English as their own. Provided
that the charges of its capture be equally borne by both parties, one
half by me, and the other half by the English nation; and in that case,
the benefit of the plunder thereof, of whatsoever kind, shall belong
half to me, and half to the English. And thereafter, I shall claim no
right, title, or interest in the said town, precincts, or appurtenances
whatsoever."

"I also covenant for myself, my heirs and successors, that the whole
trade of the English, in whatsoever commodities, brought in or carried
out, shall be entirely free from all custom, imposition, tax, toll, or
any other duty, of any quality or description."

"To these covenants, which the shortness of time did not permit to
extend in more ample form, I, the Zamorin, have sworn to perform, by the
great God whom I serve, and not only for myself but for my successors;
and in witness thereof have laid my hand upon this writing.[180] And the
said William Keeling promises to acquaint the king his master with the
premises, and to endeavour to procure his majesty's consent thereto."

[Footnote 180: This probably alludes to a custom mentioned in one of our
earlier volumes, of imprinting the form of the hand, smeared with ink,
on the paper, instead of signature or seal.--E.]

This being agreed upon, a stock was made out for a factory, such as the
shortness of time would permit, and three factors were appointed. These
were, George Woolman, chief, Peter Needham, second, who was one of the
general's servants, and I, Roger Hawes, third; together with a youth,
named Edward Peake, as our attendant, who was to learn the language.
John Stamford, a gunner, was likewise left to assist the Zamorin in his
wars. On the 10th the ships departed, leaving us and our goods in a
_shrambe_ at the water side, together with a present for the Zamorin. We
continued there till the 13th, at which time the last of our goods were
carried to the Zamorin's castle; whose integrity we much suspected,
after having thus got possession of our goods. On the 20th, he insisted
to see Mr Woolman's trunk, supposing we had plenty of money. Needham had
told him we had 500 rials; but finding little more than fifty, he
demanded the loan of that sum, which we could not refuse. He offered us
a pawn not worth half; which we refused to accept, hoping he would now
allow us to proceed to Calicut, but he put us off with delays. He
likewise urged us to give his brother a present.

On the 28th, the Zamorin came into the apartment where we were, and gave
Mr Woolman two gold rings, and one to each of the rest; and next day he
invited us to come to his tumbling sports. That same night, Stamford
went out with his sword in his hand, telling the boy that he would
return presently. The next news we had of him was, that he was in the
hands of the Cochin nayres. He had lost His way while drunk, and meeting
with some of them, they asked where he wished to go; he said to the
Zamorin, to whom they undertook to conduct him, and he knew not that he
was a prisoner, till he got to Cochin. This incident put us in great
fear, but the Zamorin gave us good words, saying he was better pleased
to find him a knave now, than after he had put trust in him.

We had leave in April to depart with our goods to Calicut, where we
arrived on the 22d of that month, and were well received; but had to
remain in the custom-house, till we could get a more convenient house,
which was made ready for us on the 6th of May, with promise of a better
after the rains. We were very desirous, according to our orders from
the general, to have sent a messenger with his and our letters to
Surat, to acquaint our countrymen that we were here; but the governor
would not consent till we had sold all our goods. On the 18th of June,
one was sent. On the 26th, part of our goods were sold to the merchants
of Calicut, by the governor's procurement, with fair promises of part
payment shortly. But it is not the custom of the best or the worst in
this country to keep their words, being certain only in dissembling. Mr
Woolman was desirous of going to Nassapore to make sales, but the
governor put him off with divers shifts from time to time. The 3d July,
our messenger for Surat returned, reporting that he had been set upon
when well forwards on his way, and had his money and letters taken from
him, after being well beaten. Among his letters was one from Captain
Keeling to the next general, the loss of which gave us much concern; yet
we strongly suspected that our messenger had been robbed by his own
consent, and had lost nothing but his honesty. A broker of Nassapore
told Mr Needham, that our dispatches had been sold to the Portuguese,
and when the governor heard of this, he hung down his head, as guilty.
We here sold some goods to merchants of Nassapore.

Mr Woolman died on the 17th of August. We could not procure payment of
our promised money, and were told by our broker, that some one of our
debtors would procure a respite from the governor, by means of a bribe,
on which the rest would refuse till they all paid. On the 24th, the
Zamorin's sister sent us word, that she would both cause our debtors to
pay us, and to lend us any money we needed; but we found her as false as
the rest The queen mother also made us fair promises, and several others
made offers to get letters conveyed for us to Surat; but all their words
were equally false. Thus wronged, Mr Needham farther wronged himself by
his indiscretion, threatening, in presence of a nayre who attended us,
and who revealed his threats, that he would go to the king of Cochin,
making shew of violent revenge to put the governor in fear. He behaved
outrageously likewise to a _scrivano_,[181] who is the same as a justice
with us, taking him by the throat, and making as if he would have cut
him down with his sword, for detaining some of our money which he had
received. Our broker also told Mr Needham, that it was not becoming to
go up and down the streets with a sword and buckler; and indeed his
whole conduct and behaviour more resembled those we call
_roaring-boys_,[182] than what became the character of a merchant. For
my admonitions, he requited me with ill language, disgracing himself and
injuring the affairs of the company.

[Footnote 181: This term is obviously Portuguese, and cannot be the
proper appellation for a judge on the Malabar coast.--E.]

[Footnote 182: This character is now only to be met with in some of our
old plays such as Captain Bobadil in Every Man in his Humour.--E.]

A Dutch ship, which had been trading in the Red Sea, arrived here on the
23d of September, with the intention of settling a factory, and they
were referred by the governor to the Zamorin, promising to carry a
letter for us, but went without it; so that our delays continued. Mr
Needham went himself to the Zamorin on the 4th November, and returned on
the 25th, having got a present of a gold chain, a jewel, and a gold
armlet, with orders also from the king to further our purposes; but the
performance was as slow as before. The 20th December, a Malabar captain
brought in a prize he had taken from the Portuguese, and would have
traded with us; but we could not get in any of our money, due long
before. We also heard that day of four English ships being at Surat. The
governor and people continued their wonted perfidiousness; the former
being more careful in taking, and the latter in giving bribes, than in
paying our debts. We used a strange contrivance of policy to get in some
of these; for, when we went to their houses, demanding payment, and
could get none, we threatened not to leave their house till they paid
us. We had heard it reported, that, according to their customs, they
could neither eat nor wash while we were in their houses; and by this
device we sometimes got fifty _fanos_ from one, and an hundred from
another. They would on no account permit us to sleep in their houses,
except one person, with whom we remained three days and nights, with
three or four nayres. They were paid for watching him, but we got
nothing. The nayre, who had been appointed by the king to gather in our
debts, came to demand a gratuity from us, though he had not recovered
any of our money. He would go to the debtor's houses, taking three or
four _fanos_, and then depart without any of our money.

On the 9th of January, 1616, Mr Needham went to demand payment of a
debt, and being refused permission to pass by a nayre who struck him, as
he says, he gave the nayre a dangerous wound in the head with his sword,
of which it is thought he cannot recover, and others of the natives were
hurt in the fray. Word was presently brought to us to shut up our doors,
lest the nayres should assemble to do us some mischief, as feuds or
kindred-quarrels and murders are common among them, having no other law
or means of vengeance. Our nayre with his kindred, to the number of
thirty or more, with pikes, swords, and bucklers, guarded Mr Needham
home, on which occasion we had to give a gratuity. Our house had to be
guarded for three or four days and nights, none of us daring to go out
into the streets for money or other business for a week, though before
we used to go about in safety. After that, our broker advised us never
to go out, unless attended by a nayre, as they had sworn to put one of
us to death, in revenge for him who was slain.

The 20th, the Portuguese armado of thirty-four sail, passed by from the
south, of which fourteen were ships, and the rest frigates or grabs.
They put into the harbour, in which three Malabar frigates lay at
anchor, and a hot fight ensued, in which the Portuguese were forced to
retreat with disgrace, having only cut the hawser of one of the
frigates, which drove on shore and was stove in pieces. This belonged to
the governor, who was well served, for he remained like a coward in the
country, keeping four or five great guns that were in the town locked
up, except one, and for it they had only powder and shot for two
discharges. Before the fight ended, some 4000 nayres were come in from
the country, and several were slain on both sides. Nine or ten
Portuguese were driven ashore, and two or three of the chiefs of these
were immediately hung up by the heels, and being taken down after two
days, were thrown to be devoured by wild beasts.

On the 28th of January, we were told by a Pattemar, that the governor
was only our friend outwardly, wishing rather to have the Portuguese in
our room, as we did no good in the country, bringing only goods to sell,
whereas the Portuguese did good by making purchases. The 8th of February
we had letters from Surat; and on the 4th of March, the Zamorin wrote to
us, that if our ships came, he wished them to come to Paniany, and that
we need not be anxious for our money, as he would pay us, even if he
were forced to sell his rings.

SECTION VI.

_Journal of Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador from King James I, to Shah
Jehanguiro, Mogul Emperor of Hindoostan_.[183]

INTRODUCTION.

There are two editions of this journal in our older Collections of
Voyages and Travels, but both exceeding defective and imperfect. The
_first_ of these is in the Pilgrims of Purchas, which is said to have
been "_Collected out_ of the Journal of Sir Thomas Roe, Knight, Lord
Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Britain, to the Great Mogul." It is
evidently to be considered as an _abridgement_ made by Purchas, which,
indeed, he fully acknowledges in a postscript, in the following
terms:--"Some readers may perhaps wish they had the whole journal, and
not thus contracted into _extracts_ of those things out of it which I
conceived more fit for the public. And for the whole, myself would have
wished it; but neither with the honourable Company, nor elsewhere, could
I learn of it, the worthy knight himself being now employed in like
honourable embassage from his majesty to the _Great Turk_." Besides that
it is a mere abridgement, often most confusedly, and almost
unintelligibly tacked together, this article in The Pilgrims breaks off
abruptly in a most interesting part of the narrative, which we have now
no means to supply. The full title of this article in The Pilgrims is as
follows:--"Observations collected out of the Journal of Sir Thomas Roe,
Knight, Lord Ambassador from his Majesty the King of Great Britain, to
the Great Mogul. Consisting of Occurrences worthy of Memory, in the way,
and at the Court of the Mogul; together with an Account of his Customs,
Cities, Countries, Subjects, and other Circumstances relating to India."

[Footnote 183: Purch. Pilgr. I. 535. Churchill's Collect. I. 617.]

The _other_ edition of this journal is in the collection published by
the Churchills, of which we quote from the third edition of 1744,
reprinted by Lintot and Osburn, booksellers in London. Of this edition
the editor of that collection gives the following account:--"Sir Thomas
Roe has before appeared in print, in part at least, in the collection of
Purchas, since translated into French, and published in the first volume
of the collection by Thevenot. He now comes again abroad with
considerable additions, not foisted in, but taken from his own original
manuscript, of which it would appear that Purchas only had an imperfect
copy. These additions, it is true, are not great in bulk, but they are
valuable for the subject; and several matters, which in the other
collection are brought in abruptly, are here continued in a more
methodical manner."

After an attentive comparison of these two former editions, it obviously
appears that the edition by Purchas, in 1625, is in general more
circumstantial and more satisfactory than that of Churchill, in 1744,
notwithstanding its superior pretensions, as above stated. Yet, on
several occasions, the edition in Churchill gives a more intelligible
account of particulars, and has enabled us, on these occasions, to
restore what Purchas, by careless abbreviation, had left an obscure and
almost unintelligible jumble of words. The present edition, therefore,
is formed upon a careful collation of these two former, supplying from
each what was defective in the other. On the present occasion, the
nautical and other observations made by Sir Thomas Roe during the voyage
from England to Surat, are omitted, having been already inserted into
the account of that voyage by Captain Peyton.

It were much to be desired that this first account of the political
intercourse between Britain and Hindoostan could have been given at full
length, more especially as that extensive, rich, populous, and fertile
country is now almost entirely reduced under the dominion of the British
crown; and as Sir Thomas Roe, even in the garbled state in which we are
forced to present his observations, clearly shews the inherent vices of
the Mogul government, through which it so rapidly fell into anarchy, and
was torn in pieces by its own cumbrous and ill-managed strength. Perhaps
the archives of the East India Company are still able to supply this
deficiency in the history of its original establishment; and it were
surely worthy of the more than princely grandeur of that great
commercial company, to patronise the publication of a collection of the
voyages, travels, negotiations, and events which have conduced to raise
it to a degree of splendour unexampled in the history of the world. The
importance of this first embassy from Great Britain to the Great Mogul,
and the vast consequences, both commercial and political, which have
since arisen from that early intercourse, have induced us to give the
following additional information respecting the mission of Sir Thomas
Roe, from the Annals of the East India Company, vol. I. p. 174, _et
sequ._, which will in some measure supply the defects in this journal,
as published by Purchas and Churchill.--E.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The information which the Court [of Committees or Directors of the
East India Company] had received, in the preceding season, [1613-14]
induced them to apply to the king to grant his royal authority that an
ambassador should proceed in his name to the Great Mogul. King James, in
compliance with the wishes of the Company, on the 14th January, 1614-15,
granted his commission to the celebrated Sir Thomas Roe, "to be
ambassador to the Great Mogul, or king of India," the company agreeing
to defray the expence, in consideration, that, under their exclusive
privileges, they were to acquire such benefits as might result from this
mission.

"Sir Thomas Roe sailed from England in March 1615, on board the Lion,
Captain Newport, and arrived at Surat, whence he proceeded to the
Mogul's court at Agimere, which he reached in December, 1615; and on the
10th January, 1616, was presented to the Mogul as ambassador from the
king of England, when he delivered the king's letter and presents. Of
these, an English coach was the chief article, and with it the Mogul was
pleased to express his satisfaction, and to give the ambassador a
gracious reception. From the company's agents having already been too
profuse in their presents to the ministers and favourites, Sir Thomas
found that the articles which he carried out as presents were not so
highly estimated as he expected; he therefore informed the court that
nothing less than valuable jewels would be deemed worthy of acceptance;
and at the same time he advised that 'four or five cases of red wine'
should be sent as presents to the king and prince, as, in his own words,
'never were men more enamoured of that drinke as these two, and which
they would more highly esteem than all the jewels in Chepeside.'

"In describing his own situation, he stated that the natives could not
comprehend what was meant in Europe by the rank or quality of an
ambassador, and that in future it would be preferable to employ an agent
only, who could bear these affronts without dishonour, which an
ambassador, from, his rank, could not encounter. He complains also,
that, from want of an interpreter, he had experienced much difficulty in
explaining to the Mogul, and to his ministers, the object of his
mission; in particular, the grievances which the English had suffered
from the governor of Ahmedabad, because the native brokers, whom he was
obliged to employ, were afraid to interpret literally, lest they should
either incur the king's displeasure, or be disgraced by his ministers.
In his application for redress from the governor of Ahmedabad, he
discovered that this officer was supported by sultan Churrum, the
Mogul's eldest-son,[184] and Asaph Khan, the favourite. By perseverance
and firmness, however, the ambassador at length obtained the relief he
solicited.

[Footnote 184: Sultan Chesuro appears to have been the eldest son of
Jehanguire, but held in confinement for having endeavoured to supplant
his father in the succession, and Churrum seems only to have been the
third son.--E.]

"On the 24th January, 1616, Sir Thomas had a second audience of the
Mogul, at which he complained of the injuries the English had sustained
from the arbitrary conduct of the governor of Surat, and so effectual
were his remonstrances, that this officer was dismissed. The ambassador
then proposed to renew the articles of the _phirmaund_, or treaty
between the Mogul and the English nation, and solicited to have the
treaty ratified by the signatures[185] of the Mogul and Sultan Churrum,
which being procured, the treaty was concluded.[186]

[Footnote 185: This expression is rather ambiguous, as the ratifications
of such papers in India were by the seals of the princes, and not what
we understand by the term used in the text--E.]

[Footnote 186: It has not been thought necessary to insert the substance
of this treaty as contained in the Annals, as it is given in the
Journal.--E.] "The dispatches of Sir Thomas, of this year, concluded
with recommending to the company, as a commercial speculation, to send
out annually a large assortment of all kinds of toys, which would find a
ready sale at the great festival of _Noroose_, [the new year] in the
month of March.

"In 1616 we discover a jealousy in the factory at Surat, of Sir Thomas
Roe, notwithstanding his efforts and success in obtaining phirmaunds
from the Mogul favourable to the factories at Surat and Ahmedabad, and
in general for the encouragement of English trade in the Mogul
dominions; for the factors represented to the court that a merchant or
agent would be better qualified for a commercial negociator than a
king's ambassador; and, in support of this opinion, referred to the
practice of the king of Spain, who on no occasion would send an
ambassador, but always a commercial agent; and stated that Sir Thomas
Roe, besides, considered himself to be vested with the exercise of a
controlling power over the commercial speculations of the Surat factory,
and held himself to be better qualified to judge of the English
interests by combining the political relations which he wished to
introduce between the Mogul and the king of England, than by forwarding
any projects for trade which the factory might devise as applicable to
the Mogul dominions.

"In this year he reported that he had returned thanks to Sultan Churrum
for the protection which he had afforded to the English in relieving
them from the extortions of Zulfeccar Khan, the late governor of Surat,
and had remonstrated against the partiality which had been shown to the
Portuguese; representing to the Mogul that the king of Portugal had
assumed the title of king of India, and that the Portuguese trade could
never be so beneficial as that of England, as the English annually
exported from India calicoes and indigo to the amount of 50,000 rials.
To strengthen this remonstrance, Sir Thomas offered to pay to the sultan
12,000 rupees yearly, on condition that the English should be exempted
from the payment of customs at the port of Surat; and then gave it as
his opinion, that the plan of the agency at Surat, of keeping permanent
factories at Surat, and other parts of the Mogul dominions, ought to be
abandoned, as it would be preferable to make the purchases of goods
inland, by the natives, [particularly the indigo from Agra, and the
Bengal goods] who could obtain them at reasonable rates. But if the
court were of opinion that English factors ought to be stationed at
Agra, he recommended sending the goods in carts rather than on camels.
He concludes this part of his report by advising that agents should
reside at Cambay and Baroach, because the best cloths in India could be
procured at these towns.

"Though Sir Thomas Roe appears to have procured a phirmaund through the
means of Noor-Mahal, the favourite sultana or empress, for the general
good treatment of the English at Surat, and had desired that an
assortment of English goods, perfumes, &c. should be forwarded to him as
presents to her and to her brother, Asaph Khan, he yet describes, in
1618, the governor of Surat as reluctant to shew that favour to the
English which the phirmaund had enjoined. It therefore became a question
with him, as the governor of Surat would not allow the English to
strengthen or fortify their factory for the protection of their goods
and servants, whether it might not be expedient to remove to some other
station, where the means of self-defence might be more practicable. At
one time he thought of Goga, and subsequently of Scindy; but, after a
review of the whole, decided that it would be more expedient to remain
at Surat, though, from the character of the natives, and the instability
of the Mogul government, all grants of privileges must be considered as
temporary, and any agreement or capitulation which might be procured,
ought not to be depended on as permanent. He concludes, that, though a
general phirmaund for trade in the Mogul dominions had been obtained,
and of course a foundation laid for the English intercourse with the
rich provinces of Bengal, yet the attempt to enter on that trade would
be unwise, from being in the exclusive possession of the Portuguese.

"Sir Thomas Roe returned from the embassy to Surat in the spring of
1618-19, when it appears that the opposition in opinion between him and
the factors at that place had subsided, as the efforts of both were
united to establish a distinct system for the trade of the English at
Surat. It has been already stated that Sir Thomas Roe had procured a
phirmaund to the English from the Mogul, for the establishment of a
general trade in his extensive dominions, but that the relaxed situation
of the government, which always, under the administration of the Moguls,
preceded an expected succession to the throne, had rendered the governor
of Surat, at this juncture, less obsequious to the orders of his
sovereign than the absolute nature of the constitution would otherwise
have prescribed. Under these circumstances, and to improve upon the
general treaty already mentioned, Sir Thomas Roe made proposals to
Sultan Churrum to enter into an alliance for resisting the pretensions
of the Portuguese. After long discussions with that prince, this treaty
was concluded, and the following are its leading articles.

"That the governor of Surat should lend ships to the English, to be
employed in the defence of that port. The English, however, to be only
allowed to land ten armed men at one time; but the resident merchants to
be allowed to wear arms. That the English should be allowed to build a
house in the city, but distant from the castle.[187] That the governor
of Surat should receive the ambassador and his suite with marks of
honour. That the English should enjoy the free exercise of their
religion, and be governed by their own laws. That in any dispute between
the English and the natives; reference was to be made to the governor
and his officers, who should decide speedily and justly; but disputes
among themselves were to be decided by their own factory. That liberty
of trade was to be allowed the English, in its fullest extent, on
payment of the usual duties on landing the goods, from which pearls,
jewels, &c. were to be exempted. That freedom of speech was to be
allowed to the English linguists and brokers, in all matters regarding
the trade of their employers. And, lastly, That all presents intended
for the court were to be opened and examined at the customhouse of
Surat, and then sealed and given back to the English, and to pass
duty-free; but, in case these presents were not made, then these
articles were to become liable to pay duty.

[Footnote 187: Though not so expressed in the Annals, this appears to
have been a _fortified_ house; as, on an occasion, when Surat was taken
and plundered by an armed force belonging to Sevagee, the first
sovereign of the Mahrattas, the English were able to defend their
factory from injury.--E.]

"During his residence in India, Sir Thomas Roe had likewise used his
best endeavours to promote the trade of the English with the ports of
Persia, in which considerable opposition was experienced from the
Portuguese, who tried every expedient to engross the Persian trade to
themselves, and to exclude the English from any participation. In this
opposition Sir Robert Shirley had been implicated, who had gone to
Europe in 1615, on a mission from the king of Persia, to form a contract
with the king of Spain, then sovereign of Portugal, not only to sell to
his subjects the whole of the Persian silk, but to grant them licence to
fortify the sea-ports of Persia for the protection of their shipping and
factories. Mr Connock, the English agent in Persia, under these
circumstances, recommended the necessity of applying to king James, and
submitting to his consideration the danger of allowing the Portuguese to
enjoy the exclusive possession of that trade, which would render them
the most powerful European nation in the East Indies. In the mean time,
he represented to the king of Persia the necessity of seizing the island
of Ormus from the Portuguese, under the protection of which the Persian
dominions could be supplied by the English with all kinds of Indian
commodities.

"In this critical situation of the company's agents at Ispahan, an
ambassador arrived from the king of Spain, in June 1617, authorised to
adjust and settle the contract which Sir Robert Shirley had projected.
The English agent, in consequence, urged the factory at Surat to
dispatch the whole of the company's ships to Jasques for the defence of
that port, as the Portuguese fleet had rendezvoused at Muscat, and had
determined to blockade the passage into the Persian gulf against the
English trade. These events induced Sir Thomas Roe to grant a
commission, and to give instructions to the company's agent at Ispahan,
authorising him to treat with the king of Persia, in the name of the
king of England.

"In 1618, Captain Shillings, of the company's ship Ann, went to Mokha,
and obtained a phirmaund from the governor, by which the English were
allowed free trade, and protection to their persons and property, on
condition of paying three per cent. on merchandize, and three per cent.
on the prices of all goods exported by them from Mokha. On receiving
information of this event, Sir Thomas Roe addressed a letter to the
governor of Mokha, requesting that these privileges might be confirmed
by the Grand Signior, and promising, on the part of the English, that
all kinds of European goods should be regularly brought to Mokha, and
that the English should defend that port against all enemies, and
particularly against the Portuguese.

"This appears to have been the last transaction of Sir Thomas Roe in the
East Indies. In his voyage home he touched at Saldanha bay [Table bay]
in May, 1619, where he met, and held a conference with the Dutch admiral
Hoffman, who commanded the outward-bound fleet from Holland of that
season. From this officer he learned that the respective governments in
Europe, alarmed at the commercial jealousies and animosities between
their subjects in the East Indies, had appointed commissioners to take
that subject into consideration. It was therefore, with a becoming sense
of duty, agreed between them that each should address a letter to the
chiefs of their respective factories in India, recommending to them to
abstain from any opposition or violence against each other, till each
had received specific instructions from their superiors, or should be
informed of the result of the conferences between the commissioners of
the two nations in Europe."

Sec.1. _Journey from Surat to the Court of the Mogul, and Entertainment
there, with some Account of the Customs of the Country_.

I landed at Surat on the 26th September, 1615, and was received in an
open tent by the chief officers of the town, well attended. On this
occasion I was accompanied by the general, and principal merchants,
Captain Harris being sent to make me a court of guard with an hundred
shot, and the ships, all dressed out to the best advantage, saluted me
with their ordnance as I passed. There was much controversy about
searching my servants, but at length they passed free to the city, where
we had a house provided for us. We continued there to the 30th October,
suffering much vexation from the governor, who forcibly caused search
many of our chests and trunks, taking away what he thought fit.

The 30th October I departed from Surat, and that day travelled only four
coss to _Sumaria_.[188] The 1st November I went eleven miles to a
village. The 2d, to _Biarat_, twenty-one miles, where there is a castle,
this town being on the borders of the kingdom of Guzerat, subject to the
Mogul, and belonging to _Abraham Khan_. The 3d I entered the kingdom of
_Pardaff shah_,[189] a pagan lord of the hills, who is subject to
nobody; and at the end of fifteen miles we lodged in the fields, beside
a city of note, called _Mugher_. The 4th we travelled nine miles by a
rocky way, and lay in the fields, beside a village called Narampore. The
5th, fifteen miles, and lay in the fields. The 6th, twenty miles, to a
city called _Nundabar_, in the kingdom of _Brampore_, [Burhanpoor] which
is subject to the Mogul. At this place we first procured bread, after
leaving Surat, as the Banians, who inhabit all the country through which
we had travelled, make only cakes instead of bread. The country
peculiarly abounds in cattle, as the Banians never kill any, neither do
they sell any for being slaughtered. One day I met at least 10,000
bullocks loaded with grain, in one drove, and most other days I saw
smaller parcels.

[Footnote 188: In this journal the names of places are exceedingly
corrupted, and often unintelligible. Such as admitted of being
corrected, from the excellent map of Hindoostan, by Arrowsmith, have
their proper names placed within brackets.--E.]

[Footnote 189: In the miserable map of Hindoostan, accompanying this
journal in the Pilgrims, this prince is called Partap-sha.--E.]

The 7th we went eighteen miles to _Ningull_. The 8th, fifteen to
_Sinchelly_, [Sindkera.] The 9th, other fifteen to _Tolmere_, [Talnere.]
And the 10th, eighteen to _Chapre_, [Choprah] where we pitched our tents
without the town, and the king's officers guarded us all night with
thirty horse and twenty shot, for fear of out being attacked by robbers
from the mountains, as I refused to remove into the town. The 11th we
travelled eighteen miles, eighteen on the 12th, and fifteen on the 13th,
which brought us to _Brampore_, [Burhanpoor] which I guessed to be 223
miles east from Surat.[190] The country is miserable and barren, the
towns and villages only built of mud. At _Bartharpore_,[191] a village
two miles short of Burhanpoor, I saw some of the Mogul ordnance, most of
which is too short, and too open in the bore. On coming to Burhanpoor,
the _cutwall_ met me, well attended, having sixteen stand of colours
carried before him, and conducted me to a _serai_ appointed for my
lodging. He took leave of me at the gate, which had a handsome stone
front; but, when in, I had four chambers allotted for me, no bigger than
ovens, with vaulted roofs and bare brick walls, so that I chose to lodge
in my tent. I sent word to the cutwall, threatening to leave the town,
as I scorned such mean usage, but he desired me to be content till
morning, as this was the best lodging in the city, which I afterwards
found to be the case, as it consists entirely of mud cottages, excepting
the houses inhabited by _Sultan Parvis_, the Mogul's second son, that of
_Khan Khanan_, and a few others. Sultan Parvis here represents the king
his father, living in great state and magnificence, but Khan Khanan, who
is the greatest subject of the empire, is at the head of a large army,
in which are 40,000 horse, and governs every thing, the prince only
having the name and pomp allowed him.

[Footnote 190: The particulars of the journey in the text amount to 214
miles.--E.]

[Footnote 191: Perhaps Babaderpore, but it is twelve or fifteen miles
short of Burhanpoor.--E.]

On the 18th, both to satisfy the prince who desired it, and whom I was
not willing to displease, and to see the fashions of the court, and
because it was proposed to establish a factory here, where sword-blades
were in great request for the army, and sold well, I went to visit the
prince, to whom, I carried a present. I was conducted by the cutwall,
and in the outer court of the palace I found about an hundred horsemen
under arms, who formed a line on each side, being all gentlemen waiting
to salute the prince on his coming forth. In the inner court the prince
sat in a high gallery encircling the court, having a canopy over head,
and a carpet spread before him, appearing in much, yet barbarous state.
Going towards him through a lane of people, an officer came and told me
that I must touch the ground with my head, and with my hat off. I
answered, that I came to do the prince honour by visiting him, and was
not to be subjected to the custom of slaves. So I walked on till I came
to a place railed in, just under where he sat, where there was an ascent
of three steps; and having there made him a reverence, to which he
answered by bending his body, I went within the rails, where stood all
the great men then in the town, holding their hands before them like
slaves. This place, as mentioned before, was covered over head by a rich
canopy, and all the floor was spread with carpets. It resembled a large
stage, and the prince sat on high, like a mock king in a theatre.

On entering, as I had no place assigned me, I went right forwards, and
stood before him at the bottom of the three steps, on which stood his
secretary, readily to convey to him any thing that is said or given. I
told him that I was ambassador from the king of England to his father;
and, while passing his residence, I could not but in honour visit his
highness. He answered that I was welcome, and asked me many questions
about the king my master, to which I gave fit answers. While standing in
that manner at the foot of the steps, I asked leave to come up and stand
beside him; but he said, even if the king of Persia, or Grand Turk, were
there, such a thing could not be allowed. To this I replied, that I must
be excused for believing he would, in such a case, come down and meet
them at his gate; and that I required no higher privilege than was
allowed to the ambassadors of these sovereigns, with whom I considered
myself entirely equal. He declared I should have that privilege in all
things. I then demanded to have a chair, to which it was answered, that
no person was ever allowed to sit in that place, but I was desired to
lean against a pillar covered over with silver, which supported the
canopy. I then requested his favour for an English factory to be
established at Burhanpoor, which readily granted, and gave immediate
orders to the _Buksh_ to draw up a _firmaun_, license, for their coming
and residence. I also requested an order for carriages for conveying the
presents for the king his father, which he gave in charge to the cutwall
to see provided. I then made him a present, which he took in good part.
After some other conference, he said, though I might not come up to
where he then sat, he would go to another place, where I might come to
him with less ceremony. But one part of the present I made him happened
to be a case of cordials, of which he tasted so freely by the way, that,
after waiting some time, I heard he had made himself drunk, and one of
his officers came to me with an excuse, desiring me to go home then, and
come some other time to see him. But that very night I was taken ill of
a fever.

The 27th of November, though, still sick, I was carried, from Burhanpoor
three coss to _Raypora_; the 28th, fifteen c. to _Burgome_, [Burgaw];
the 30th, seven c. December the 1st, ten c. to _Bicangome_; the 2d,
seven c. the 3d, five c. the 4th, eleven c. to _Ekbarpoor_, which stands
on a good river, [the Nerbudda] which runs into the sea near _Buroach_.
The 5th, I passed the river _Nerbuddah_. The 6th, I travelled eight c.
and lay in a wood, not far from the king's famous castle of _Mandoa_,
[Mundu] which stands on a steep hill, of great extent, the walls being
fourteen c. in circuit, this castle being of wonderous extent and great
beauty. The 7th, I proceeded ten c. the 8th, eight c. the 9th, ten c.
the 10th, twelve c. the 11th, sixteen c. the 12th, fourteen c. the 13th,
six c. the 14th we halted to take rest. The 15th, six c. the 16th, six
c. the 17th, twelve c. the 18th, five c. when we arrived at _Cytor_,
where I was met by Mr Edwards accompanied by Thomas Coryat, who had
travelled to India on foot.

_Cytor_, [Chitore] is an ancient town in ruins, situated on a hill, but
shews the remains of wonderful magnificence. There are still standing
above an hundred temples, all of carved stone, with many fair towers and
domes, supported by many enriched pillars, and innumerable houses, but
not a single inhabitant. The hill, or rock rather, is precipitous on all
sides, having but one ascent cut out of the rock in a regular slope; in
which ascent there are four several gates before reaching the gate of
the city, which last is extremely magnificent. The top of the hill,
about eight coss in circuit, is inclosed all round with walls, and at
the S.W. end, is a goodly old castle. I lodged close by a poor village
at the foot of the hill.

This city stands in the country of the _Rama_,[192] a prince newly
subdued by the Mogul, or rather brought to submit to pay tribute and
acknowledge subjection; and _Cytor_ was reduced by _Akbar Shah_, the
father of _Shah Jehan-Guire_, the present king of the Moguls. This
Hindoo raja is lineally descended from _Porus_, the valiant Indian
sovereign who was conquered by Alexander the Great; so that I suppose
this city to have been one of the ancient seats of Porus, though Delly,
much farther north, is reported to have been the chiefest, a famous
place, though now only in ruins. Near that stands a pillar erected by
Alexander the Conqueror, with a Greek inscription. The present Mogul and
his ancestors, descendants of Tamerlane, have reduced all the ancient
cities to ruin, dispeopling them and forbidding their restoration; I
know not wherefore, unless that they would have no monuments of
greatness remain, beyond their own commencement, as if they and the
world were co-equals in antiquity.

[Footnote 192: This is probably an error of the press in the Pilgrims
for the _Ranna_.--E.]

The 19th I proceeded twelve c. on my journey; the 20th ten c. the 21st
ten c. the 22d nine c. the 23d ten c. and arrived at _Ajimere_. The
first six days journeys from Burhanpoor towards Ajimere were west, or
northwest, to get round the hills; but after that northwards, so that
these two places bear nearly N. by W. and S. by E. from each other: the
whole distance being 209 cosses,[193] which I judge to be 418 English
miles; the cosses here being longer than near the sea.[194] On my
arrival at Ajimere I was so ill as to keep my bed; but on the 10th
January, 1616, at four in the afternoon, I went to the _Durbar_, which
is the place where the Mogul sits in public daily to entertain
strangers, to receive petitions and presents, to issue commands, and to
see and be seen. Before proceeding to give an account of my reception,
it may be proper to digress a little, that I may give some account of
the customs of the court.

[Footnote 193: The particulars in the text only amount to 200 cosses;
but the extent of one day's journey is omitted, which may explain the
difference.--E.]

[Footnote 194: The coss at Surat is repeatedly explained, in Purchas and
Churchill, to be 1-1/2 English mile, while that of Hindoostan Proper is
rated at two miles.--E.]

No men, except eunuchs, are permitted to come within the private
lodgings or retiring rooms of the royal palace, within which his women
keep guard with warlike weapons, and there likewise they execute justice
upon each other for offences. Every morning, the Mogul comes to a
window, called the _jarneo_,[195] which looks into the plain or open
space before the palace-gate, where he shews himself to the common
people. At noon he returns to the same place, where he sits some hours,
amusing himself with seeing fights of elephants and other wild beasts,
the men of rank then at court attending below within a railed space. He
then retires to sleep within the female apartments. In the afternoon he
comes to the before-mentioned Durbar. At eight in the evening, after
supper, he comes down to a fair court, called the _guzalcan_, in the
midst of which is a throne of freestone, on which he sits, yet
sometimes below in a chair of state, at which time only men of high
quality are admitted into the presence, and even of these only a few
have that privilege, unless by special leave. He here discourses very
affably on all subjects with those around him. No business is transacted
with him, concerning affairs of state and government, or respecting war
and peace, but at one or other of these two last-mentioned places,
where, after being publicly propounded and resolved upon, it is
registered by attendant secretaries, and any one, who has the curiosity,
may see the register for two shillings; insomuch that the common people
know as much of the affairs of state as the ministers and counsellors of
the king, and every day the king's acts and resolutions are circulated
as news, and are freely canvassed and censured by every rascal. This
course of proceeding is unchangeable, except when prevented by the
sickness of the king, or in consequence of his getting drunk, which must
always be known. Thus, though all his subjects are slaves, he lives in a
state of reciprocal bondage, being so tied to the observance of these
hours and customs, that if he were unseen one day, and no sufficient
excuse given, the people would mutiny; and no excuse will sanction his
absence for two days, unless the gates are opened, and he be seen by
some for the satisfaction of the rest. Every Tuesday, he sits in
judgement at the _jarneo_,[196] where he attends to the complaints of
his meanest subjects, listening patiently to both parties; and where
likewise he sometimes sees, with too much delight in blood, execution
performed on offenders by his elephants. _Illi meruere, sed quid tu ut
adesses_?

[Footnote 195: in subsequent passages, this is called the Jarruco.--E.]

Before going to the durbar, I had required to be allowed the customs of
my own country, which were freely granted. At the durbar, I was led
directly before the king, at the entrance of an outer rail, where two
noble slaves came to conduct me nearer. On entering the outer rail, I
made a profound reverence, at my entry within an interior rail I made a
second reverence, and a third when I came directly under where the king
sat. The place in which the durbar is held is a great court, to which
all sorts of people resort. The king sits in a small raised gallery;
ambassadors, great men belonging to the court, and strangers of quality,
are within the innermost rail directly under him, that space being
raised from the ground, covered overhead with canopies of silk and
velvet, and laid underfoot with good carpets. The meaner men,
representing what we would call gentry, are within the outer rail; the
common people being on the outside of all, in a base court, so that all
may see the king. The whole of this disposition hath much resemblance to
theatrical representation. The king sitting as in a gallery, the great
men raised as actors on a stage, and the vulgar below in a pit gazing at
the show. The king, on my presentation, interrupted the dull formality
of my interpreter, bidding me welcome to the brother of the king my
master. I then delivered a translation of the king's letter, and then my
commission, on both of which he looked curiously; and afterwards on my
presents, which were well received. He asked some questions; and, with a
seeming regard for my health, offered to send me his own physicians,
advising me to keep the house till I recovered strength, and that I
should freely send to him in the meantime for any thing I needed, with
assurance that I should have whatever I desired. He dismissed me with
more signs of grace and favour, if I were not flattered by the
Christians, than ever were shewn to any ambassador from the Turks or
Persians or any other nation.

[Footnote 196: This place, formerly described as a window looking to the
esplanade in front of the palace, called _jarneo_ in Purchas, is called
_jarruco_ in Churchill.--E.]

On the 14th I sent to offer a visit to Sultan _Churrum_,[197] the third
son of the Great Mogul, but first in favour. Hearing that he was an
enemy to all Christians, I therefore feared some affront; yet he sent me
word that I should be received with all due respect, and should have as
much content as I had already from his father. This prince is lord of
Surat, our chief residence in the empire, and his favour, therefore, was
important for our affairs. I went accordingly to visit him on the 22d at
nine in the morning, at which time he sits in public, in the same manner
as his father, to dispatch his business, and to be seen of his
followers. His character was represented to me as naturally proud, so
that I was in some fear for my reception; but, on hearing of my arrival,
instead of coming out to his public durbar, he sent one of his principal
officers to conduct me into a good inner room, never before done to any
one. The officer here entertained me with discourse concerning my
mission for half an hour, till the prince was ready; who now came forth
and used me better than his promise. I delivered him a present, but not
in the name of his majesty, as it was too mean for that purpose; but
excused the omission, by saying, That my sovereign could not know of his
being lord of Surat, which had been so lately conferred upon him; but I
had no doubt the king of England would afterwards send him one more
suited to his high rank, the one now presented being only sent by the
English merchants, who humbly commended themselves to his favour and
protection. He received all in very good part. After stating some
grievances and injuries suffered by the English at Surat, from his
governors, and of which I had forborne to complain to the king from
respect to him, he promised me speedy and effectual justice, and to
confirm our security in any way I might propose. He professed to be
entirely ignorant of any past transactions there, as stated by me,
except as informed by Asaph Khan; and especially denied having given any
order for our dismissal, which the governor had falsely alleged, and for
which he should dearly pay. He then dismissed me, full of hopes to have
our decayed state and reputation rectified, making me a promise of an
effectual firmaun for our trade and secure residence at Surat.

[Footnote 197: In the Pilgrims, this prince is uniformly named Corone;
but the name in the text has been adopted from the authority of Dow's
History of Hindoostan. He succeeded to his father in 1627, when he
assumed the name of Shah Jehan; and was, in 1659, dethroned and
imprisoned, by his third son, the celebrated Aurungzebe, who assumed the
name of Alumguire.--E.]

The 24th, I went again to the royal durbar to visit the king; who, on
seeing me far off, beckoned with his hand, that I should not wait the
ceremony of asking leave, but come up to him directly, and assigned me a
place near himself, above all other men, which I afterwards thought fit
to maintain. On this occasion I gave a small present; as it is the
custom for all who have any business to give something, and those who
cannot get near enough to speak, send in or hold up their gift, which he
always accepts, be it only a rupee, and demands to know their business.
He held the same course with me; for having looked curiously at my
present, and asked many questions respecting it, he demanded to know
what I wanted of him. I answered that I wanted justice. For, on the
assurance of his firmaun, which had been sent to England, the king my
master had not only given leave to his subjects to make a long and
dangerous voyage to his dominions with their goods, but had deputed me,
as his ambassador and representative, to congratulate and compliment his
majesty on the amity so happily commenced between two so mighty nations,
and to confirm the same. Yet I found that the English, who were settled
at Ahmedabad, were injured and oppressed by the governor in their
persons and goods, being fined, subjected to arbitrary exactions, and
kept as prisoners; while at every town new customs were demanded for
their goods on their passage to the port, contrary to all justice, and
in direct contravention of the formerly conceded articles of trade, as
contained in his majesty's firmaun. To this he answered, that he was
sorry to hear of such things, which should be immediately rectified; and
he gave orders for two firmauns to be immediately extended according to
my desire. By one of these, the governor of Ahmedabad was commanded to
restore the money he had exacted from Mr Kerridge, and to use the
English in future with all favour. By the other, all customs required on
any pretence by the way were abolished, and all such as had been taken
was ordered to be restored. Finally, he desired me, if these gave not
speedy and effectual remedy, that I should renew my complaint against
the disobeyer, who should be sent for to answer for his conduct; and so
dismissed me.

The 1st of March, I rode out to see a pleasure-house belonging to the
king, two miles from Agimere, which had been given him by Asaph Khan. It
was situated between two vast rocks, by which it was so sheltered that
scarcely could the sun be any where seen. The foundations and some rooms
were hewn out of the solid rock, the rest being built of freestone.
Close adjoining was a handsome small garden, with fine fountains, with
two great _tanks_ or ponds of water, one being thirty steps higher than
the other. The way to this retreat is so narrow that only two persons
could go abreast, and is almost inaccessible, being very steep and
stony. It is a place of much melancholy, yet of great security and
delight, abounding in peacocks, turtle-doves, wild fowl, and monkies,
which inhabit the rocks impending on every side around.

The 2d of March began the feast of _Norsose_ in the evening. This is the
festival of the new year, the ceremonies of which begin on the first new
moon after, which this year fell together. It is kept in imitation of
the Persian feast of that cause, signifying in that language _nine
days_, as anciently it continued only for that number; but these are now
doubled. On this occasion, a throne is erected about four feet high in
the _durbar court_; from the back of which, to the place where the king
comes out from the inner apartments, a space of fifty-six paces long by
forty-three broad is railed in, and covered over by _semianes_, or
canopies, of cloth of gold, velvet, and rich silk, all joined over
head, and held up by canes covered with similar stuffs. At the upper or
west end, were set out the pictures of the king of England, the queen,
the Princess Elizabeth, the Countesses of Somerset and Salisbury, and of
a citizen's wife of London. Below, there was a picture of Sir Thomas
Smith, governor of the East India Company. The whole floor was laid with
rich Persian carpets of large size, and into this place come all the
great men to wait upon the king, except a few, who were within a smaller
railed space, right before the throne, appointed to receive his
commands. Within this square there were set out many small houses, one
of which was of silver, and other curiosities of value. On the left
side, Sultan Churrum had a pavilion, the supporters of which were
covered with silver, as were also some others of those near the king's
throne. This was of wood and of a square form, inlaid with mother of
pearl, resting on four pillars covered with cloth of gold; and overhead
was a fringed drapery like a vallence of network, all of real pearls,
whence hung down pomegranates, apples, and pears, and other fruits, all
of gold, but hollow. Within that pavilion, the king sat on cushions,
very rich in pearls and other jewels. All round the court before the
throne, the principal men had tents or pavilions, mostly lined with
velvet, damask, and taffety, and some few with cloth of gold, in which
they were stationed, making shew of their wealth. Anciently, the kings
used to go to every tent, taking away whatever pleased him best: But now
the custom is changed, as the king remains on his throne, and receives
there such new-year's-gifts as are brought to him. He makes his
appearance every day, and retires at the usual hours of the durbar; and
in the interval all sorts of great gifts are made to him, which are very
great and almost incredible, though not equal to report. At the close of
this feast, in recompence for these gifts, the king advances some of his
courtiers, making additions to their charges of horse, according to his
pleasure.

On the 12th[198] I went to visit the king, and was brought immediately
before him to deliver my present, which gave him much satisfaction. He
then appointed me to come within the rail, that I might stand beside
him; but not being allowed to step up on the raised platform on which
the throne was placed, I could see little, as the railing was high, and
covered with carpets. But I had permission to view the inner room at
leisure, which, I must confess, was very rich; but consisted of so many
articles, all unsuitable to each other, that it seemed patched work,
rather than magnificent, as if it aimed to shew all; as if a lady, among
her plate on a magnificent cupboard, should exhibit her embroidered
slippers. This evening, the son of the Raima, the new tributary formerly
mentioned, was brought before the king, with much ceremony, being sent
by his father with a present. After kneeling three times, and knocking
his forehead on the ground, he was brought within the inner rail, when
the king embraced his head. His gift was an Indian tray or voider full
of silver, upon which was a carved silver dish full of gold. He was then
conducted to pay his respects to the prince. This evening, some
elephants were shewn, and some music girls sang and danced.--_Sic
transit gloria mundi_.

[Footnote 198: It may be proper to observe, that Churchill's edition
gives the commencement of this festival on the 11th, and says Sir Thomas
went to the durbar next day.--E.]

The 13th at night, I went again to wait upon the king at the _Guzalcan_,
at which is the best opportunity for transacting business, and took with
me my Italian interpreter, determined to walk no longer in darkness, but
to prove the king, as I had hitherto been delayed and refused on all
hands. I was sent for in, along with my old broker, but my Italian was
kept out, because Asaph Khan mistrusted I might say more than he was
willing should come to the king's ears. On coming to the king, he
appointed me a place to stand just before him, and sent to ask me many
questions respecting the king of England, and about the present I had
made him the day before. To some of these I made answers; but I at
length said, that my interpreter was kept out, and as I could not speak
Portuguese, I wanted the means of satisfying his majesty. On this,
though much against the wish or Asaph Khan, my Italian interpreter was
called in. I then made him tell the king that I requested leave to speak
to him, to which he answered, willingly. On this, the son-in-law of
Asaph Khan pulled away my interpreter by force, and that faction so
hemmed in the king, by gathering round him, that I could scarcely see
his majesty, nor could my Italian approach. Upon this, I ordered the
Italian to speak aloud, that I craved audience of the king; who
immediately called me before him, and the others made way. Asaph Khan
stood on one side of my interpreter, and I on the other: I to inform him
what to say, and the other to awe him by winks and signs.

I desired him to say, that I had now been two months at court, one of
which I had spent in sickness and the other in compliments, and had
effected nothing of all on which I had been sent by the king my master;
which was to conclude a firm and lasting treaty of peace and amity
between the two sovereigns, and to establish a fair and secure trade and
residence for my countrymen in his majesty's dominions. He answered that
this was already granted. I replied, it was so; but that it still
depended upon so slender a thread, and such weak conditions, as to be
very uncertain in its continuance. That an affair of so high importance
required an agreement dear and explicit in all points, and a more formal
and authentic confirmation than it now had, by ordinary firmauns, which
were merely temporary commands, and respected accordingly. He asked me
what presents we would bring him? To which I answered, the league was
yet new and weak; that many curiosities were to be found in our country,
of rare value, which the king of England would send; and that our
merchants would search for such things in all parts of the world, if
they were made sure of a quiet trade and secure protection on honourable
conditions, having been hitherto subjected to manifold wrongs. He asked
me what kind of curiosities I meant, and whether these were jewels or
precious stones? To this I answered, that we did not deem such things
fit to be sent back from Europe to India, of which he was the principal
sovereign, as they were common here in India, and of much higher price
with us in Europe: But that we would endeavour to find such things for
his majesty as were rare and uncommon in his dominions; such as
excellent specimens of painting, carving, enamelling, figures in brass,
copper, and stone, rich embroideries, stuffs of gold and silver, and the
like.

The king said that these things were all very well, but that he wished
to have an English horse. I answered, that this was utterly impossible
by sea, and that the Turks would not allow of any being sent by land. In
reply, he said he thought it not impossible by sea; and, when I
represented the dangers from storms, he said if six were sent in one
ship, one of them surely might live, and though it came lean, it might
be here made fat. I then told him, I feared it could not be done by so
long a voyage; yet, for his majesty's satisfaction, I should give due
notice of his desire.

He then asked to know what were my demands? I answered, That his majesty
would be pleased to sanction by his royal signature, certain reasonable
conditions which I should propound, in confirmation of a league of
peace and amity, and for the security of our nation in their residence
and trade in his dominions; as they had hitherto been often wronged, and
could not continue on their present terms, of which I forbore to make
any specific complaint, because I hoped to procure amendment from his
majesty. At these words, Asaph Khan offered to pull away my interpreter,
but I held him fast, while Asaph Khan continued to make signs to him not
to interpret my words. On this the king became suddenly very angry,
pressing to know who had wronged us, and seemed in such fury, that I was
unwilling to follow it out, and spoke in broken Spanish to my
interpreter, desiring him to say, That I would not trouble his majesty
with what was past, but would seek justice of the prince his son, whose
favour I doubted not to obtain. Not attending to what my interpreter
said, but hearing the name of his son, the king mistakingly conceived I
accused him; and hastily saying _mio filio! mio filio_! he called for
the prince, who came in great fear, humbling himself. Asaph Khan
trembled, and all those present were amazed.

He chid the prince roundly, and he excused himself. But as I perceived
the king's error, I made both the king and prince understand the
mistake, by means of a Persian prince who offered himself as
interpreter, as my Italian understood Turkish better than Persian. By
this means I appeased the king, saying that I in no respect accused the
prince, but wished to inform his majesty that I should appeal to the
prince's justice, in regard to the past wrongs our nation had suffered
in those places which were under his government. The king then commanded
the prince, that he should give as effective justice. In his
justification, the prince said that he had already offered me a firmaun,
which I had refused. The king asked me the reason of this. To which I
answered, that I humbly thanked the prince, but he knew that it
contained a condition I could not accept; and besides, that I wished to
propound our own demands, in which I would insert all the desires of the
king my master at once, that I might not daily trouble his majesty and
the prince with complaints. And, when the conditions on both sides were
mutually agreed upon, I would reciprocally bind my sovereign, to mutual
offices of friendship, and to such reasonable conditions for the benefit
of his majesty's subjects as he might propose: All of which being drawn
up in tripartite, I hoped his majesty would graciously sign one, his son
the prince another, and I would confirm the third in the name of my
sovereign, in virtue of my commission.

The king pressed to know what was the condition in the prince's firmaun
which I had refused, which I stated. So we fell into earnest dispute
before the king, with some heat. Mukrob Khan interposed, saying he was
advocate for the Portuguese, and spoke slightingly of us, alleging that
the king ought to grant no articles to us that were unfavourable for
them. I answered, that I did not propose any against them, but only in
our own just defence, and that I had not conceived he was so great a
friend to the Portuguese. On this the jesuit and all the Portuguese
faction struck in, so that I explained myself fully concerning them; and
as I offered a conditional peace, so I valued the friendship of the
Portuguese at a very low rate, and their enmity at a still lower. After
some time, having explained my demands, the king said my proposals were
just and my resolution noble, and bade me clearly propound the
conditions I desired. Asaph Khan, who had stood silent during all this
debate, and who now wished to end it, as we were warm, now interposed,
saying, If we talked all night, it could only come to this at last, that
I should draw my demands in writing and present them; which, if found
reasonable, would be granted by the king. The king said he certainly
would do so; and at my request the prince engaged to do so likewise. The
king then rose to go away, but on my request he turned round, and I
desired my interpreter to say, That I came the day before to see his
majesty and his greatness, and the ceremonies of the feast, on which
occasion I was placed behind him, in an honourable place certainly, but
where I could not see around; and therefore humbly requested his majesty
would be pleased to let me stand on the platform beside his throne. In
answer to this, he commanded Asaph Khan to let me choose my own place in
future.

In the morning of the 14th, I sent a messenger to Asaph Khan, lest he or
the prince might have misunderstood me, by reason of the king's mistake,
and had supposed I had complained against either of them, which I did
not, neither did I so intend; yet I was willing to let them see that I
did not entirely depend upon Asaph Khan, by whom I had hitherto done my
business with the king; but, if he should continue his manner of only
delivering to the king what he himself pleased, and not what I said, I
would find another way. My message was intended to clear up any such
doubts, if they remained, and to entreat he would move the prince to
favour my demands respecting our residence and trade at Surat. His
answer was, that neither the prince nor he had any reason to suspect I
intended to complain against them, the error being sufficiently obvious;
and that, for his part, he had ever been disposed to favour the English,
and would so continue.

The 15th I went again in the evening to see the ceremonies of the
_Norose_; and according to the Mogul's order, I chose my place of
standing on his right hand, and on the raised platform, the prince and
the son of the Ranna standing on the other side. I here had a full view
of every thing that was to be seen; viz. the presents, and the
exhibition of the elephants, horses, and dancing girls.

The 23d, the Mogul condemned one of his own nation on suspicion of
felony; but as he was one of the handsomest men in India, and the proof
was not very clear against him, instead of condemning him to death, he
sent him in irons to me as a slave, to be disposed of as I pleased. This
was looked upon as a great favour, and I accordingly returned thanks;
yet added, that we had no slaves in England, not thinking it lawful to
make the image of God like unto a beast, but that I should employ him as
a servant, and should restore him to liberty if he behaved well. The
king was well pleased with this message.

I went to the _Guzalcan_ on the 26th, and it delivered in the articles
which I had drawn up, which were referred to Asaph Khan for his
consideration and report. Some time after, Asaph Khan sent a message,
desiring me to remove from the place I occupied near the king, because I
stood alone, which was not the custom. I refused at the first; but, as
he still insisted I should rank myself among the nobles, I removed to
the other side, where the prince and young Ranna were. This still more
displeased Asaph Khan, who persuaded the prince to complain of me to the
king, which he did. On hearing their complaint and my answer, that I had
changed my place by order of Asaph Khan, the Mogul said I had done well,
and they were wrong to pretend to displace me. So I kept my place in
quiet. The following is the substance of the articles delivered to the
Great Mogul, which were delayed and opposed: But the conclusion
respecting them will be seen hereafter.

_Proposed Articles of Treaty, between the Great Mogul and the King of
Great Britain_.

1. There shall be perpetual peace and amity between the king of Great
Britain and his majesty the emperor of India.--2. The subjects of
England shall have free trade in all the ports of India.--3. The
governors of all sea ports shall make public proclamation of this
agreement three several times, upon the arrival of any English
ships.--4. The English merchants and their servants, shall not be liable
to search, or to any ill usage.--5. No presents sent to the Mogul shall
be opened.--6. The goods belonging to the English shall not be stopped
more than twenty-four-hours at the custom-houses; where they shall only
be sealed, and sent to the house or factory of the merchants, to be
there opened and rated within six days afterwards.--7. No governor shall
take any goods by force, nor unless upon payment at the owner's price;
neither shall any be taken away under pretence of being for the king's
service.--8. The English merchants shall not be hindered from selling
their goods to whom they please, nor from sending them to other
factories; neither shall they pay any more in this case than has been
already paid at the port of entry.--9. Whatever goods the English may
purchase in any part of the dominions of the Mogul, shall be allowed to
be transmitted to the ports, without any hindrance or molestation, and
shall pay no other duty than may be agreed upon at the port of
shipping.--10. No goods already entered at a port shall be again opened,
the English shewing a certificate of their numbers, qualities, and
conditions, from the governor or other proper officers of the place
where they were purchased.--11. No confiscation shall be made of the
goods or money belonging to any of the English who may die in
India.--12. No duties shall be demanded for provisions, purchased during
the stay of English ships at any of the ports.--13. The servants of the
English merchants, whether English or natives, shall not be punished or
beaten for doing their duty.--14. The Mogul shall cause any governor or
officer to be punished for the breach of any of these articles.--15. The
English ships shall permit all others to pass and repass freely, to and
from the ports in the dominions of the Mogul, except those of their
enemies with whom they are at war: And the English, while ashore, shall
conduct themselves quietly and peaceably, as merchants.--16. The English
shall yearly furnish the Mogul with all such European rarities, and
other things, as he may desire, and at reasonable rates.--17. The
English shall pay duty on their commodities, reasonably rated, at three
and a half per cent. and two per cent. on rials of eight or money, and
shall not be liable to any other duty or exaction whatsoever.--18. The
English shall be ready to assist the Great Mogul against all his
enemies. And, lastly, The Portuguese shall be admitted to come into this
peace within six months; or, if they refuse, the English shall be at
liberty to exercise all hostilities against them.

On the 31st of March, the Great Mogul dined at the house of Asaph Khan,
all the way from the palace, which was an English mile, being laid under
foot with silks and velvet sewed together, but rolled up as the king
passed. It was reported that this feast, and the present made on the
occasion, cost six lacks of rupees, which amount to L60,000
sterling.[199]

[Footnote 199: According to Thevenot, a _lack_ contains 100,000 rupees,
and a rupee is a French crown and five sols. At which rate, the _six
lacks_ must amount at least to L150,000 sterling.--_Churchill_.

The editor of Churchill's Collection must here have been mistaken the
French crowns alluded to by Thevenot. The rupees in India are various,
and consequently differ in their value; but two shillings may be assumed
as a fair average, in which case the computation in the text is quite
correct.--E.]

I received intelligence on the 26th April, that the prince had made one
of his servants ask the king at the durbar wherefore he gave so great
countenance to the English as to banish the Portuguese from Surat, who
brought much more profit to the king in rubies, pearls, and other jewels,
while the English came there only in search of profit, by the sale of
cloths, swords, knives, and other articles of small value? The king
acknowledged that this was true, yet could not be mended. By this the
affections of the prince were made sufficiently manifest, and I had fair
warning to be on my guard, that I might study to preserve ourselves in
the good graces of the king, in which only we could be safe. I resolved,
however, to take no notice of this, except by endeavouring to give the
prince a better opinion of our nation.

On the 22d of May I went to the king at the durbar, to solicit his
authority to get back a youth named Jones, who had run away from me to
an Italian, who protected him to the disgrace of our nation, by using
the king's name. The king gave me an order for his delivery; but the
prince, who waited every opportunity to injure us, for the sake of his
favourite, _Zulphecar Khan_, moved the king in private to send for the
youth first, to the Guzalcan, which was done. I had newly broken off
from conferring with the prince, on account of his partiality to
Zulphecar Khan, and had sent him word that I would no longer refrain
from stating our grievances to the king in person, which was the cause
of his enmity towards me. When Jones was brought before the king, being
instigated by the protection and countenance of the prince, he railed
against me to my face, with the most virulent malice, beseeching the
king to save his life; on which the king resolved not to deliver him up
to me, but to send him as a prisoner to Surat. But the prince, to brave
me, begged to have him for a servant, as the fellow had renounced his
country, on which the king did so, in spite of every thing I could
allege. On this the prince gave him 150 rupees, with the pay of two
horsemen, and commanded me not to meddle with him.

On the night of the 23d, Jones came and threw himself at my feet, asking
pardon for his lies and mad behaviour. I told him I would not now keep
him prisoner, as he was the prince's servant; but I would not give him
any answer till he had made public reparation for his misbehaviour, as
far as he could. Accordingly, on the next day, he contrived to get to
the _Guzalcan_, and there asked pardon of the king for the lies he had
spoken against me, denying every word he had then spoken, alleging he
had done so to protect himself against me, whom he had offended, and
prayed the king to send for me, that he might ask my pardon in public.
The king was well pleased, but the prince fell into a rage. I went to
the Guzalcan on the 25th, when the king protested he never believed what
Jones had said against me, and that he considered him a villain, yet
could not but protect him, as he had cast himself on his mercy. Jones
was sent for, and asked my pardon on his knees, declaring on oath to the
king that he had in every thing belied me, and that he now made this
declaration in a voluntary manner, as he durst not return to his
country. The king chid him a little, saying to me that neither he nor
any good man could believe such a slanderer. The prince grew angry, and
endeavoured to make Jones stand to what he had said formerly against me;
and as Jones refused, the prince basely desired him to restore the 150
rupees he had received for bearing witness against me. Jones promised to
return the money, for which purpose an under-treasurer was sent along
with him to the house in which he lodged, as I would not suffer him to
come to mine.

I was forced to seem content, having no way to seek redress, as I had no
presents to give, and the king never listens to any request unless well
backed, and will even demand it in plain terms, of which the prince
takes advantage, urging that the Portuguese bring rich jewels, rubies,
and pearls, and treating our English commodities with great scorn. On
the 29th of May the Portuguese were admitted to the king with a present,
and to sell a ballass ruby, which was said to weigh thirteen _toles_,
two and a half of these being equal to an ounce.[200] For this they
asked five lacks of rupees, but the king only offered one lack. Asaph
Khan also was an advocate for the Portuguese, who made him a present of
jewels. They had many rich rubies, ballasses, emeralds, pearls, and
other jewels, for sale, with which they so much gratified the king and
his great men, that we were for a time eclipsed. The prince and the
jesuit fell out about presenting them, which the prince desired, but it
had been promised before to Asaph Khan. I had formerly judged concerning
the credit of the Portuguese at court by report, but I now experienced
the difference between them and us; for they were sought after by all,
while they only bought our commodities as it were by way of giving us
charity. Besides, the Portuguese had an advantage over us in consequence
of their establishments in the neighbourhood, by which they could hinder
trade into the Red Sea, being always more at hand to do harm than we,
who are only entertained out of a little fear, while our trade and
commodities are little cared for.

[Footnote 200: This must be an enormous exaggeration, or error, as in
this case the ruby would have weighed 5 1-5th ounces.--E.]

Sec.2. _Occurrences in June, July, and August 1616, from which the
Character and Dispositions of the Mogul and his Subjects may be
observed_.

The 12th of June a resolution was taken that Sultan Churrum should go to
the wars in the Deccan, and a day was fixed for his setting out on his
journey, for which all the Bramins were consulted. On this occasion it
is reported that Sultan _Parvis_, who is to be recalled, wrote to his
father the Mogul, that if his elder brother were sent to assume the
command, he would readily obey; but, if dishonoured by sending this his
younger brother, he, in the first place, would fall upon him, and would
afterwards finish the Deccan war. All the captains, such as Khan-Khanan,
Mahomed Khan, Khan Jeban, and others, refuse to serve under the command
of Sultan Churrum, who is reputed a tyrant, of whom all men are in
greater awe than of the king, more especially now that he is to have the
command of the army. Yet the king cannot be persuaded to change his
resolution, so that the departure of the prince, with his favourite
Zulphecar Khan is determined to take place at the distance of twenty-two
days; wherefore I must make haste to finish my business, as after his
departure with his minion, Zulphecar Khan, I shall have no chance to
recover a single penny, nor to get any justice against him.

The 18th, the king commanded one of his brother's sons, who had been
made a Christian out of policy, to bring him into hatred of the people,
to touch a lion on the head which was brought in before the king. But he
refused it, being afraid, on which the king desired his youngest son to
touch the lion, which he did, without receiving any harm. On this the
king commanded his nephew to be taken to prison, whence he is never
likely again to be released.

On the 24th a son was born to Sultan Churrum, and being now preparing to
set out for the Deccan wars, all men's eyes are upon him, either for
flattery, gain, or envy, none for love. He has received twenty lacks of
rupees, equal to L200,000 sterling, towards his expences, and begins to
act with more than his usual liberality. Notwithstanding this shew of
his father's affection, a khan at court endeavoured to persuade the king
that this expedition would be productive of danger, as prince Parvis,
whose honour would be thereby wounded, would certainly not submit
without revenge. To this the king answered, "Let them fight, and he who
proves the better captain, shall pursue the war."

The 25th I had an audience of the king, being sent for by Asaph Khan,
and was received by his majesty with much courtesy. This Asaph Khan was
much in the prince's favour, wherefore I was unwilling to disoblige him,
though he had given me several provocations. At this time Mukrob Khan,
another of the great men, made me offers of service, being of a contrary
faction to Asaph Khan, but I thought it best to endeavour to make
friends of them both. Among other subjects of discourse, Mukrob told me
that the English brought too much cloth and broad-sword blades for sale
to India, and hardly any thing else, wherefore he advised they should
forbear for two or three years, and rather bring the curiosities of
China and Japan, which would be more acceptable, and to bring from
England the best cloth of gold, and the richest silks wrought with gold
and silver, and above all things, large quantities of Arras hangings.

The 30th I visited Abdalla Hassan, having need of his friendship; and,
what is rare in this country, he refused to accept of any present.
Abdalla is captain over all the soldiers maintained at court, and
treasurer of all the armies. He entertained me with great civility, and
few compliments, and made me sit beside him to see the soldiers shoot at
marks with their bows and firelocks. Most of them hit the mark with a
single bullet, being about the size of a hand, affixed to a butt. We had
some discourse together about the manner of using weapons in Europe,
after which I took my leave and departed.

Most of July passed in soliciting the prince to sign the articles I had
presented to the king, as mentioned before. On the 13th I sent him three
bottles of Alicant, and a letter concerning the difference between us
and the Portuguese about trade, offering to take all the customs to
farm, both inwards and outwards, for the use of the company. The prince,
according to his usual barbarous custom of transacting all business in
public, caused my letter to be twice read over to him by his secretary,
often interrupting him with discourse, and sent word that he would read
it again at night and consider its contents, and that I should have his
answer through _Mirza Sorocalla_.

That night I went to the durbar to visit the king, who, as soon as I
came in, sent Asaph Khan to say that he heard I had an excellent painter
in my house, and that he wished to see some of his work. I replied,
there was only a young man, a merchant, who drew some figures for his
amusement, in a very ordinary manner, with a pen, but which were far
from having any claim as paintings. The king said I need not fear his
taking any man from me by force, as he would neither do me any injury
himself, nor suffer any to be done me by others, and desired he might
see the young man and his work. I answered, I had no fears of injury
from his majesty, and, for his satisfaction, should bring the young man
to the Guzalcan with such drawings as he might have, which were probably
figures of elephants, deer, or the like. On this the king bowed his
head, saying, if I desired to have an elephant, or any other thing in
his country, I had only to let him know freely what I wished, and he
would give it me, for he was my friend. I made a low reverence, humbly
thanking his majesty, and said that elephants were of no use to me,
neither was it the custom of any person of our nation, especially of my
rank, to ask any thing: Yet, if his majesty were pleased to give me even
the value of a rupee, I should thankfully accept it as a mark of his
favour. He answered, that he knew not what I might wish for, but there
were many things in his country rare in mine, and desired I might not be
dainty, but speak to him freely, and he would give me such things as
were most acceptable. He then desired me to be merry, for he was the
friend of our nation and of me, and should take care we had no injury
done to us. He then desired me to attend that night at the Guzalcan, and
to bring with me the young man who painted pictures. Then Asaph Khan
wished me to send for him to come to his house, where also he invited me
to go till the time when the king came out again, assuring me I should
be welcome, which I agreed to. I had never before been so graciously
treated by the king as now, which all the great men took notice of, and
accordingly altered their deportment towards me. It so happened that the
jesuit acted as my interpreter on this occasion, by the king's
appointment.

I went from the durbar to the house of Asaph Khan, according to
invitation, and continued there till the king came out again, when I was
conducted back, accompanied by Mr Hughes, the supposed painter, with
whom the king had some discourse. After this, I shewed the king a
curious picture I had of a friend of mine, which pleased him much, and
he shewed it to all his company. The king sent for his chief painter,
who pretended he could make as good, which I denied, on which a wager of
a horse was made between Asaph Khan and me in the king's presence, and
to please him, but Asaph afterwards retracted. After this, the Mogul
fell to drinking some Alicant wine which I had presented him, giving
some of it to those about him, and then sent for a full bottle, and
drinking a cup, sent it to me, saying it soured so fast it would be
spoiled before he could drink it, and I had none. This done, he turned
him to sleep, when all the candles were put out, and I had to grope my
way out in the dark.

This day, a gentlewoman attendant upon _Noor-mahal_ was taken in the
king's house in some improper act with an eunuch, when another animal of
the same kind, who loved her, slew her paramour. The poor woman was set
up to the arm-pits in the ground, with the earth hard rammed around her,
being condemned to remain there three days and two nights in that
situation, without sustenance, her head and arms exposed to the violence
of the sun. If she survived, she was then to be pardoned. The eunuch was
condemned to the elephants. This damsel was found to be worth, in
pearls, jewels, and money, sixteen lack of rupees.[201]

[Footnote 201: In Purchas this sum is rated in words at sixteen hundred
thousand, while in Churchill it is only in figures 160,000.--E.]

On the 22d, I had letters from Burbanpoor in answer to those I had
written to Mohabet Khan, who granted my desire of a firmaun in favour of
our nation, granting them a house near the governor's, strictly
commanding that no person should molest them by sea or land, neither to
exact from them any customs, or to give them trouble on any pretence,
with entire liberty to buy, sell, and transport any commodities at their
pleasure, without let or hindrance. I received this in a letter from
himself, full of civility and kindness, far exceeding any I had hitherto
met with in India, protesting the highest respect, and his earnest wish
to give me every content in whatever I might desire. I caused this
firmaun to be immediately sent to Surat, so that Broach is now provided
as a good retreat from the prince's injuries, and the customs given up,
by which L1500 a-year will be saved, besides all manner of searches and
extortions. No person doubts the performance of this firmaun, as Mohabet
Khan careth not for the prince, and feareth no man, neither needeth he
any person's favour, being much beloved of the king, and reckoned the
second man in the empire. He has all his life been liberal of his purse,
and honourable in his word, so that he has the good report of all men.
In regard to the customs on trade, as the king takes none, and the
governors convert them to their own profit, he professes to scorn
abusing the liberties of the king's ports.

On the 6th of August I was sent for to the durbar, where I had much talk
with the king, who asked me many questions to satisfy his curiosity, and
desired me to come to the Guzalcan at night, when I should see my
picture so exactly copied, that I should not know the copy from the
original. He asked me what reward I would give the painter who had made
the copy so like, to which I answered, I would give fifty rupees, a
painter's reward. To which the king replied, that his painter was a
gentleman, and my proffered reward was too small. I said, that I gave
the picture willingly, esteeming it rare, and had no inclination to make
comparisons or wagers; and that, if his majesty's servant had performed
well, and would not accept my gift, his majesty was most fit to reward
him. So, after many merry jests, and brags of the arts in his dominions,
his majesty asked me how often I drank in the day, and how much, and
what we drank in England. Mentioning beer, he asked what beer was, how
it was made, and whether I could make it here in India. To all of which
serious state questions I answered to his satisfaction.

He sent for me again at night, being impatient to triumph in the skilful
execution of his painter, and shewed me six pictures, all pasted on one
board, one being my own, and the other five done by his artist, and all
so like, that by candle-light I was at some loss to determine which was
which, being greatly beyond my expectation. At length, by closer
inspection, I pointed out my own, and explained the differences between
it and the copies, which were not apparent to an inexperienced eye. The
king was much pleased that I had not seen the difference at first sight,
for which he was full of mirth, and exulted over me. I gave him way, and
satisfied him much by praising his painter, saying, that I saw his
majesty needed no pictures from our country. He then asked me what
reward I would give his painter? To which I answered, I would double my
former offer, and if he came to my house, would give him an hundred
rupees to buy a nag. The king took this kindly, but said his painter
would not accept money, but some other gifts which I had before
promised. I said this was referable to my own discretion. To which he
answered, that this was true, yet he wished I would name it. To this I
said, I would give him a good sword, a pistol, and a picture. "Then,"
said the king, "you confess he is a good workman, send for him to your
house, and shew him such rarities as you have, and let him choose one,
in return for which you shall have any one of these pictures you please,
that you may shew in England we are not so unskilful as you supposed."
He then pressed me to make a choice, which I did, and which the king
wrapped in paper, and placed in a little book of mine, expressing much
exultation at the supposed victory of his painter. I then shewed him a
picture I had of his majesty, far inferior to the work I now saw, saying
I had judged from it, supposing it among the best. When told where I got
it, he asked why I bought any such thing? "Have not I the best, and have
not I told you that I would give you any thing you desired?" I thanked
his majesty, but said I held it impertinent for me to trouble him in
trifles, especially as a beggar. To this he replied, that it was no
shame to ask from him, and desired me to speak freely at all times, and
pressed me to ask for something. To this I answered, that I would not
make choice of any gift, as whatever he was pleased to give, I would
joyfully accept as a mark of honour. He then said, if you desire my
picture, I will either give you one for yourself or for your king. To
this I answered, that if his majesty thought proper to send one to my
king, I would gladly carry it, and knew that my sovereign would esteem
it much, and take it as a mark of friendship; but, as his majesty had
emboldened me by his gracious condescension, I would humbly ask one for
myself, which I would keep and leave to my posterity, as a memorial of
his majesty's favour. He answered, as my king did not desire one, but I
did, I should have one, and so gave immediate order for its making. He
then turned himself to sleep, and we had to go out as before, in the
dark.

The 9th of August a band of an hundred robbers were brought in chains
before the Great Mogul, together with their accusation. Without any
ceremony of trial, he ordered them to be carried away for execution,
their chief being ordered to be torn in pieces by dogs, and all the rest
to be put to death in the ordinary manner. The prisoners were divided
into portions, sent for execution to several quarters of the city, and
executed in the streets. Close by my house, the chief was torn in pieces
by twelve dogs, and thirteen of his fellows, having their hands and
feet tied together, had their necks cut by a sword, yet not quite
through, and their naked and bloody bodies were left to corrupt in the
street, to the annoyance of the whole neighbourhood.

On the 10th, 11th, and 12th, I was occupied at court in giving notice to
the king and prince that a Dutch ship lay before Surat, and refused to
give notice of its object till the arrival of a fleet to which it
belonged, which was expected with the first fair wind. I took advantage
of this circumstance to make them apprehensive of the designs of the
Hollanders, and the dangers that might arise from them, all of which was
well taken. And, being consulted on the subject, I advised not to come
to a rupture with them, and yet to exclude them from trade.

The last of these days I went to visit _Gemaldin Ussen_,[202] the
viceroy of _Patan_,[203] and lord of four cities in Bengal, a man of
seventy years of age, who had often been employed as an ambassador by
the Mogul, had more understanding and courtesy than all his countrymen,
was universally esteemed for his hospitality and regard to strangers,
and was considered as entirely free from secret ambition. He had often
invited me to his house, to which I went this day, and was received with
extraordinary kindness and friendship. He even offered me a lack of
rupees, and such other demonstrations of courtesy, as bespoke their own
refusal. He offered me likewise his credit and favour with the king, and
his best advice in every emergence; indeed, omitting nothing that could
evince his desire to serve me. All this seemed cordially to proceed from
the heart, especially from a person of his years and experience; and, in
the course of our conversation, he spoke so plainly of many of the chief
men about the court, which, from my own experience, I knew for truth,
that I was satisfied he was a true-hearted and well-disposed old man. He
gave me much information respecting the customs of this empire, their
want of laws, their servitude, the increase of the empire, and many
other things, having served in grace and favour under three successive
kings. He shewed me a book containing the annals of all memorable
actions in his time, which he daily committed to record, and offered me
a copy if I would procure it to be translated. This also treated
concerning the king's revenue, and the manner in which it was raised,
besides confiscations, gifts, and deductions upon the great men. He
shewed me that the government of every province paid yearly a certain
rent to the king. Thus, for his government of Patna, he gave yearly to
the king eleven lacks of rupees;[204] all other profits of the
government being his own, he having entire power and authority to take
what he thought fit. His government was estimated at 5000 horse, the pay
of each being 200 rupees yearly, of which he only kept 1500 on foot,
being allowed the surplus as dead pay. Besides which, he had a daily
pension of 1000 rupees, and enjoyed some smaller governments. Yet he
assured me that several of the great lords had double the emoluments he
enjoyed, and that there were above twenty equal to himself.

[Footnote 202: This name does not appear rightly reported, yet we have
no means of correcting its orthography, neither is it of much
importance. Perhaps it may have been Jemal-ul-dien Ussan Khan.--E.]

[Footnote 203: This is probably a mistake for Patna in Bengal, and he
may have been Nabob, or Nawab, perhaps Soubah of Bengal.--E.]

[Footnote 204: Eleven lack, or 1,100,000 rupees, on the computation
formerly assigned, are equal to L110,000. In the Pilgrims, at this
place, the rupee is said to equal 2s. 2d, which would add L9166:12:4 to
that sum.--E.]

In the course of our conversation, this lord praised the good prophet
Jesus, and his laws, and was full of much pleasant and profitable
discourse. Some days after this visit, when I thought his kindness had
been at an end, he borrowed the king's banqueting-house and
pleasure-garden, called _Havar Gemall_, a mile from town, on purpose to
treat me, and earnestly inviting me, I promised to come. He went there
himself at midnight, carrying his tents and all requisite furniture and
provisions, and fitted up a place very handsomely, by the side of the
tank, for the entertainment. I went there in the morning, and on my
arrival he came to meet me with extraordinary civility, carrying me into
the pavilion he had prepared, where he had some company, among whom were
two of his sons, of whom he had thirty in all. He had likewise an
hundred servants attending. To amuse me, he carried me to see the king's
little closets and retiring rooms, which were painted in the antique
manner, having pictures of some of the French kings, and other Christian
princes, on several of the pannels. He said he was only a poor servant
of the king, yet wished I might have some content, and had therefore
invited me to a slight banquet, that we might eat bread and salt
together, to seal a friendship which he entreated me to accept. There
were many great men, he alleged, who were better able to shew me
kindness, but were proud and false-hearted, and he wished me therefore
to trust none of them. For, if I had any business to transact concerning
the Portuguese or any other, they who acted as my interpreters would
never deliver the truth, but only what pleased themselves, or would give
satisfaction in the relation. That, therefore, I should never be rightly
understood, nor be able to effect my business without being abused and
cheated, nor ever clearly know the situation in which I stood, until I
had an Englishman who could speak Persian, who was able rightly to
deliver what I wished to have said, without using any other person. And,
if I could find any such, the king would readily grant me leave to
employ him, having conceived a good opinion of me; insomuch, that the
preceding night, at the Guzalcan, when the jewels of _Sheik Ferid_,
governor of Lahore, who was lately deceased, were presented to him, he
remembered me of his own accord, and seeing a picture of himself which
pleased him, he delivered it to Asaph Khan, commanding him to send it to
me, that I might wear it for his sake, with many words of favour
concerning me, which would make all the great men respect me.

While thus conversing, dinner was served. So sitting down on a carpet, a
cloth was spread, divers kinds of banqueting dishes were set before us.
The like was done a little on one side for the gentlemen of his company,
with whom he went to eat, as they hold it a kind of uncleanness to
mingle with us. Upon this, I told him that he had promised we should eat
bread and salt together, and without his company I felt little appetite,
whereupon he arose from the rest, and sat down beside me, and we fell
heartily to our repast. It consisted of various kinds of dishes,
together with raisins, almonds, pistachio nuts, and various fruits.
After dinner, he played at chess, and I walked about, and after some
time spent in discourse, I offered to take my leave. But he said he had
invited me to eat with him, and hitherto we had only had a collation,
wherefore he entreated I might not depart till we had supped together,
to which I readily consented.

About an hour after, the ambassador of one of the kings of the Deccan
came to visit him, whom he presented to me, using him with civility, but
much inferior to the respect he had shewn me. He afterwards asked me,
if the king my master would scorn the offer of service from so poor a
man as he was, and if he would vouchsafe to accept a present from a
stranger, as he proposed to send a gentleman to England with me to kiss
the hands of my sovereign, and to see our country. I answered him as
became me, with all civility; so he sent for one presently, whom he
questioned if he would venture upon such a journey, and as this person
seemed willing, he presented him to me, saying he would provide some of
the curiosities of the country for the king my master, and send them by
this gentleman along with me. By the manner all this seemed to be in
earnest.

While we thus spent our time in friendly converse, supper was brought
in; and, as in the morning, two cloths were spread, one before me and my
chaplain, with one merchant, on which were set various dishes of roast,
fried, and boiled meats, with rice and sallads. On this occasion my
honourable entertainer desired me to excuse his company, as it was their
custom to eat among themselves, and his countrymen might take it ill if
he did not eat with them; so he and his guests, and I with my
companions, solaced ourselves with good cheer. The meats were not amiss,
but the attendance and order were excellent, as the servants were very
diligent and respectful. After the manner of this country of giving
presents to invited guests, he made me a present of five cases of
sugar-candy flavoured with musk, and a loaf of the finest sugar, as
white as snow, weighing fifty pounds, and requested my acceptance of an
hundred such against my departure. He then addressed me in these
terms:--"You refuse these from me, thinking I am poor, but being made in
my government, it costs me nothing, as it comes to me _gratis_." To this
I answered, that he had already much too far obliged me, yet would I not
refuse his kindness when ready to go away. On which he replied, that he
might not be then provided, and therefore desired I would accept now,
that he might not lose both his offer and his labour. Thus, calling
himself my father, and me his son, we took leave of each other, with
many compliments.

I went to visit the king on the 16th, who, as soon as I came in, called
to his women, and reached out his own picture set in gold, and hanging
to a chain of gold wire, with a pendant of foul pearl, which he
delivered to Asaph Khan, whom I warned not to demand any reverence from
me on the occasion which I would not willingly perform; as it is the
custom here, when he bestows any gift, that the receiver kneels down and
touches the ground with his head; and which ceremony had been exacted
from the ambassador of Persia. Then Asaph Khan came to me with the
picture, which I offered to take in my hand, but he made a sign to me,
to take off my hat and put it about my neck, leading me right before the
king. Not understanding his purpose, and doubting he might require my
conformance with the custom of the country, called _sizeda_, I resolved
rather to forego the present than comply. He made a sign to me to return
thanks to the king, which I did after the fashion of our country; on
which some of the officers called for me to make _sizeda_, but the king
immediately said, No, no, in Persian. So, with many gracious words, I
returned to my place. You may judge of the king's liberality by this
mighty gift, which was not in all worth thirty pounds, yet was five
times the value of such as he usually gives of that kind, and which are
yet held as a special favour, as all the great men wear the king's
picture, which yet none may do but those to whom it is given. This
ordinarily consists of only a small gold medal, not bigger than a
sixpence, impressed with the king's image, having a short gold chain of
six inches to fasten it on their turbans; and to which, at their own
charges, some add precious stones or pearl pendents.

_Gemaldin Ussen_, who had invited me to the _Havaer Gemal_, as before
mentioned, being newly appointed governor of _Sinde_, came to dine at my
house on the 19th, accompanied by two of his sons and two other
gentlemen, and attended by about an hundred servants. He partook of some
part of the banquet, which had been prepared at my house by a Mahomedan
cook, but declined eating of any of the dishes which were cooked after
our English fashion, though he seemed to have a good inclination, being
influenced by a superstitious notion; yet he desired that four or five
dishes, of his own choice, might be sent to his own house, being all
baked meats, dressed in a way he had not before seen, saying he would
afterwards eat of them in private, which was accordingly done. At this
entertainment, he offered us a free trade and secure residence at the
chief town, of Sinde, his new government, and having filled himself with
my banquet, he took his leave, after receiving a small present from me,
according to the fashion of the country. This day, Mr Hall, my chaplain,
died suddenly, to my great grief. He was a man of mild and gentle
manners, and a most sincere Christian, of unspotted life and
conversation.

On the 20th and the night before, there fell a vast storm of rain,
called in this country the _elephant_, owing to which such prodigious
streams of water flowed into the great tank, the head of which is of
stone and apparently of great strength, that it gave way in one place,
causing a sudden alarm that the whole fabric would give way and drown
all that part of the town in which I dwelt. Insomuch that the prince and
all his women forsook their house, and my nearest neighbour carried off
his goods and his wife to the skirts of the hills on his elephants and
camels. All persons had their horses ready at their doors, that they
might save their lives by flight in case of necessity. We were in the
utmost consternation, and sat up till midnight, having no alternative,
as we thought, but to flee ourselves and abandon all our goods, for it
was reported that the water would rise three feet higher than the top of
our house, and carry all away, being only a slight mud building. The
foot of the tank was level with our dwelling, and the water was of great
extent and very deep, so that the surface of the water stood
considerably higher than the top of my house, which stood in a hollow,
in the very course of the water, and where every ordinary heavy rain
occasioned such a current at my door as to be for some hours impassable
by man or horse. But the king caused a sluice to be cut during the
night, to conduct the water by another course, so that we were freed
from the extreme danger; yet the excessive rain had washed down a
considerable part of the walls of my house, and so weakened it by
breaches in different parts, that I now feared its falling down, as much
as I had dreaded its being swept away by the flood. It was every where
so bemired with dirt and water, that I could hardly find a place in
which to sit or lie dry, and was forced to be at material charges in
having it repaired. Thus were we every way afflicted, by fires, smoke,
floods, storms, heats, dust, and flies, and had no season of temperate
air and quietness.

On the 27th, I received advice from Surat, that the Dutch had obtained
permission to land their goods, and to secure them in a warehouse at
that place, carrying on trade till the pleasure of the prince were
known, and under condition that they should depart at the first warning.

The king went to _Havar Gemal_ on the 29th, whence he employed himself
in hunting. At that place, a resolution was taken, to remove the court
to Mundu, a castle near Burhanpoor, where there is no town. At this
time, Sultan Parvis came from the Deccan wars in disgrace, and arrived
with his train near Agimere; and the king commanded him to retire to
Bengal, refusing to admit him into his presence. Having thus dispatched
him, without the inconvenience dreaded from a meeting between the
brothers, he now proposed to settle Sultan Churrum in the Deccan wars,
although all the chief men of the court were averse from this measure;
on which account, the king feared to send him down, as was formerly
proposed, and had therefore delayed this measure until Prince Parvis was
withdrawn, and now meant to establish Churrum by means of his own
presence at Mundu, in the neighbourhood of the Deccan. If this
resolution is executed, it will put us to much trouble and expence, as
we must build a new house both for ourselves and goods, because that
castle stands on a hill, and has no buildings near it.

The king returned from hunting on the night of the 30th, and about
eleven o'clock sent me a very large and fat wild boar, desiring to have
the tusks back, and accompanied by a message, saying it was killed by
his own hand, and therefore desiring me to be merry, and to eat it with
good cheer. On this occasion, I desired Jaddow, who brought this message
from the king, to tell Asaph Khan, that I proposed to visit him next
day, when I hoped to receive from him a firmaun of the privileges
granted by the king. Asaph Khan sent me back word, that they would not
be then ready, but it should be sealed some days after, and that he did
not wish to see me till he had given me satisfaction.

Sec.3. _Of the Celebration of the King's Birth Day, with other Occurrences
in September 1616_.

The 2d of September was the birth-day of the Great Mogul, which was
solemnized with extraordinary festivities. He was then weighed against a
variety of articles, as jewels, gold, silver, stuffs of gold and silver,
silk, batter, rice, fruits, and many other things, of each a little, all
of which is given to the Bramins. On this occasion, the king ordered
Asaph Khan to send for me; who did so, and appointed me to come to the
place where the king held his durbar. But the messenger mistook, so that
I went not in time, and missed the sight. Being there before the king
came out, he sent for me as soon as he noticed me, and enquired why I
had not come to see the ceremony of weighing, for which he had given
order. I explained the reason, as it actually was, on which he chid
Asaph Khan publicly for the omission. He was at this time so richly
ornamented with jewels, that I must confess I never saw at any one time
such unspeakable wealth. He now amused himself in seeing his greatest
elephants brought in before him. Some of these were lord-elephants,
having their chains, bells, and furniture all of gold and silver, being
attended by many gilt flags and streamers, and each having eight or ten
inferior elephants to wait upon him, clothed in gold, silk, and silver.
In this way there passed about twelve troops, all very splendidly
furnished. The first lord-elephant had all the plates on his head and
breast set with rubies and emeralds, being a beast of most wonderful
stature and beauty. They all bowed down before the king, making their
reverences very orderly, and formed as fine a shew of beasts as I had
ever seen. The keepers of each chief elephant made a present to the
king. After this was over, the king made me some gracious speeches, and
went into the interior apartments.

About ten o'clock at night, after I was in bed, the king sent me a
message, saying he had heard I had a picture which I had not shewn him,
and desired I would come then to him, bringing the picture with me; and
if I would not part with it, that he might see it, and have copies taken
for his wives. I rose and carried the picture with me, and when I came
to the presence, I found him sitting cross-legged on a little throne,
his robes all covered over with diamonds, pearls, and rubies. Before him
stood a golden table, on which were above fifty pieces of gold plate,
all set with precious stones, some of them being large and of great
value. His nobles were all around him in their best attire, whom he
commanded to drink cheerfully of several kinds of wine, which stood
there in large flaggons.

On my approach he asked for the picture, on which I shewed him two. He
seemed astonished at one of these, and asked whose it was; to which I
replied, that it was the portrait of a friend who was dead. He asked if
I would give it him. I replied, that I valued it more than any thing I
had, as being the portrait of one I had loved dearly; but if his majesty
would pardon my attachment to that picture, and accept the other, which
was French and of excellent work, I would most willingly give it. He
thanked me, saying it was that only picture which he desired, and which
he loved as much as I did; and, if I would give it him, he would value
it more than the richest jewel in his house. I answered that I was not
so much in love with any thing, but that I would part with it to satisfy
his majesty, being extremely glad to have any opportunity to serve him,
and was ready even to present him with my heart, if I could thereby
demonstrate my affection. He bowed to me, saying he had never before
seen so much art and beauty, and conjured me to tell him truly if ever
such a woman had lived. I answered, that there certainly did once live a
lady whom this portrait resembled in every thing but perfection. He then
said, that he accepted my readiness to give him what I so valued as a
great kindness; but would only shew it to his ladies, and cause his own
painter make five copies, and if I knew my own I should have it back. I
answered, that I had freely given it, and would be glad of his majesty
accepting it: But he said he would not keep it, and loved me better for
putting so much value on the image of my departed friend. He knew, he
added, that it would be doing me an injury to take it from me, and would
only have five copies taken, which his wives should wear, and would then
return me the original with his own hand. In this art of limning or
painting in water colours, his artists are wonderfully expert. But he
liked not the other picture, which was painted in oil.

He then told me that this was his birth-day, and all men made merry, and
asked me therefore if I would drink with them. I said I would willingly
do whatever he was pleased to command, as I sincerely wished him many
prosperous days, and that the ceremony of this day might be repeated for
an hundred years. He asked me what wine I would have, whether that of
the grape or made wine, and whether strong or weak. I said whatever he
was pleased to order, hoping he would neither command me to have it too
strong or in too large quantity. So he called for a gold cupful of
mingled wine, half of the grape and half artificial, which he sent me by
one of his nobles, with this message, that I should drink it off twice,
thrice, four times, or five times, for his sake, and accept the cup and
appurtenances as a present. On drinking a portion of it, I found it
stronger than any I had ever tasted, insomuch that it made me sneeze, at
which he laughed, and called for raisins, almonds, and sliced lemons,
which he sent me on a gold plate, and desired me to eat and drink what I
liked, and no more. I then made a reverence for my present, after my own
manner, though Asaph Khan wanted me to kneel and knock my head upon the
ground, but the king accepted it in my own way. The cup was of gold, set
all over with small rubies and turquoises; the cover being likewise
gold, and set with great rubies, emeralds, and turquoises; and there was
likewise a suitable dish or salver on which to set the cup. I know not
the value, because many of the stones are small, and the greater, which
also are numerous, are not all clean; but there are above two thousand
stones in all, and the gold weighs about twenty ounces. On giving me
this splendid present, he sent me word that he esteemed me more than
ever he had done a Frank, and asked if I were merry in eating the wild
boar he had sent me, how I had it dressed, what I drank with it, and
many such compliments; which public shew of his grace and favour did me
much service in the eyes of all his nobles, who strove to shew me
respect.

After this, he threw among those that stood below, two chargers of
rupees, and among us who were round the throne two chargers of hollow
almonds made of gold and silver mingled; but I would not scramble as did
his great men, for I saw his son did not take any up. He then
distributed sashes and girdles of gold tissue to all the musicians and
servants, and many others. So drinking heartily himself, and commanding
others to drink, he and his nobles became as jovial as could be, and of
a thousand humours. But the prince, Asaph Khan, two old men, the former
king of Candahar, and I, refrained from drinking. When the king was not
able any longer to hold up his head, he lay down to sleep, and we all
departed. While going out, I moved Asaph Khan for the dispatch of our
privileges, assuring him his majesty could give me no present so
acceptable. I said farther, that I had no doubt it lay in his power to
dispatch me; but if he did not think proper to do so, or if any other
hinderance was in my way, I should on the morrow again apply to the
king. He desired me not to do so, for the king loved me and had given
orders for dispatching my business, which had been hindered by the
preparations for this feast; but he would now send it to me with all
speed, and do me all manner of service.

Seven months had now been vainly spent in soliciting the signing and
sealing of the articles of amity and commerce, formerly detailed, and I
had nothing but promises and delays, from day to day, and from week to
week. Therefore on the 3d September, the English fleet being hourly
expected to arrive at Surat, I delivered to him a memorial, containing
the articles I desired to have an order for, that they might be observed
in the unloading of the ships. These were, 1. That the presents coming
for the king and prince, should not be opened at the port, but sent up
to court under the seals of the customhouse officers. 2. That
curiosities sent for presents to other persons, and for the merchants to
sell, should also be sent to the court sealed, for the prince to make
the first choice. 3. That the gross merchandize should be landed,
reasonably rated, and not detained at the customhouse, but that the
merchants, on paying the customs, should have full liberty to sell or
dispose of it as they pleased; and that the ships should be fully
supplied with provisions, without paying any custom for the same.

On the 4th, Asaph Khan sent me back my articles, after so long
attendance and so many false promises, some of them altered, and others
struck out, together with a letter, saying there was no need of any
articles, as an order from the prince to trade at Surat was quite
sufficient, he being lord there, and that no grant of trade at Bengal or
Sinde could ever be allowed. Notwithstanding all this vexation, I durst
not change my mode of proceeding, or wholly quit the prince and Asaph
Khan. I therefore drew up other articles, leaving out what seemed
displeasing in the former, and desired Asaph Khan to put them into form
and procure them to be sealed, or else to allow me to apply to the king,
that if he denied me I might leave the country. The substance of these
new articles was as follows:--1. That all the subjects of the Great
Mogul should receive the English in a friendly manner, suffering them to
land their goods peaceably, and to procure provisions for their money
without paying customs for them.--2. To have liberty, after paying
customs for their goods, to sell them to any one they pleased, and none
to force them to sell at an under rate.--3. To have liberty to pass with
their goods to any part of the empire, without any farther exactions
than those payable at the port.--4. To have the presents for the Mogul
and prince sealed without being opened, and sent to the ambassador.--5.
To have the goods of those that might die freed from confiscation, and
delivered to the surviving English factors.--And finally, That no injury
should be offered to any of the English.

On the 8th, Asaph Khan sent me word in plain terms, that absolutely he
would procure nothing for me sealed, that in any respect concerned the
government belonging to the prince, and that I must rest satisfied with
a firmaun or order, signed by the prince, which was quite sufficient,
and I needed not to apply any more to him. This clearly revealed the
purpose he had so long intended, that we should be entirely dependent on
the prince; and I now had just cause to look out for new friends, Asaph
Khan having forsaken me. He that first took him for our solicitor
engaged us in all this misery, for he was the known protector of our
enemies, and a slave to their numerous bribes. I therefore determined to
try the prince, and to seem entirely dependent upon him. So I went to
the prince on the 10th, and desired he would grant his firmaun for the
four articles formerly sent to his secretary, which he threw down to his
secretary, so that I hoped to be at rest. I received it on the 11th, but
on reading it over, I found two of the four clauses much altered, and
one entirely left out; so I returned it, declaring roundly I could not
accept it, neither would I suffer any goods to be sent ashore. Never was
any man so distressed with such pride, covetousness, and falsehood.

At night, I rode to visit the prince's secretary, _Mirza Socrolla_, with
whom I expostulated the business, declaring my resolution to depart. But
I now found the firmaun quite different than I had been informed, and
containing all the clauses I had required, though in some phrases rather
ambiguous in my judgment, which the secretary interpreted favourably,
declaring it was the prince's intent to satisfy me entirely, and that
every thing was quite sufficient for our purpose. After urging the
obscurity of some points, and as he had declared the meaning of the
prince to me, I requested he would explain them in the same sense to the
governor of Surat, which he agreed to; and especially gave order that
the customer should pay for fifty pieces of cloth, which he had bought
many months before, and wished now to return upon the factors, to their
extreme loss. At the close of our conference, he expressed the prince's
desire that we would rely entirely on him, and not cross him in matters
belonging to his government, by applying to the king, declaring that we
should so find him a better friend than we expected. Being thus
satisfied, I was in some hope of success, especially as this man is no
taker of bribes, and is reputed honest, and pledged his credit that we
should sustain no loss or injury, every thing being referred to him by
the prince. So I accepted the firmaun, which, on having it translated, I
found very effectual and satisfactory.

The 16th, I went to visit the prince, intending to seem entirely
dependent upon him, till I heard what entertainment our ships were
likely to meet with. But I found him in much perplexity, fearing the
coming of Sultan Parvis to court, he being only at the distance of eight
coss, anxiously desiring leave to kiss his father's hands. The king had
even granted his desire, but by the influence of Nourmahal, the
favourite queen, he had revoked the permission, and Sultan Parvis was
ordered away directly to Bengal.[205] The resolution of the king to
remove the court from Agimere still continued, but no one knew certainly
where he intended to go.

[Footnote 205: At this place there is an expression in the Pilgrims,
coupled with this sentence, which is quite inexplicable. "Yea, although
the king had fallen down, and taken his mother by the feet, to obtain
her leave to see her son." We are not sufficiently conversant in the
secret history of the Zenana of Shah Jehan-guire to explain this; yet
strongly suspect that this sentence ought to have run thus: Although the
prince's mother fell at the king's feet to obtain leave to see her
son.--E.]

Sec.4. _Broils about Abdala Khan and Khan-Khannan: Ambitious projects of
Sultan Churrum to subvert his eldest Brother: Sea Fight with a
Portuguese Carrack; and various other Occurrences_.

Several days now passed in soliciting the king and great men, and paying
my court to them, without any remarkable occurrence; till on the 9th
October, I had letters from Surat, giving me an account that four
English ships had arrived there. On the 10th, Abdala Khan, the great
governor of Ahmedabad, being sent for to court in disgrace, to answer
for many insolent and contemptuous neglects of the king's commands,
thought to stand upon his defence and to refuse compliance. But Sultan
Churrum, whose ambitious views sought to turn every thing to his
advantage, being desirous to oblige so great a man, who was reckoned one
of the chiefest captains in the empire, prevailed upon him to submit, on
his word to protect him. Abdala came therefore, in pretended humility,
habited as a pilgrim, attended by forty servants on foot, until he
arrived within a day's journey of the court, having 2000 horse attending
him at some distance behind. He was this day brought to the _Jarruco_,
the place where the king sits in public to see sports and hear
complaints, and advanced towards the king, between two noblemen, having
chains on his legs, and holding his turban over his eyes, that he might
see no one till he had the happiness to behold the king. After making
his humble reverence, and answering a few questions, the king forgave
him, caused his irons to be taken off, and clothed him in a new vest of
cloth of gold, with a turban and sash, as is the custom.

The prince, Churrum, now intended to establish his honour and power on
the Deccan wars, which his elder brother Sultan Parvis had been recalled
from in disgrace, and which the great commander, Khan-Khannan, had not
conducted prosperously, being strongly suspected of a secret
understanding with the princes of the Deccan, from whom he was believed
to receive pensions. Churrum, therefore, induced his father to recall
Khan-Khannan, who refused to obey; and wrote to the king, not to send
Churrum to the war, but one of his youngest sons, then only about
fifteen. This gave Churrum much uneasiness, as he was exceedingly intent
upon having the conduct of this war, for which reason he promised to
give the subordinate command of the army to Abdala Khan, under himself,
if he could contrive to get Khan-Khannan displaced. Fearing troubles
from the ambition and factious practices of his son Churrum, the
discontent of the two elder sons, Cuserou and Parvis, and the power of
Khan-Khannan, the king was anxious to accommodate matters in the Deccan
by accepting a peace, and continuing Khan-Khannan in his government; to
which end he wrote him a letter of favour, and proposed to send him a
vestment, as a sign of reconciliation, according to custom. Before
dispatching these, he acquainted a kinswoman of Khan-Khannan, who lived
in the seraglio, with his purpose. Whether she was false to her
relation, through the secret influence of Sultan Churrum, or was grieved
to see the head of her family so unworthily dealt with, who merited so
highly, does not certainly appear: But she plainly told the king, that
she did not believe Khan-Khannan would wear any thing the king sent, as
he knew his majesty hated him, and had once or twice already sent him
poison, which he had put into his bosom instead of his mouth, and proved
by trials. For this reason, she was confident Khan-Khannan would not
dare to put on any thing sent from his majesty. The king offered to
wear the dress himself in her presence for an hour, which she might
certify in a letter to her relative. To this she answered, that
Khan-Khannan would trust neither of them with his life; but, if allowed
to continue quietly in his command, would do his majesty good service.
Upon this, the king altered his plans, and resolved to invest Sultan
Churrum in the supreme command of the Deccan wars, and to follow after
him with another army, to ensure his reception.

Khan-Khannan, having due notice of the storm preparing against him,
practised with the Deccan sovereigns, who were at his devotion, to offer
favourable terms of peace for a season, as he saw no other way of
averting the cloud that hung over both him and them, unless by
temporizing till the king and the prince were established farther off.
For this purpose, there came two ambassadors at this time to court, from
the princes of the Deccan, bringing horses richly caparisoned as
presents. The king refused to listen to them, or to accept their gifts,
and turned them over to his son, saying that peace or war rested
entirely with him. The prince was so puffed up by this favour, though
informed that the proposed conditions of peace were highly honourable,
that he declared proudly he would listen to no terms, till he was in the
field at the head of the army, being resolved that Khan-Khannan should
not deprive him of the honour of finishing that war.

The ambitious views of this young prince are quite obvious, and form the
common talk of the country, yet the king suffers him to proceed,
although he by no means intends him as his successor. Sultan Cuserou,
the eldest son, is highly beloved and honoured of all men, and almost
adored, for his excellent parts and noble dispositions, with which the
king is well acquainted, and even loves him dearly. But he conceives
that the liberty of this son would diminish his own glory, and does not
see that the ambition of Churrum greatly more tarnishes his own fame
than would the virtuous character and noble actions of the other. Thus
the king fosters division and emulation among his sons, putting so much
power into the hands of the younger, which he believes he can undo at
his pleasure, that the wisest here foresee much fatal division in this
mighty empire when the present king shall pay the debt of nature,
expecting that it will then be rent in pieces by civil wars.

The history of this country, for the variety of its incidents, and the
many crooked practices of the present king during the reign of his
father, Akbar Shah, and these latter troubles, were well worthy of being
committed to writing. But, as the country is so remote, many would
despise such information, and as the people are esteemed barbarous, few
persons would give it credit. I content myself, therefore, with
privately contemplating the singular history of this nation, although I
could narrate so many singular and amusing state intrigues, subtle
evasions, policies, answers, and adages, as could not be easily equalled
in the history of one age or country. One incident, however, that
occurred lately, I cannot omit relating, as it evinces the wisdom and
patience of the emperor, the incorruptible fidelity of a servant, the
detestable falsehood of a brother, and the impudent boldness of a
faction, ready to dare every infamous action, when permitted by the
supreme ruler to exercise an authority beyond the limits of their
condition, and contrary to the dictates of reason and true policy.

The favourite Prince Sultan Churrum, together with the favourite Queen
_Nourmahal_, aunt to his wife, Asaph Khan father-in-law to Churrum, and
brother of _Nourmahal_, and _Etiman Dowlet_, father of _Asaph Khan_ and
_Nourmahal_, being the faction that now governed the emperor, and who
believed their bad influence in danger of being overthrown if the prince
_Cuserou_ were allowed to live, determined to use every effort for his
destruction, and to endeavour to get him into their power, that they
might end his days by poison, for they knew that he was universally
beloved among the nobles, and that his remaining in life and restoration
to liberty must some day overthrow and punish their ambitious projects.
To attain their infamous purposes, Nourmahal was instructed to practise
upon the king's weakness, by false tears and bewitching blandishments,
to insinuate that Sultan Cuserou was not in sufficiently safe custody,
and that he still meditated aspiring projects, contrary to the authority
and safety of the emperor, who listened to all her insinuations, yet
refused to understand her, as she did not plainly speak out her meaning.

As this plan failed, the prince, with Etiman Dowlet and Asaph Khan, took
the opportunity of the emperor being drunk, to persuade him, as if for
the greater safety and honour of Sultan Cuserou, that it were fitter he
should be in the company of his brother Churrum, who would be more
regardful of his safety and happiness than could be expected from an
idolatrous rajput, to whose custody he had been committed by the
emperor. They therefore humbly implored his majesty that Prince Cuserou
might be confided to the care of his dear brother Churrum. This was
granted by the intoxicated monarch, who immediately fell asleep.

They now deemed their project successful, as having the royal authority;
and, considering their own greatness, they believed no one would dare to
dispute the warrant, or to refuse delivering the prince into their
hands. Accordingly, Asaph Khan went that same night with a guard to the
house of _Anna-Rah_, a rajput Rajah, or prince, to demand from, him, in
the king's name and authority, the person of Sultan Cuserou, who had
been confided to his custody by the king. Anna-Rah declared that he was
the most humble slave of Prince Churrum, whose name Asaph Khan used upon
this occasion; but having received charge of Prince Cuserou directly
from the hands of the emperor, he would deliver him up to no other
person. He therefore entreated that Prince Churrum would have patience
till next morning, when he would discharge his duty to the king, whose
pleasure, once known, he would implicitly obey. This answer overturned
the whole contrivance. In the morning Anna-Rah went to the king, to whom
he communicated the demand made upon him in the name of Prince Churrum,
saying. That his majesty had given his son Cuserou to his charge,
together with the command of 4000 horse, with all of whom he was ready
to die at the imperial gate, rather than resign the prince into the
hands of his enemies: But, if his majesty required, he was ready at all
times to obey his commands. To this the king replied, "You have done
honestly and faithfully, and have answered discretely. Continue your
purpose, and take no notice of any orders. I will not seem to know any
thing of this, neither do you speak of it any farther. Preserve your
fidelity, and let us see how far they will prosecute this affair."

Next day, finding the king silent on the subject, the prince and his
faction took no notice of any thing, hoping the king might forget what
had passed in his cups over night. I have communicated this incident,
that you may beware of scattering your goods in this country, or of
engaging your servants and stock too deeply; for the time will come when
the whole of this empire will be in commotion, and it is not a few years
war that will put a period to the inveterate enmity accumulated on all
hands against a day of vengeance. Should Sultan Cuserou prevail in
procuring his rightful inheritance, this empire will become a sanctuary
for Christians, whom he loves and honours, being a patron of learning,
and an encourager of true valour and just government, abhorring all
covetousness, and despising the base custom of accepting bribes and
presents, in use among his ancestors and the nobility of this empire.
Should Sultan Churrum ascend the throne, it will be a great loss to us,
as he is a rigid adherent to the superstition of Mahomet, a hater of all
Christians, proud, subtle, false, and barbarously tyrannical.[206]

[Footnote 206: From this paragraph it appears that the journal of Sir
Thomas Roe was addressed to the Governor and Committees, or Directors of
the East India Company.--E.]

The king returned from hunting on the night of the 13th October, and
sent me a wild pig. An ambassador is daily expected here from Shah
Abbas, king of Persia. This day I received advice of the arrival of four
of our ships in safety at Swally roads, and at the same time received
letters from England. The fleet, originally consisting of six ships,
left England on the 9th March, 1616, losing company of the Rose about
the North Cape, in foul weather. The other five arrived safely in
Saldanha bay on the 12th June, where the Lion was waiting for a wind,
homewards bound, her officers and people all in good health. After
staying some time at the Cape without news of the missing ship, they
dispatched the Swan for Bantam, and sailed on the 29th June with the
other four ships for Surat. On this passage, on the 6th August, when in
lat. 12 deg. 50' S. near the Comora islands, they got sight of a carrack of
1500 tons burden, and 600 men, being the admiral of a fleet for Goa. The
Globe fetched her to windward, and after the usual salutations of the
sea, the carrack commanded her to leeward, and seconded this order with
five shots through her hull, to which the Globe replied with eighteen,
and then luffed off. The admiral of the English got now up with all his
ships, and demanded satisfaction for the injury, which was replied to
with scorn. On this an engagement ensued, in which the commander,
Benjamin Joseph, was soon slain, but his successor continued the battle.
Towards evening the carrack ran herself ashore on the rocks of
_Angazesia_. Our fleet came to anchor in the offing to wait the event,
and sent a boat to offer fair terms of battle. But about midnight the
carrack was set on fire, and continued to burn all next morning. The
English sent their boats to give assistance, but could not approach, and
they had reason to believe that not one man was saved.[207] The new
viceroy of Goa was in this ship, by whose obstinacy the death of all the
rest was occasioned. Our fleet came to anchor off Swally on the 24th
September, 1616.

[Footnote 207: It was afterwards known that some few escaped with life
and poverty. A more particular account of this fight will be found in
the subsequent journal of Alexander Child.--_Purch._]

The 14th October I waited on the emperor, to whom I imparted his
majesty's salutations, which were courteously received, but he
immediately began to enquire what presents had been sent to him. I
mentioned our late fight and victory, at which he seemed to rejoice, and
applauded the valour of our nation; but he immediately shifted the
discourse, asking what our king had sent him. I answered, that he had
sent many tokens of his love and affection; but knowing that his majesty
was lord of the best portion of Asia, and the richest monarch of the
East, my sovereign was satisfied the sending of rich gifts to his
majesty were to cast pearls into the sea, their common mother and
storehouse; but that my master, together with the warmest assurance of
his love, had sent him many curiosities, which I hoped would give him
entire satisfaction. He urged me to mention particulars, some of which I
named. He asked me for French _muffe_ or velvet, to which I answered,
that all my letters were not arrived. He then enquired if there were any
dogs. To which I answered, that some had been slain in the battle at
sea, but that two were preserved for him, at which he seemed much
rejoiced. He then said, if I could procure him one of our great horses,
such as I had described, being a _roan_ or Dutch horse, he would value
it more than an additional kingdom. I answered, that I should use my
best endeavours to satisfy his majesty, but much feared it could not be
effected, owing to the length of the voyage. He said he would willingly
give a lack of rupees for such a horse. I then desired he would be
pleased to give an order for the transmission of the presents without
being searched, and for the good usage of our people. He answered, that
the port belonged to his son, but sent for him, and publicly gave orders
for what I required; that the presents should not be searched, nor pay
any custom, but should be sent up safe to me with all expedition, that I
might distribute them at my discretion. He likewise commanded the prince
to give orders for the good usage of our people, and that I should be
satisfied in all my demands. This order did not extend to the grant of a
fort, as Asaph Khan had absolutely refused to deliver in that clause.
This charge was very round and hearty on the part of the king, and a
great grace to me. The prince called Asaph Khan forwards in my presence,
and promised, before his father and the whole court, to give me all
reasonable satisfaction. All this was on the strength of the new
presents.

That same day I sent for the Portuguese jesuit who resided at court, and
gave him an account of the engagement between our ships and the carrack,
offering to make peace between our nation and the Portuguese upon equal
terms. He promised to acquaint the viceroy of Goa with my offer, and so
departed. The 15th I received accounts from Masulipatan that Captain
Keeling had taken a Portuguese ship and two barks; one on the coast of
Cochin, laden with tin, and the other freighted from Bengal, both of
which were carried to Bantam. I was also informed that Sir Robert
Shirley had been dismissed with disgrace from Goa, and was on his way
overland to Masulipatan, to procure a passage; but am apt to believe
this intelligence is untrue.

The 16th, being with the prince's secretary about the dispatch of our
affairs, he proposed to me, by his master's orders, to procure him two
gunners from our fleet to serve him in the Deccan war, offering good pay
and good usage. This I undertook to perform, knowing that indifferent
artists might serve there. While at the prince's palace, Abdala Khan
came to visit him, so magnificently attended, that I have not before
seen the like. He was preceded by about twenty drums, and other martial
music, on horseback, who made abundant noise. After them followed fifty
persons bearing white flags, and two hundred well-mounted soldiers, all
richly clothed in cloth of gold, velvet, and rich silks, who all entered
the gate with him in regular array. Next his person were forty
targeteers, in the richest liveries. After making his humble reverence,
he presented a black Arabian horse, splendidly caparisoned, all his
furniture being studded with flowers of enamelled gold, and set with
small precious stones. According to custom, the prince returned a
turban, a vest, and a girdle.

Still persisting in his purpose of personally finishing the war in the
Deccan, he would give no answer to the ambassadors from that country,
but detained them till he should come to the frontiers. Being now about
to depart, he and his party thought themselves not secure if Sultan
Cuserou remained under the safeguard of Anna-Rah, lest, during the
absence of Churrum, the king might be reconciled to Cuserou, by whose
liberty all the hopes and power of their faction would be overthrown, in
which case their ambition and the injuries they had done could hardly
escape punishment. In this view they continued to urge the king to
deliver Sultan Cuserou into the custody of Asaph Khan, as deputy on that
occasion to Churrum, under pretence that this measure would intimidate
Khan-Khannan and the Deccan princes, when they shall learn that Sultan
Churrum is so favoured that the king has delivered his eldest son into
his keeping, giving him as it were present possession of the kingdom,
and the certain prospect of succession. Accordingly, on the 17th of
October, Sultan Cuserou was delivered up as they desired, the soldiers
of Anna-rah were discharged, and those of Asaph Khan placed over him,
assisted by 200 horse belonging to the prince. The sister of Sultan
Cuserou, and several other women in the seraglio, have put themselves in
mourning, refuse to take their food, and openly exclaim against the
dotage and cruelty of the king; declaring, if Cuserou should die, that
an hundred of his kindred would devote themselves to the flames, in
memory of the king's cruely to the worthiest of his sons.

The king endeavoured to sooth them by fair words, protesting that he had
no evil intentions towards his son, whom he promised speedily to deliver
from captivity, and even sent his favourite Nourmahal to endeavour to
appease the enraged and disconsolate ladies; but they refused to admit
her visit, loading her with curses and threatnings. The common people
universally condemn the king's conduct, saying, that he has not only
delivered his son's life, but his own into the keeping of an ambitious
prince and treacherous faction, and that Cuserou cannot perish without
extreme scandal to his father, unless he amply revenge his death, for
which cause the party will dispatch the king first, and his eldest son
afterwards, that through their deaths the ambitious and unnatural
Churrum may mount the throne. Every hour new rumours are spread of the
deliverance of Cuserou, which are speedily contradicted; for he still
remains in the tyger's den, refuses food, and requires that his father
may take away his life, and not leave him to be a sport and prey to his
inveterate enemies. The whole court is filled with rumours and secret
whispers; the nobles are sad, and the people full of turmoil and noise,
without any head, having no one to direct their rage to any specific
object. The issue seems involved in dangers, especially for us, as, in
regard to themselves, it matters not who wins. Although the elder prince
have more right, and is of a more honourable character, he is still a
Mahomedan, and can hardly be a better prince than his father, whose
dispositions are good, yet so facile that he allows all to govern at
their will, which is even worse than if he were a tyrant, for we had
better suffer injuries from one prince than from a host of ministers and
subordinate agents.

The 19th of October _Mahomet Reza Beg_, the Persian ambassador, made his
entry into the city with a great cavalcade, partly sent out by the king
to meet him. There were at least an hundred elephants, with many
musicians; but no man of quality went out on this occasion beyond the
ordinary official receivers of strangers. His own train consisted of
about fifty horse in splendid dresses of cloth of gold, their bows,
quivers, and targets being richly adorned. Together with these he had
about forty musqueteers, and about 200 ordinary _peons_ and attendants
on his passage. He was conducted to a room within the outer court of the
palace, to rest himself till the evening, at which time I sent my
secretary to the durbar, to give me an account of the ceremonial. On
coming into the presence, and reaching the first rail, he made three
_tessalims_ and one _sizeda,_ which is prostrating himself and knocking
his head three times against the ground. On entering within the rail he
did the same, and then presented the letter of his master, _Shabas_,
[Shah Abbas.] This the king took with a slight inclination of the body,
saying only, _How doth my brother_? without using any title of majesty.
After some few words, the ambassador was placed in the seventh rank,
close to the rail beside the door, and below many of the king's
servants, which, in my opinion, was a very mean place for the ambassador
of Persia; but he richly merited this degradation for doing that mean
reverence to the dishonour of his master which all his predecessors had
refused, and by which he gave much offence to many of his nation. It is
reported that he had orders from Shah Abbas to give content in all
things, and hence it is conjectured that he is sent to obtain some aid
in money against the Turks, in which kind the court of Persia often
finds liberal succour from the Mogul government. Others pretend that his
object is to mediate a peace for the princes of the Deccan, whose
protection Shah Abbas is said to have much at heart, being jealous of
the extension of this empire.

According to custom, the king gave him a handsome turban, a vest of
cloth of gold, and a girdle, for which he again made three _tessalims_
and a _sizeda_, or ground courtesy. The present he brought consisted of
three times nine Persian and Arabian horses, this being among them a
ceremonious number; nine very large and handsome mules; seven camels
laden with velvet; two suits of European _Arras_, or tapestry, which I
suppose was Venetian; two chests of Persian hangings; one rich cabinet;
four muskets; five clocks; a camel's load of cloth of gold; eight silk
carpets; two balasss rubies; twenty-one camel loads of wine made of
grapes; fourteen camel loads of distilled sweet waters; seven of
rose-water; seven daggers and five swords adorned with precious stones;
seven Venetian mirrors, all so fair and rich that I was ashamed of the
relation.

These presents were not now delivered, but only a list of them in
writing. His own equipage was rich, having nine led horses, their
trappings all studded with gold and silver. His turban was encircled by
a chain of pearls, rubies, and turquoises, having three pipes of gold,
in which were three plumes of feathers. Having thus caused accurate
observation to be made of his reception, and compared it with my own, I
find it in nothing more gracious than my own, and in many things
inferior, except only in being met without the town, which, owing to my
sickness, was not demanded; neither did the king receive the letter of
Shah Abbas with so much respect as that of the king, my master, whom he
called the king of England, his brother, naming the Persian barely his
brother, without addition. This observation was made by the jesuit, who
understood the language.

Sec.5. _Continuation of Occurrences at Court, till leaving Agimere, in
November_, 1616.

The 20th of October I received the prince's letter to send to Sarat,
with orders for the governor of that city to sit along with the judge
of the custom-house, to take care that no wrong was done to the English.
The clause about sending up the presents sealed and unsearched to me,
was so obscure and unintelligible, that it was susceptible of various
constructions, which I believed was done designedly, that they might
come into the hands of the prince, so as to become his own. I sent it
back therefore to his secretary to be altered; and getting it returned
still more intricate than at first, I went to the prince on the 21st,
and desired to have that clause of his letter explained, at which he
stuck a little, and I perceived he was as hollow as I had imagined. He
plainly asked, How then he should have his presents, or see such
curiosities as came up? and proposed to accompany me to where they were.
I answered, that I could not do this till I had delivered my master's
message and presents to the king, after which I should wait upon his
highness with his presents, and that every rarity that came to me should
be sent after him. He pressed me to pass my word for the performance of
this, which I did, and then I had the letter for Surat made out to my
content.

At this interview the prince observed a white feather in my hat, and
asked if I would give it to him. I answered, that I could not presume to
offer any thing I had worn; but if he were pleased to command it, that
or any thing else in my power was at his service. He then asked if I had
any more; to which I answered, that I had three or four others of
different colours. He desired to have them all, as he was to shew his
horses and servants to the king within two days, and wanted some, being
rare in these parts. I therefore promised to bring all I had next day,
when his highness might take what pleased him.

This day Abdalla Khan waited on the prince with a gallant equipage,
himself and servants being anticly apparelled, yet soldier-like,
according to their fashion. On this occasion he made a present to the
prince of a handsome white horse, full of spirit and high mettled, the
saddle and furniture all ornamented with enamelled gold. The prince
returned him a plain sword with a leathern belt. Many other swords were
brought before him, the hilts and scabbards being of silver, set with
small stones, together with targets covered with gold velvets, some
painted and embossed with gold and silver, all of which he distributed
among his servants. Against this muster many saddles and other
horse-furniture were provided, richly ornamented with gold and precious
stones, intended for spare horses. His boots were embroidered, and every
thing was of the highest magnificence, so that the expence is
wonderful, and the wealth seen daily is inestimable. There is a report
going, that, on the past night, six of the servants of Sultan Churrum
went to murder Sultan Cuserou, but were refused the key by the porter
who has charge of him. It is farther said that the queen mother is gone
to the king to lay before him an account of this matter. But the truth
of these things is hard to be found, and it is dangerous to ask
questions.

In the evening I went to the durbar to wait upon the king, where I met
the Persian ambassador with the first muster of his presents. He seemed
a jester or juggler, rather than a person of any gravity, continually
skipping up and down, and acting all his words like a mimic player, so
that the _Atachikanne_ was converted as it were into a stage. He
delivered all his presents with his own hand, which the king received
with smiles and a chearful countenance, and many gracious words. His
tongue was a great advantage to the Persian in delivering his own
business, which he did with so much flattery and obsequiousness, that he
pleased as much that way as by his gifts, constantly calling his majesty
king and commander of the world, forgetting that his own master had a
share of it; and on every little occasion of favourable acceptance, he
made his _tessalims_. When all was delivered for that day, he prostrated
himself on the ground, making _sizeda_, and knocking his head on the
floor as if he would have entered it.

The gifts this day were a handsome quiver for a bow and arrow, richly
embroidered; all sorts of European fruits, artificially made, and laid
on dishes; many folding purses, and other knacks, of leather, curiously
wrought in coloured silks; shoes stitched and embroidered: great mirrors
in richly inlaid frames; one square piece of velvet, highly embroidered
with gold in panes, between which were Italian pictures wrought in the
stuff, which he said were the king and queen of Venice, being, as I
suppose, the hanging called Venetian tapestry, of which six were given,
but only one shown. There were besides, many other curiosities of small
value; after which came the three times nine horses and mules, the
latter being very handsome, but the horses had lost their beauty and
condition, as, except one or two, they were very unfit for being sent or
accepted between princes. This done, the Persian returned, with many
antic tricks, to his place, which was far inferior to mine, as I stood
alone, and above all the subjects, though Asaph Khan at first wanted to
put me from it, but I maintained it as my right, having been appointed
me by the king. This was only the first act of the play presented by
the Persian ambassador, which will not be finished in ten days.

The 22d I went to the prince's secretary for the promised Surat letter;
but his highness had changed his mind, and, loth to let the presents
pass without ransacking them, refused to seal the letter. The secretary
pretended they could not be allowed to pass without search, lest the
merchants, under that pretence, might defraud the customs. I was
offended, and going away; but the secretary prevailed on me to go with
him to the prince, to whom I delivered some feathers, being two
_plurides_ and two birds of paradise, which he graciously accepted; and
having made known my determination not to have the presents opened, or
to be sent up by any others than my own servants, he at last yielded,
and commanded his secretary to make out the dispatch in my own way.

At night I went to the durbar to observe the Persian ambassador, whom I
found standing in his place, but often removed and set lower, as the
great men came in. The king once spoke to him, on which he played off
his monkey tricks, but gave no present; only the king gave command that
he should be feasted by the nobles. Most of the time was spent in seeing
saddles and furniture, against the removal of the court, some of which
the king presented to his followers, as the court was daily expected to
move; the king's tents having been pitched four days. I sent that night
to the secretary for my firmaun, but was put off with excuses.

The 24th the king removed to Havar Gemal, and called for the Persian
ambassador, who at night eat and drank before the king along with the
nobles, as I had done on the birth-day. On this occasion the king gave
him 20,000 rupees for his expences, for which he made innumerable
_tessalims_ and _sizedas_, which greatly pleased the king, being base
yet profitable idolatry. As the prince was in attendance on the king, I
could not get my business dispatched.

The king returned to the city in the evening of the 25th, having been
far gone in wine the night before. Some person, either by chance or from
malice, spoke of the last merry night, when many of the nobles had drank
wine, which none may do without leave. Having forgot his own order, the
king demanded to know who gave? It was answered that it had been given
by the _buxy_, as no one dared to say it was the king, seeing he doubted
it. The custom is that the king drinks alone, though sometimes he will
give command that the nobles shall drink also, which to refuse is
likewise an offence, so every one who takes the cup of wine from the
officer has his name written down, and makes _tessalim_, though perhaps
the king's eyes are misty. The king called for the _buxy_, and asked if
he gave the order, which he falsely denied; though he actually gave it
as ordered, calling by name such as were to drink with the ambassador.
The king then called for the list, and fined the delinquents, some 1000,
some 2000, and others 3000 rupees. Some that were near his person, he
caused to be whipped in his presence, receiving 130 stripes with a most
terrible instrument of torture, having at the ends of four cords irons
like spur-rowels, so that every stroke made four wounds. When they lay
for dead, he commanded the standers-by to spurn them with their feet,
and the door-keepers to break their staves upon them. Thus cruelly
mangled and bruised, they were carried away, one of them dying on the
spot. Some would have excused themselves, by blaming the ambassador; but
the king said he had only ordered a cup or two to be given to him.
Though drunkenness be a common and frequent vice in the king, it is yet
strictly forbidden; and no one can enter the _guzelkhan_ where the king
sits, till the porters have smelt his breath, and if he have only tasted
wine he is refused admittance; and if this reason of his absence be
known, he shall scarcely escape the whip. When the king has taken
offence at any one, even a father dares not speak for his son. Thus the
king made all the company pay for the Persian ambassador's reward.

The 26th, I went to _Sorocolla_, the prince's secretary, to get the
promised firmaun; when he sent me a copy as fraudulent and ambiguous as
the former, which I refused to accept. I drew up the clause I so much
disliked myself, which I sent back, and was promised to have it sealed
next day.

The day of the king's removal being at hand, I sent on the 28th to Asaph
Khan, to have a warrant for carriages, as our merchants had sought all
over the town for carriages to convey their goods to Agra, and could not
procure any. As I was enrolled by the king, I received an order for
twenty camels, four carts, and two coaches, to be paid for at the
king's price; of which I appointed for the use of the factors as many as
they needed.

At this time the following incident took place, being either a wonderful
instance of baseness in this great monarch, or a trial of my
disposition. The king had condemned several thieves to death, among whom
were some boys, and there was no way to save their lives, except by
selling them as slaves. On this occasion, the king commanded Asaph Khan
to offer two of them to me for money, which he directed to be done by
the _cutwall_, or marshal. He came accordingly and made the offer to my
interpreter, who answered without my knowledge, that the Christians kept
no slaves, and, as I had already set free those the king had given me,
it was in vain to propose the matter to me. I afterwards suspected this
were done to try me whether I would give a little money to save the
lives of two children, or, if it even were in earnest, I thought there
was no great loss in doing a good deed. So, to try the scope of this
affair, I directed my interpreter to inform Asaph Khan, that being made
acquainted with the offer, and the answer my interpreter had given, I
had reprehended him for presuming in any case to answer for me; and
that, if any money were to be given to save the lives of the children,
either to those whom they had robbed, or to redeem them from the law, I
was ready to give it, both out of respect for the king's command, and
for charity; but I would not buy them as slaves, only meaning to pay
their ransom, and set them free; and, if he would let me know the king's
pleasure, that I might give them their lives and liberties without
offence, I was very willing to do it.

Asaph Khan agreed to accept the money, making many commendations of my
extraordinary goodness, and said I might dispose of the boys as I
thought fit, desiring me to send the money to the _cutwall_, yet made no
offer of informing the king, which was one chief purpose of my
liberality. I had no inclination to be cheated, yet resolved to pay the
money in such a way that the king should learn I had more mercy than he,
and that a Christian valued the life of a Mahomedan beyond money. I sent
therefore a factor and my interpreter to the _cutwall_, to acquaint him
with my communication to Asaph Khan, and that, if he informed the king
of my offer to redeem the prisoners for charity, and his majesty
consented to give them their pardon and liberty, I was ready to send
the money; but that I would not buy them as slaves, even for an hour.
Thus I put them to the test as to their base offer. This sum did not
exceed ten pounds, a poor affair for which to impose upon a stranger, or
to be gained by so great a king. The _cutwall_ answered that he would
enquire the king's pleasure, and let me know the result. Some would have
me believe, that this was, a signal favour of the king, chusing out any
great man to do this good and honourable work of redeeming prisoners, as
the money is given in satisfaction to the person robbed, and that those
who are thus appointed to ransom them, make _sizeda_ to the king, as for
a mighty benefit. But I see no honour in a king thus to impose upon a
stranger, to whom he gives neither maintenance nor liberality. I went to
the durbar, to see if the king would himself speak to me, that I might
declare my own offer. The _cutwall_ made many motions, and brought in
his executioner, who received some commands, but I understood them not.

I this day sent my secretary with a message to the Persian ambassador,
to say I would visit him, if he gave his word to return my visit. He
sent me for answer, with much respect, that it was not the custom of the
country for ambassadors to visit each, other without leave of the king,
which he would ask; and which given, he would thankfully accept my
visit, and repay it with all manner of pleasure.

On the 1st November, Sultan Churrum took his leave and went to his
tents. On this occasion the king sat in his durbar at noon, when the
prince passed his establishment in review before his father, consisting
of about 600 elephants richly caparisoned, and about 10,000 horse, all
splendidly arrayed, many of his followers being clad in cloth of gold,
and their turbans adorned with herons plumes. The prince himself was in
a dress of cloth of silver, all over embroidered, and splendidly
decorated with pearls and diamonds, shining like the firmament in a
clear night. The king embraced and kissed him with much affection,
presenting him with a rich sword, the hilt and scabbard all of gold set
with precious stones, valued at 100,000 rupees, a dagger valued at
40,000, together with an elephant, and a horse, the furniture of both
magnificently adorned with gold and jewels. At his departure, he gave
him a coach, made in imitation of that sent by the king my master to the
emperor, and commanded the English coachman to drive the prince to the
tents. Churrum went accordingly into the coach, sitting in the middle
thereof, all the sides being open; and was attended by all his chief
nobles a-foot, all the way to the camp, which was about four miles.
Being followed by a vast concourse of people, he scattered all the way
among them handfuls of quarter rupees. At one time he reached his hand
to the coachman, and put about 100 rupees into his hat.

On the 2d, the king removed, with his women and all the court, to the
tents, about three miles from town. I went that morning to attend upon
him at the _Jarruco_ window of the palace, and went up to the scaffold
under the window, being desirous to see this exhibition. Two eunuchs
stood upon tressels, having long poles headed with feathers, with which
they fanned him. On this occasion, he dispensed many favours, and
received many presents. What he gave was let down by a silk cord, rolled
on a turning instrument; and what he received was drawn up in the same
manner, by a venerable, fat, and deformed old matron, all hung round
with _gymbals_ like an image. Two of his principal wives were at a
window on one side, whose curiosity led them to break holes in a lattice
of roods that hung before the window, to gaze on me. At first I only saw
their fingers; and afterwards, applying their faces to the holes, I
could at times see an eye, and at length could discern their entire
countenances. They were indifferently fair, having their black hair
smoothed up from their foreheads; and they were so adorned with pearls
and diamonds, that I might have seen them without the help of any other
light. On my looking at them, they retired very merry, and, as I
supposed, laughing at me.

After some time, the king departed from the window, and we all went to
the durbar, to wait his coming out of the inner apartments. He came not
long after, and remained in the durbar for about half an hour, till his
ladies had mounted their elephants, which were in all about fifty, all
richly caparisoned, especially three, which had turrets or _howders_ of
gold, with grates of gold wire for the ladies to see through, and rich
canopies over head of cloth of silver. The king then descended the
stairs, amid such acclamations of _health to the king_, as would have
drowned the noise of cannon. At the foot of the stairs, where I
contrived to be near him, a person brought to him a large carp, and
another presented a dish of some white stuff like starch, into which the
king dipped his finger, with which he touched the fish, and then rubbed
it on his forehead. This ceremony was said to presage good fortune. Then
came another officer, who buckled on his sword and buckler, all set with
large diamonds and rubies. Another hung on his quiver with thirty
arrows, and his bow-case, being that which had been presented by the
Persian ambassador. On his head, the king wore a rich turban, with a
plume of heron's crests, not many but long: On one side hung a rich
unset ruby as large as a walnut; on the other side a diamond of equal
size; and in the middle an emerald much larger, shaped like a heart. His
sash was wreathed about with a chain of great pearls, rubies, and
diamonds, drilled. A triple chain of excellent pearls, the largest I had
ever seen, hung round his neck. He had armlets above his elbows, richly
set with diamonds; and three rows of diamonds round each wrist. His
hands were bare, having a rich ring on almost every finger; and a pair
of English gloves were stuck into his girdle. His coat, without sleeves,
was of cloth of gold, over a fine robe as thin as lawn. On his feet he
wore buskins embroidered with pearls, the toes being sharp and turned
up.

Thus richly accoutred, he went into the coach, which waited for him
under the care of his new English servant, who was dressed as gaudily as
any player, and more so, and had trained four horses for the draught,
which were trapped and harnessed all in velvet and gold. This was the
first coach he had ever been in, made in imitation of that sent from
England, and so like it that I only knew the difference by the cover,
which was of gold velvet of Persia. Having seated himself at one end,
two eunuchs attended at each side, carrying small golden maces set all
over with rubies, to which horse-tails were fastened, for driving away
flies. Before him went drums, bad trumpets, and loud music; with many
canopies, parasols, and other strange ensigns of majesty, all of cloth
of gold, and adorned with rubies. Nine spare horses were led before him,
some having their furniture garnished with rubies, some with pearls, and
others with diamonds, while some had only plain gold studs. Next behind
the coach came three palanquins, the carriages and feet of one being
plated with gold, set with pearls, and a fringe of great pearls in
strings a foot long, the border being set all round with rubies and
emeralds. Beside this, a man on foot carried a stool of gold, set with
precious stones. The other two palanquins were covered and lined with
cloth of gold.

Next followed the English coach, newly covered and richly trimmed, which
he had given to his favourite queen, Nourmahal, who sat in the inside.
After this came a coach, made after the fashion of the country, which I
thought seemed out of countenance, in which were his younger sons. This
was followed by about twenty spare royal elephants, all for the king's
own use, all so splendidly adorned with precious stones and rich
furniture, that they outshone the sun. Each elephant had several flags
and streamers of cloth of silver, gilded sattin, or rich silk. His
noblemen accompanied him on foot, which I did likewise to the gate, and
then left him. His women, who accompanied him on elephants, as before
mentioned, seemed like so many parroquitos in cages, and followed about
half a mile in the rear of his coach. On coming to the door of the house
in which his eldest son was kept prisoner, he caused the coach to stop,
and sent for prince Cuserou; who immediately came and made reverence,
having a sword and buckler in his hands, and his beard grown to his
middle, in sign of disfavour. The king now commanded his son to mount
one of the spare elephants in the royal train, so that he rode next his
father, to the great joy and applause of the multitude, who were now
filled with new hopes; and on this occasion, the king gave him 1000
rupees to throw among the people; his gaoler, Asaph Khan, and all the
ministers, being still attendant on foot.

To avoid the press and other inconveniences, I took horse and crossed
out of the _leskar_, getting before the king, and then waited for him
till he came near his tents, to which he passed all the way from the
town between a guard of turreted elephants, having each on the four
corners of their howdars a banner of yellow taffety, and a _sling_[208]
mounted in front, carrying a bullet as big as a tennis-ball. There were
about three hundred elephants armed in this manner, each having a
gunner; besides about six hundred other elephants of honour, that
preceded or followed the king, all covered with velvet or cloth of gold,
and all carrying two or three gilded banners. Many men afoot ran before
the king, carrying skins of water with which to sprinkle the road to
prevent dust from annoying him; and no one was allowed to approach the
coach on horseback by two furlongs.

[Footnote 208: The sling in the text appears to have been a _slung_
musquetoon, or small cannon, mounted in that manner to avoid
recoil.--E.]

Having gone before a-horseback, as before mentioned, I hastened to the
tents, to await the king's arrival. The royal encampment was walled
round, half a mile in circuit, in form of a fortress, with high screens
or curtains of coarse stuff; somewhat like Arras hangings, red on the
outside, the inside being divided into panes or compartments, with a
variety of figures. This inclosure had a handsome gateway, and the
circuit was formed into various coins and bulwarks, as it were; the
posts which supported the curtains being all surmounted with brass tops.
The throng was very great, and I wished to have gone into the enclosure,
but no one was allowed, even the greatest of the land having to sit down
at the gate. At length I was admitted, but the Persian ambassador and
all the nobles were refused. At this gate, and for the first time, I was
saluted by the Persian ambassador as I passed, by a silent _salam_.

In the midst of this enclosure, there stood a throne of mother-of-pearl,
borne aloft on two pillars, under cover of a high tent or pavilion, the
pole of which was headed by a golden knob, the roof being of cloth of
gold, and the ground covered by carpets. When the king came near,
several noblemen were admitted, together with the Persian ambassador;
all of us making a kind of lane, the ambassador being on one side, and I
on the other. As the king came in, he cast his eye on me, whereupon I
made him a reverence, to which he answered by bowing and laying his hand
on his breast. Turning to the other side, he nodded to the Persian. I
followed close at his heels till he ascended the throne, every one
calling out, _joy, health, and good fortune_. The king then called for
water, with which he washed his hands, and then retired into an interior
tent, to join his women, who had entered by another gate to their own
quarters; there being about thirty divisions with tents within the royal
inclosure. His son I saw not. All the noblemen now retired to their
quarters, which were all very handsome, some having their tents green,
others white, and others again of mixed colours, all handsome in form
and arrangement, and all as orderly inclosed as their houses in the
city, so that the whole composed the most curious and magnificent sight
I had ever beheld. The whole vale seemed like a magnificent city, no
mean tents or baggage being allowed to mix among these splendid
pavilions. I was utterly unprovided with carriages or tent, and ashamed
of my situation, for indeed five years of my allowances would not have
enabled me to take the field any thing like the others; every one having
a double set of pavilions, one of which goes before to the next station,
where it is set up a day before the king removes. On this account, I was
obliged to return to my poor house in the town.

On the 5th November I rode about five miles, to the tents of the prince,
Sultan Churrum. I made him my compliments of leave taking, wishing him
all prosperity and success; but he ordered me to return and take my
leave two days afterwards, as I had moved him on some business,
respecting debts due to the English, which he promised to examine and
dispatch. He sat in state, in the same greatness and magnificence I have
mentioned of his father; his throne being plated all over with silver,
inlaid with gold flowers, having a square canopy over head, borne up by
four pillars covered with silver; his arms, such as his sword, buckler,
bows, arrows, and lance, being on a table before his throne. I observed
him curiously, now that he was in absolute authority, and took especial
notice of his actions and behaviour. He had just received two letters,
which he read standing, before he ascended his throne. I never saw any
one having so settled a countenance, or maintain a so constant gravity
of deportment, never once smiling, or shewing by his looks any respect
or distinction of persons, but evincing an extreme pride and thorough
contempt for all around him. Yet I could perceive that he was every now
and then assailed by some inward trouble, and a kind of distraction and
brokenness in his thoughts, as he often answered suitors in a disjointed
manner, as if surprised, or not hearing what they had said. If I can
judge, he has left his heart among his father's women, with whom he is
allowed to converse. The day before, Noormahal went to visit him in the
English coach; and, on taking leave of him, she presented him with a
robe, all embroidered with diamonds, rubies, and pearls; and, if I do
not mistake, she carried away with her all his attentions from other
business.

The 6th I had a letter from Mr Brown at Ahmedabad, giving an account of
a fray begun by the Portuguese. Five of them assailed an English boy at
Cambay, whose arms they took from him. On notice of this, John Brown and
James Bickeford went to rescue the boy, and were set upon by seven
Portuguese, one of whom fired a pistol and wounded Brown in the hand.
They defended themselves bravely and honourably like Englishmen, killed
one, wounded some others, and chaced the rest up and down the town like
cowards, to the great shame of such villains, and the reputation of our
nation. To revenge this, the Portuguese came ashore in considerable
numbers from their frigates, no more English being in the town except
the three already mentioned. The governor, being informed of this
affair, sent the cutwall with a guard to our house, and ordered the
water port to be shut, expelling the Portuguese from the town, and
commanding them, on pain of chastisement, not to meddle with the
English, whom he dismissed in safety from Cambay, and they are now
returned to Ahmedabad.

The 9th, the prince being to remove, sent one of his guards for me in
haste. I was not prepared for going, but the messenger pressed me,
urging that his master waited for me, and he had orders not to return
without me. He added, that the whole court talked of the prince's favour
for me, and it was reported he had asked leave from the king for me to
accompany him to the war, and had promised to use me so well that I
should be forced to acknowledge his favour to our nation. I accordingly
took horse after dinner; but on my arrival, I found the prince already
under march. I met a Dutchman, the prince's jeweller, who confirmed
every thing the soldier had said, and added so much more in the same
strain, that I disbelieved the whole. I sent word to the prince of my
arrival, when he returned for answer, That I should go on before to the
tents, and wait his arrival, when he would speak with me. It was night
when he came. He sat a short while, only giving me a look, and arose to
retire among his women. As he passed, he sent a servant to desire me to
wait a little, till he came out to hold his guzalcan, when he should
take leave of me.

He came out in half an hour, but I could not get any one to remind him
of me, and he was fallen to play, and either forgot me, or proposed to
play me a state trick. I then told the waiters, that I had been sent for
by the prince, and only waited his orders, for which I had too long
waited, as it was late, and I must return to my house; and therefore, if
the prince had any business for me, I desired it might be sent after me,
as I scorned to be so used. Before I could mount, messengers came
running after me, and called me back to wait upon the prince. Going in,
I found him earnestly engaged at cards, but he excused himself of
forgetfulness, blaming the officers formally for not reminding him, and
shewed more than ordinary attention, calling me to see his cards, and
asking me many questions. I expected he would have spoken of my going
along with him; but, finding no such discourse, I told him I had come
only in obedience to his commands, and to take my leave, and craved his
pardon for being in haste, as I had to return to Agimere, having no
convenience for staying all night in camp. He answered, that he had sent
to speak with me before his departure, and that I should be presently
dispatched. He then sent in an eunuch into the interior apartments, and
several of his officers came to me smiling, who said that the prince
meant to give me a magnificent present, and if I feared to ride late, I
should have a guard of ten horsemen to see me safe home, making as much
of the matter as if I had been to get his best chain of pearls. By and
by came a cloak of cloth of gold, which the prince had once or twice
worn, which he caused to be put on me, and for which I made my reverence
very unwillingly; yet I urged some business, and having an answer, took
my leave. It is here reputed the highest favour, to give one a garment
that has been worn by a prince, or that has merely been laid on their
shoulders. The cloak now given me might have answered well for an actor
who had to represent the character of his ancestor, Tamerlane, on the
stage, but was to me of no importance. On my way out, I was followed by
his porters and waiters, begging in a most shameless manner, so that I
half paid the value of the cloak before I could get out from among them.

On the 10th November, almost every body had removed from the town of
Agimere, so that I was left nearly alone, and could neither get carts
nor camels for my removal, notwithstanding my warrant. The Persian
ambassador was in a similar predicament, but complained, and was soon
redressed. I therefore sent to court, and on the 11th I received two
warrants, for being supplied with carts and camels at the king's price:
but it was not easy to procure either, as the great men had soldiers in
every direction, to take up all for their use; and indeed it was
wonderful, how two leskars or camps, belonging to the king and prince,
could both remove at once.

The 16th, an order was given by the king to set fire to the whole leskar
at Agimere, that the people might be compelled to follow, which was duly
executed. I was left almost destitute; and the Persian ambassador, who
had fought, chid, brawled, and complained, without any remedy, was in
the same state with me. We sent messages of condolence to each other;
and, by his example, I resolved to buy, as many were disposed to sell,
who would not hire at the king's price, and I calculated that by
purchasing I should almost save hire, though carts were dear, as the
hire of three months would have exhausted the price of purchase.
Necessity enforced me to remove, as the town was burnt and utterly
desolate, and I was in great danger from thieves, as the soldiers came
from camp and robbed during the night. So desolate was the town, that I
could not even procure bread. Yet I sent again to court, to make one
trial more, before I purchased.

The 17th I received accounts from Goa, which were said to be true, that
Don Emanuel de Meneses, with about 300 of those who were saved ashore
out of the Admiral, had arrived at Goa in a very poor condition, having
been robbed and plundered by the inhabitants of Angazesia, who had also
slain many. On the 24th October, not one of the Lisbon fleet had reached
Goa, to their great wonder and disappointment. The Mosambique galleon
was fought with by the Hollanders that lately went from Surat, and had
cruised off Goa to meet the expected ships. This galleon was very rich
in gold and other commodities, but she escaped.

I received an order for camels and carriages, but was continually
delayed and disappointed; and being afraid to remain, I bought two
carts, and was continually promised camels, yet none appeared. Mr
Bidulph remained in the prince's leskar to receive money. The leskar of
the king was still only twelve cosses from Agimere. The 18th, the
Portuguese Jesuit took leave of me, being under the necessity of
purchasing a carriage, although he had an order for one out of the
king's store; but every one was distressed, owing to the scarcity.
Having nothing material to say, respecting my own affairs, during my
solitude at Agimere, I shall here digress, to mention the state of
Sultan Cuserou, of whose new delivery into the hands of his enemies, the
hearts and mouths of all men were now full.

Though the king had so far condescended to satisfy his proud son Churrum
at his departure, as again to place Cuserou in confinement, yet it seems
that he did not mean to wink at any injurious behaviour to his eldest
son: And, partly to render his situation the more secure, in the custody
of Asaph Khan, and partly to satisfy the murmurs of the people, who
feared some treachery against him, he took occasion to declare his mind
respecting him in the public durbar. Asaph Khan had been to visit his
new prisoner, and in his behaviour towards him, did not treat him with
the respect due to a prince, but rudely pressed into his presence
against his will, and in a disrespectful manner. Some are of opinion he
did this purposely to pick a quarrel, knowing the bravery of the prince,
who would not suffer an indignity, meaning to tempt him to draw his
sword, or to use some violence, which the guard might suddenly revenge;
or that he might have opportunity to represent to the king, that the
prince had attempted to kill his keeper, on purpose to escape. But the
prince acted with patient prudence, and only procured a friend to
acquaint the king with the rude behaviour of Asaph Khan. Accordingly,
one day at the durbar, the king called Asaph Khan before him, and asked
when he had seen his charge? To which he answered, he had seen him two
days before. The king then asked, What he had then done to him? He said
he had only visited him. But the king pressed to know what reverence and
fashion he had carried towards the prince. Asaph Khan then saw that the
king knew what had passed. He therefore said, That he had gone to wait
upon the prince, in all reverence and affection, to offer his service,
but that the prince refused him admittance into the apartment;
wherefore, as he was entrusted with his safety, he thought it both
necessary for him to see the prince, and discourteous in him to deny,
and had therefore pressed in. On this, the king quickly asked, "And when
you were in, what did you say and do?" Asaph Khan stood confounded, and
confessed that he did not make any reverence. Whereupon, the king told
him roundly, "That he would make his proud heart know the prince as his
eldest and beloved heir, and his prince and lord; and, if he ever heard
again of the smallest disrespect or want of duty in his behaviour
towards the prince, he would command his son to trample him under his
feet." He added, that he loved his son Prince Churrum, yet did not
entrust his eldest son Cuserou among them for his ruin and destruction.

The 20th I received a new warrant for carriages, which procured me eight
camels, but such poor ones as were quite unable to suffice for our
baggage, and I was therefore under the necessity of purchasing the rest.
The 22d I removed to my tents. The 23d and 24th I waited for the
merchants; and on the latter of these days I had a letter from Ispahan,
saying that my letters had been dispatched for Aleppo, and that we were
expected in Persia, but on condition that we seconded the wishes of Shah
Abbas, by diverting the sale of his silks from Turkey. My letters added,
that the general of the Turks lay with a mighty army at _Argerone_,
[Arzerom,] six days march short of Tauris, as if uncertain whether to
attack that city, or to enter Gurgestan and Gilan, the provinces in
which silk is produced, so as to win that by conquest which was refused
in the way of trade. To guard against both attempts, Shah Abbas was
encamped at _Salmas_, whence he could march either way as might be
required. But, it was farther said, if the armies did not come to battle
in two months, the approach of winter, and the wants attendant on such
numerous bodies of men, would constrain both to quit the field. It is
thought the Persians will not adventure a battle, though 180,000 strong,
as, being light, and unencumbered with cannon or baggage, they are
fitted for rapid marches, and can harass the Turkish army with perpetual
skirmishes and assaults on all sides, hovering round about, and wasting
them, without hazard to themselves.

Sec.6. _Sir Thomas Roe follows the Progress of the Court, and describes the
King's Leskar, and some Places through which he passed; with instances
of the King's Superstition and Drunkenness, and some curious Incidents
respecting a Present_.

The 25th of November I removed four cosses from Agimere, but waited
during the remainder of that month, for the arrival of a caravan, going
from Agra to Surat, by which I might transmit my papers in safety. The
caravan departed from Agimere at midnight of the 30th November: and on
the 1st December I went six cosses to Ramsor, where the king had left
the naked bodies of an hundred men, put to death for robbery. The 2d I
travelled seven c. I rested the 3d, because of rain. The 4th I went five
c. and this day I overtook a camel, laden with 300 heads, sent from
Candahar to the king, the people to whom these heads had belonged having
been in rebellion. Travelling five c. on the 5th, and four c. on the
6th, I that day overtook the king at a walled town called _Todah_, in
the best and most populous country I had seen in India since I landed.
The district was quite level, having a fertile soil, abounding in corn,
cotton, and cattle, and the villages were so numerous and near together,
as hardly to exceed a coss from each other in any direction. This town
was the best built of any I had seen in India, many of the houses being
two stories high, and most of them good enough for decent shop-keepers,
all covered with tiles. It had been the residence of a Rajput rajah,
before the conquests of Akbar Shah, and stood at the foot of a great and
strong rock, about which were many excellent works of hewn stone, well
cut, with many tanks, arched over with well-turned vaults, and large and
deep descents to them. Near it was a beautiful grove, two miles long and
a quarter of a mile broad, all planted with mangoes, tamarinds, and
other fruit-trees, divided by shady walks, and interspersed with little
temples, and idol altars, with many fountains, wells, and summer-houses
of carved stone curiously arched, so that I must confess a poor banished
Englishman might have been content to dwell here. But this observation
may serve universally for the whole of this country, that ruin and
devastation operates every where; for, since the property of all has
become vested in the king, no person takes care of any thing, so that in
every place the spoil and devastations of war appear, and no where is
any thing repaired.

On the 7th the king only removed from one side of Todah to the other.
The 8th I was at the guzalcan, but found the king so nearly drunk, that
he became entirely so in half an hour, so that I could not have any
business with him. The 9th I took a view of the royal _leskar_, or camp,
which is one of the greatest wonders I had ever seen, and chiefly as I
saw it finished and set up in less than four hours, all except the tents
of some of the great men, who have double suits. It could not well be
less in circuit than twenty English miles, the extent in some directions
being three cosses, including the out-skirts. In the middle, where the
streets are orderly and the tents joined, there are all sorts of shops,
so regularly disposed, that all persons know where to go for any thing
they want. Every man of quality, and every trade, is regularly appointed
how far they are to be from the king's tents, in what direction, and
what ground they shall occupy, which continues ever the same without
alteration. All this may equal almost any town in Europe for size. But
no person must approach on any side within a musket shot of the
_atoskanha_, or royal quarter, which is so strictly observed that no one
is ever admitted but by name. The evening durbar is omitted, the time
being spent by the king in hunting or hawking rather, on tanks, by means
of boats, in which he takes great delight, his barges being moved along
with the leskar on carts. On these occasions he sits by the sides of the
tanks, to view the sport, these tanks being often a mile or two over.
The king is seen every morning at the _Jaruco_, formerly mentioned; but
business or speaking to him at this time is prohibited; all business
being conducted at night in the _guzalcan_, and there the opportunity is
often missed, his majesty being so frequently overcome by drowsiness,
proceeding from drunkenness.

There was now a whisper about the court of a new affinity between Sultan
Cuserou and Asaph Khan, and great hope was entertained of the prince
recovering his liberty. I will find an opportunity to discourse of this
hereafter, because the particulars are worthy of being preserved, as the
wisdom and goodness of the king were manifest above the malice of
others: And, in this affair, Noormahal made good the observation, that
women have always great influence in court factions, and she shewed that
they are not incapable of managing business. This history will discover
a noble prince, an excellent wife, a faithful counsellor, a crafty
step-mother, an ambitious son, a cunning favourite; all reconciled by a
patient king, whose heart was not understood by any of them all. But
this will require a separate place,[209] as not fit to be mingled with
matters of ordinary business. At this time the English complained of
being ill used at Surat; but their drunkenness, and riotous behaviour
proceeding from that cause, were so notorious, that it was rather
wonderful they were not all put to death.

[Footnote 209: This story does not however appear, the journal of Sir
Thomas Roe being left imperfect, both in the Pilgrims and in the
Collection of Churchill.--E.]

The 16th of December I visited the king, who was just returned from his
sports, having all his game laid out before him, both fish and fowl. He
desired me to take my choice, and then distributed all the rest among
his nobles. I found him sitting on his throne, having a beggar at his
feet, a poor silly old man, all in rags and ashes, attended on by a
young one. The country abounds in these professed poor and holy men, who
are held in great reverence, and who, in voluntary sufferings and
mortified chastisements of their bodies, exceed all the boasted
performances of heretics and idolaters in all ages and countries. With
this miserable wretch, who was cloathed in rags, crowned with feathers,
and covered, with filth, his majesty conversed for about an hour, with
such kindness, as shewed a humility not common among kings. All this
time the beggar sat before the king, which is not even permitted to his
son. The beggar gave the king as a present, a cake made by himself of
coarse grain, burnt on the coals, and all foul with ashes; which yet the
king accepted, broke off a piece and eat it, which a dainty person would
hardly have done. He then wrapt up the rest in a clout, and put it into
the poor man's bosom, and sending for 100 rupees, he poured them into
the beggar's lap, gathering up with his own hands any that fell past,
and giving them to him. When his collation or banquet was brought in,
whatsoever he took to eat, he gave half of to the beggar. Rising, after
many humiliations and charities, and the old wretch not being nimble, he
took him up in his arms, though a dainty person would have scrupled to
touch him, and embraced him three times, laying his hand on his heart
and calling him father, and so left him, all of us greatly admiring such
virtue in a heathen prince. This I mention with emulation and sorrow;
wishing, as we have the true vine, that we should not produce bastard
grapes, or that this zeal in an unbeliever were guided by the true light
of the gospel.

The 23d, being about three cosses short of a city called _Rantepoor_,
[Rantampoor,] where it was supposed the king would rest, and consult
what way to take in his farther progress, he suddenly turned off towards
_Mundu_, but without declaring his purpose. I am of opinion, he took
this way for fear of the plague at Agra, rather than from any purpose of
being near the army; for we only marched every other day no more than
four cosses, and with such a train of baggage as was almost impossible
to be kept in any degree of order.

The 26th we passed through woods and over mountains, torn with bushes
and tired by the incommodiousness of an almost impassable way, in which
many camels perished, and many persons, wearied of these difficulties,
went away to Agra, and all complained. In this laborious day's march, I
lost my tents and carts, but by midnight I again fell in with them. The
king now rested two days, as the leskar could not again recover its
order in less time; many of the king's women, and thousands of camels,
carts, and coaches, being left in the woody mountains, where they could
neither procure food nor water. The king himself got through upon a
small elephant, which beast can climb up rocks, and get through such
difficult passes, that no horse or other animal I have seen can follow.
The 29th we encamped beside the river _Chambet_, [Chumbull.]

The first of January, 1617, I complained to Asaph Khan of the injuries
offered to the English at Surat, though I was at the same time much
perplexed by various relations, giving me a bad account of the
disorderly and outrageous behaviour of my countrymen. Asaph Khan advised
me not to carry my complaint to the king, which would incense the
prince; but desired me to ask leave of his majesty to go to visit Sultan
Churrum, with a letter from him recommending the dispatch of my
business, and good usage to our nation; so that, carrying a present to
the prince, I should please both, and succeed in my business. This was
the same plan I had already formed, and therefore pleased me the better;
more especially as the king now certainly designed to go forwards to
Mundu, which is only eight days journey from Burhanpoor, where the
prince was; and I thought I might as well ride over to him, as remain
idle in the fields. At noon this day I visited the Persian ambassador,
being the first time we had leisure for this ceremony, and was received
by him with much respectful civility. After compliments on both sides
were over, I proposed to him the settlement of trade in his master's
dominions, which he engaged to promote as much as lay in his power. He
gave me a banquet of bad fruit, but being a good fellow, it went off
well, and he outdid in courtesy every thing I had met with in India. He
railed loudly against the court, and the king's officers and council,
using most unusual liberty. He offered to be my interpreter, desiring
that I might pitch my tents beside his, and he would impart whatever I
thought proper to the king. When about to part, after long discourse, he
pressed me to accept a horse with handsome furniture, which was brought
to the door, but I refused. He then sent for nine pieces of Persian
silks, and nine bottles of wine, that I might not depart without some
testimony of his love, but these also I refused to accept, with many
protestations of affectionate regard. I observed him looking earnestly
at my sword, which I offered to give him; but, following my example, he
refused.

At night I visited the king, who spent his time sadly with an old man,
after reading long letters, and few spoke with him. At his rising, he
presented to this person, who was a cripple from age, 5000 rupees, and
took his leave of him with many embraces. I here again met the Persian
ambassador, who, after some compliments, repenting that he had refused
my sword, and having a liking to it, now asked it from me, saying, that
such liberty among friends was reckoned good manners in his country. We
continued to remove four or five c. every other day, and came on the 7th
to the goodly river _Shind_. The 18th, the king passed through between
two mountains, the road having been cut through the woods, but with so
much trouble and difficulty, and so much encumbrance to the baggage,
that it was left behind, without provisions for man and beast. This day
likewise I lost my tents and baggage, but found them again at midnight,
having been obliged till then to take up my lodging under a tree. This
part of the country is much infested by thieves, and is hardly under
obedience to government, except so far as it is kept under by force. It
belongs to a rajah, who has no desire to see the king. The exactor
complained, and some few of the people that fled being taken, were
chained by the neck and brought before the king, all the rest having
fled into the mountains. At night the king caused the town near which he
was encamped to be set on fire, appointing a new governor, with orders
to re-build and new-people the town, and to reduce the district under
more regular government and better civilization. He left a party of
horse with the new governor, to enable him to perform this service.

On the 20th, the people who had fled to the mountains, being enraged at
the burning of their town, set upon a number of stragglers who had been
left behind, killing many of them, and plundering the rest. The 22d,
having no accounts of the presents I expected from Surat, I went at
night to visit the king, to observe how he might receive me. I found him
seated in an unusual manner, so that I knew not what place to occupy,
and not willing to mix among the great men, as was offered me, and
doubting whether I might go into the apartment where the king was, which
was cut down in the bank of a river, I went to the brink and stood
alone. There were none near the king, except _Etiman Dowlet_ his
father-in-law, Asaph Khan, and three or four others. The king observed
me, and having allowed me to stay a while, he called me in with a
gracious smile, and pointed with his hand for me to stand beside him, a
favour so unusual, that it pleased and honoured me, and of which I soon
experienced the good effects, in the behaviour of the great men of the
court. He led me to talk with him, and when I called for an interpreter,
he refused it, pressing me to use such Persian words as I had learnt.
Our discourse, in consequence, had not much sense or coherence, yet he
was pleased with it, and shewed his approbation in a very courteous
manner.

On the 24th of January, news came to court, that the Deccaners were not
to be frightened out of their dominions, as had been pretended by Asaph
Khan and Noormahal, on purpose to persuade the king into this
expedition. For they had sent off all their baggage and other
impediments into the interior of their country, and lay upon the
frontiers with 50,000 horse, resolved to fight in defence of their
dominions; while Sultan Churrum had hitherto advanced no farther than
Mundu, afraid both of the enemy and Khan Khana. The king's councellors
now changed their advice, declaring that they expected the Deccaners
would have been so alarmed by his majesty's passage over the last hills,
as to have submitted at the terror of his approach; and as they now
found the contrary, they advised the king to convert his journey into a
hunting excursion, and to turn his course towards Agra, as the Deccaners
were not worthy of exposing his sacred person. He answered, that this
consideration came now too late, as his honour was engaged by having
advanced so far, and he was resolved to prosecute their former advice
and his own purpose, whatever might be the hazard. He now daily
dispatched fresh troops to reinforce the army of his son Churrum, partly
from his own followers, and the rest commanded from different
governments. These reinforcements were said to be 30,000 horse, but the
actual musters were not so numerous. Water was sometimes very scarce in
camp, and provisions grew daily scarcer and dearer, the part of the
country in which we now were not being well reduced to good government.
Not feeling these distresses, the king took no care to have them
alleviated; and as his khans, or great men, had their provisions brought
after them, they neglected to inform the king. The whole burden fell
upon strangers, the soldiers, and the poor followers of the camp, who
were worst able to endure the hardships. Every alternate day, as
formerly, the king removed his camp, three, four, or five cosses; yet on
the 29th of January, we were still sixty cosses short of Mundu.

On the 3d of February, having left the road of the leskar for my own
ease, and for the benefit of the shade, and while resting me under a
tree, Sultan Cuserou came upon me suddenly, seeking the same
conveniences. This is the king's eldest son, formerly mentioned as in
confinement by the practices of his brother Churrum and his faction, and
taken out of their hands by the king at his leaving Agimere. He was now
riding on an elephant, with no great guard or attendance. His people
called out to me to give place to the prince, which I did, yet I staid
to look at him, and he called on me to approach; and, after asking some
familiar and civil questions, I departed. His person is comely, his
countenance chearful, and his beard hung down as low as his middle. This
I noticed, by his questions, that he seemed quite ignorant of all that
passed at court, insomuch that he had never heard of any English, or of
me their ambassador. The 4th and 5th we continued our march without
halting, and on the 6th at night, we came to a little tower, newly
repaired, where the king pitched his tent in a pleasant place, on the
banks of the river _Sepra_, one coss short of the city of _Ugen_,
[Oojain,] the chief city of Malwa. This place, called _Callenda_, was
anciently a seat of the Gentoo kings of Mundu, one of whom was there
drowned while drunk. He had once before fallen into the river, and was
taken out by the hair of his head, by a person who dived for him. When
he came to himself, it was told him how he had been saved from drowning,
in hopes of having the slave rewarded. He called his deliverer before
him, and asking how he dared to be so bold as to touch his sovereign's
head, caused his hands to be cut off. Not long afterwards, while sitting
drunk beside his wife, and no other person near, he had the same
misfortune to tumble into the water, at which time she might easily have
saved him, but did not. Being afterwards asked why she had not, she said
she knew not but she likewise might have had her hands cut off for her
reward.

The 10th we removed one coss beyond Oojain; and on the 11th, the king
rode to that city, to speak with a dervise, or holy man, who dwelt upon
a hill, and was reported to be 300 years old, but I did not think this
miracle worth my examination. At noon this day, I received news by a
foot-post, that the prince, notwithstanding all the firmauns and
commands of his father, had intercepted the presents and goods on their
way up, to satisfy his own base and greedy inclinations; and no
entreaty, gifts, or persuasions, that Mr Terry could offer, who had the
charge of them, could prevail on him to part with them, and he compelled
them by force to follow him towards Burhanpoor. Yet he forbore to break
open the packages, but pressed the English to consent, which they
refused by my orders, and he thought to win them to his purpose by
vexatious usage. For it is the custom in this country, for the great men
to see all merchant goods before even the king, that they may chuse
first; but I resolved, if possible, to break that bad custom, in our
behalf.

That he might satisfy his own cupidity, the prince sent up a courier to
the king, before I could get intelligence, giving notice of having
detained the goods, but without mentioning that they were presents, and
requested his authority to have them opened, that he might purchase what
he fancied. This faithless proceeding of the prince, contrary to his
promise and his own written orders, satisfied me that I was justifiable
in the eyes of all, if I carried my complaint directly to the king,
having used every possible means to procure favour from the prince, and
having already suffered beyond the patience of a free-born man; so that
I must now be blameless by using rougher means, having already
fruitlessly proved all smoother expedients. I therefore resolved to
appeal for justice, by complaint to the king in person, yet as calmly
and warily as possible. I feared to go to Asaph Khan on this occasion,
lest he might oppose my purpose, yet thought my neglect of him might be
displeasing; wherefore, if I sent to acquaint him that I proposed to
visit the king at the guzalcan, I dreaded he might suspect my purpose,
if he had learnt the injury I meant to complain of. For all which
reasons, I considered how best to avoid being counteracted.

The visit of the king to the dervise, just mentioned, gave me a good
opportunity, and my new linguist, who was a Greek I had sent for from
Agimere, being ready, I rode out to meet the king, who was returning
from the holy man on his elephant. On his majesty's approach, I
alighted, and made a sign that I wished to speak to the king, who
immediately turned his monster towards me, and prevented me, by saying,
"My son has taken your goods and my presents; be not therefore sad, for
he shall not touch nor open a lock or a seal; for at night I shall send
him an order to set them free." He made other gracious speeches,
intimating that he knew I had come brim-full of complaints, and that he
had spoken first to ease me. At this time, seeing that the king was on
the road, I could do no more; but at night, without farther seeking to
Asaph Khan, I went to the guzalcan, determined to proceed with my
complaints, to get back my goods, and to seek redress for the charges,
troubles, and abuses at Surat, and all our other grievances.

As soon as I came in, the king called my interpreter before him, and, by
means of his own, intimated that he had already dispatched his orders so
effectually, that not even to the value of a hair should be abstracted
from our goods. In reply, I stated that the injuries, charges, and
abuses we suffered from the prince's officers, were so numerous and
intolerable as could not be endured, and that I craved effectual
redress. To this it was answered, that I must apply to his son for all
past matters; but I could obtain nothing except fair words, through the
intermediation of Asaph Khan, so that I was forced to seem satisfied,
and to seek opportunities as might be for redress, when this false
friend and pretended advocate was out of the way. The good king fell at
length to dispute about the laws of Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet; and,
being in drink, turned lovingly to me, saying, "As I am a king, you
shall be all welcome, Christians and Jews as well as Mahometans, for I
meddle not with their faiths; they all come in love, and I will protect
them from wrong while they are under my dominion, and no one shall be
allowed to molest or oppress them." This he frequently repeated, but
being extremely drunk, he fell a-weeping, and into various passions, and
so kept us till midnight.

Any one may easily conceive how much I was now disconcerted by the
unjustifiable conduct of the factors, who had detained the presents for
four months at Surat, and now sent them to fall into the hands of the
prince, who was then within two days march of Burhanpoor, by which my
trouble was infinitely increased. But having now began, and suspecting
that the prince was already sufficiently exasperated upon matters of
small importance, I thought I might as well lose his favour upon great
as small matters, so I resolved to try what I could do with the king;
and, while I waited the result, I sent back the messenger to Mr Terry,
who was with the presents, desiring him to remain firm, waiting for the
king's ultimate orders, which I should send him soon.

During this interval, the king had caused the chests to be privately
brought to him, and had opened them, which came to my knowledge, on
which I determined to express my dissatisfaction at this usage, and
having obtained an audience, I made my complaint. He received me with
much mean flattery, more unworthy even of his high rank than the action
he had done, which I suppose he did to appease me, as seeing by my
countenance that I was highly dissatisfied. He began by telling me that
he had found some things that pleased him much, particularly two
embroidered cushions, or sweet-bags, a folding glass cabinet, and the
mastiff dogs, and desired me not to be discontented, for whatever I was
not disposed to give him, he would return. I answered, that most of
these things were intended for his majesty, but that it was a great
indignity to the king my master thus to seize upon what was meant to be
presented, and not permitted to come through my hands, to whom they were
sent in the first place. I added, that besides what were destined for
his majesty, some of these things were intended for Noormahal, some for
the prince, and the rest to remain in my hands, to serve as occasion
might require, to bespeak his majesty's favour to protect us from
injuries daily offered to us by strangers, and some for my friends, or
my own use, while the rest belonged to the English merchants, with which
I had no concern. He desired me not to be grieved that he had thus got
his own choice, as he had not patience to forbear from seeing them, in
which he did me no wrong, as he believed I wished him to be served
first, and that he would make satisfaction to the king my master, to
whom he would justify me. As for the prince and Noormahal, they were all
one with himself. As to bringing any presents hereafter to procure his
favour, I might be easy on that score, as it was merely a needless
ceremony, for I should be always welcome to come to him empty-handed,
and he would hear me, as it was not my fault, and he would see me
righted at all times. That he would return me some things to enable me
to go to his son, and he would pay the merchants for such things as
belonged to them. He concluded by desiring me not to be angry with the
freedom he had taken, as he meant well. As I made no reply, he pressed
to know if I were pleased, to which I answered, that his majesty's
satisfaction must always please me.

He then began to enumerate all the things he had taken, beginning with
the mastiffs, embroidered sweet bags, the case of combs and razors, and
so forth; saying, with a smile, "You would not have me to restore these
things, and I am delighted with them?" To which I answered in the
negative. He then mentioned two glass-cases, as mean and ordinary,
asking me for whom they were intended. I answered, that one was intended
for his majesty, and the other for Noormahal. "Why then," said he, "you
will not ask me for that I have, but will be satisfied with one?" To
this I was under the necessity of yielding. He next asked for whom
certain hats were intended, which his women liked? I answered, that
three were for his majesty, and one for myself. He then said, I surely
would not take back those meant for him, and that he would return mine
if I needed it; and would not bestow it upon him. To this likewise I had
to agree. He then asked, whose were the pictures? I answered, that they
were sent me to use as occasion offered, and to dispose of as my
business might require. So he called for these, and caused them to be
opened, examining me about the women, and other little questions, asking
my judgment and opinions concerning them. The third was a picture of
Venus leading a satyr by the nose. Commanding my interpreter not to tell
me what he said on this subject, he shewed it about among his nobles,
asking them to expound its moral or interpretation, pointing out the
satyr's horns and black skin, and many other particulars. Every one
answered according to his fancy; but, liking none of their expositions,
he reserved his own opinion to himself, and commanding that all these
notions should be concealed from me, he ordered the interpreter to ask
me what it meant. I answered, that it was an invention of the painter,
to shew his art, and that it represented some poetical fable, which was
all I could say, having never seen it before. He then called upon Mr
Terry to give his opinion, who could not; on which the king asked him,
why he brought up with him an invention in which he was ignorant? On
this I interposed, saying Mr Terry was a preacher, and did not meddle
with such matters, neither had he any charge of them, having only come
along with them.

I have related this anecdote of the picture for the instruction of the
gentlemen of the East India Company, and for him who may succeed me, to
be very careful that what they send into this country may not be
susceptible of an evil interpretation; for the king and people are
pregnant with, and full of, scrupulosity and jealousy. For, though the
king concealed his opinion, yet I had ground, from what he did say, to
believe he thought the picture was meant in derision of the Asiatics,
whom he conceived to be represented by the satyr, as being of their
complexion; and that Venus leading him by the nose denoted the great
influence exercised by the women of that country over the men. He was
satisfied that I had never seen the picture, and therefore pressed me no
farther about its explanation; yet he shewed no discontent, but rolled
up the pictures, saying he would accept even the satyr as a present from
me. As for the saddle, and some other trifles, he said he would have
them sent to his son, for whom they were fit, as a present from me, to
whom he would write so effectually, pursuant to his promise, that I
should stand in no need of a solicitor near him in any of my affairs. He
added many compliments, excuses, professions, and protestations, such as
might proceed either from a very noble or very base mind.

He then enquired what was meant by the figures of the beasts, and
whether they had been sent for me to give him? I had understood that
they were very mean and ill-shaped images, from which the varnish had
come off, and were ill-formed lumps of wood. I was really ashamed of
them, and told him this was no fault of mine, those who had seized them
being guilty of the affront, in conveying them to his majesty, for whom
they were not intended, having only been sent to shew the forms of
certain animals in our country. He quickly replied, "Did you think in
England that a horse or a bull were strange to me?" I answered, that I
thought not upon such mean matters, the sender being an ordinary man,
who had sent these things out of good-will to me, and that I could not
know what might have been his thoughts. The king then said he would keep
them all; but that he desired I would procure for him a horse of the
largest size, a male and female mastiff, some tall Irish greyhounds, and
such other hunting-dogs as we had in England, adding, on the word of a
king, if I would procure him these, he would fully recompense me, and
grant every thing I desired. I answered, that I would engage to have
them sent by the next ships, but could not answer for their lives in so
long a voyage, but should direct their skins and bones to be preserved
if they died, to convince his majesty I had obeyed his commands. Upon
this he bowed to me repeatedly, laid his hand on his heart, and shewed
me so much kindness, favour, and familiarity, that all present declared
they had never seen him use the like to any man before.

This was all my recompence, except that he often desired me to be merry,
as he would royally requite the wrongs he had done me, and send me home
to my country with grace and rewards befitting a gentleman. Thus, seeing
nothing returned of all that was seized but words, I requested his
majesty would order the velvets and silks to be delivered back, as these
were merchant goods sent up among mine by the command of his majesty, by
which they had escaped the rapacity of the prince's officers. He then
desired Mr Bidulph to be called for, that he might agree with and pay
him for their value. I then delivered in a memorial, which I had ready
written, containing my demands for privileges and justice, as otherwise
I should return home a mere useless person, and under disgrace with my
sovereign. I pressed likewise to have justice in regard to a debt due by
Zulphecar Khan, lately deceased. He replied, that he would take such
order with his son, in regard to our affairs at Surat, that I should
have no cause to complain, and would give such orders for other places
as should in every respect shew his regard for me; and, that I might
return to my master with honour, he would send by me a rich and worthy
present, together with his letters certifying my good behaviour, and
giving me much praise. He likewise commanded me to name what I thought
would be most acceptable. To this I answered, that I could not crave, as
that was not our custom, neither was it consistent with the honour of my
sovereign; but I had no doubt that whatever he was pleased to send would
be acceptable from so potent a monarch, who was already so much loved by
my master. He then said, that I thought he only asked in jest to please
me, as he saw I was still discontented; but he assured me he was my
friend, and would prove so in the end, and swore by his head that he
spoke sincerely in regard to the presents, and that therefore I must not
refuse to name some for his satisfaction.

This earnestness forced me to say, that, if his majesty pleased, I
thought some large Persian carpets might be fittest, as my master did
not look for gifts of cost and value. To this he answered, that he would
provide them of all sorts and sizes, and should add to them what else he
thought fit, that my master might know how great was his respect. Having
venison of various kinds before him, he gave me half a stag, which he
said he had himself killed, and that I should see the rest bestowed on
his ladies. This was presently cut up into four pound pieces, and was
sent into the interior apartments by his young son and two women in
their bare hands, just as if he had been doling out such small fragments
to the poor by way of charity. I had now as abundant grace and fair
words as might have flattered me into conceit, but our injuries were not
to be compensated by words, though I was glad of these as a colour for
dissembling my discontent. In conclusion, he repeated his expressions of
desire to satisfy me, saying, he hoped I went away contented. To which I
answered, that his majesty's favour was sufficient to make me any
amends. He then said that he had only one farther question to ask: "How
comes it, now that I have seen your presents for two years, that your
master, before you came, sent by a mean man, a merchant, five times as
many and more curious toys, and having sent you his ambassador, with a
commission and his letters mentioning presents, that you should have
brought so little, so mean, and so much inferior to the other? I
acknowledge you as an ambassador, and have found you a gentleman in your
behaviour, but am amazed you are so slightly provided."

I was about to reply, when he cut me short, saying, "I know that all
this is not your king's fault nor yours, but I shall shew you that I
esteem you more than those who employed you. At your return, I shall
send you home with honour and reward, according to your quality and
merit, not regarding what you have brought me, and shall send a present
to your lord and master, befitting a king to send. Only this will I
require from you, and do not expect it from the merchants, that you will
take with you patterns of the following articles: a quiver and bow-case,
a coat of mail, a cushion to rest my head upon in our fashion, and a
pair of boots, which you shall cause to be embroidered for me in England
in the richest manner, as I know they can do these things in your
country better than any I have seen. These things I shall expect from
you, and if you send them, I promise you, on the word of a king, that
you shall be no loser." This I most chearfully undertook, and he
commanded Asaph Khan to send me the patterns. He then asked if I had
any grape wine, which I said I had. He desired to have some of it to
taste next night, and if he liked it, he would be obliged to me to let
him have it, otherwise I might make merry with it myself. Thus the whole
of this night being spent in discourse only with me, he rose up, and I
departed.

On the 3d of March we arrived at Mundu, into which the king was expected
to make his entry; but the day for that was not yet fixed, as he waited
till the astrologers had determined upon an auspicious hour for the
ceremony, so that we had all to remain without, waiting for the good
hour. The 6th I entered Mundu, and my servants, whom I had sent before
to seek out for quarters, had taken possession of a fair court, well
walled round, in which was a goodly temple and a tomb. Some of the
king's servants had already taken up their quarters there, but I got
possession and kept it, being the best within the whole circuit of
Mundu, though two miles from the king's house; yet it was so nearly
sufficient, that a very small charge was sufficient to make it
defensible against the rains, and save me 1000 rupees. The air was
wholesome, and the prospect pleasant, as it was on the very edge of the
hill.

I went at night of the 11th to meet the king, but was told, that, on the
news of a lion[210] having killed some horses, the king had gone out to
hunt for that animal. I thus had leisure to look out for water; for such
was the unaccountable want of foresight, that we were brought, with a
multitude of people and beasts, to a hill on which was no water, so that
the men and cattle were ready to perish. What little was to be found in
certain wells and tanks had been taken possession of by the great men,
and kept by force, so that I could not procure any. The poor forsook the
city; many more were commanded away by proclamation, and all horses or
other cattle were ordered to be removed. Thus, those who were in hopes
of rest, were enforced to seek out new dwelling places, and had to go
away some two, three, and even four cosses, to the extreme trouble and
inconvenience of all, and occasioning provisions to rise greatly in
price. For my own part, I was greatly troubled how to determine. My
house was very good, and, though far from markets, it was still less
inconvenient to submit to that trouble than to remain in the fields
without house or shelter, where I must have gone to encamp, but then I
was in want of water. Riding about with this view, I came to a great
tank or pool, which was guarded for a khan, to whom the king had granted
its use. I sent to acquaint him of my needs, and asked leave to draw
water at his tank, when he was pleased to allow me to have four loads
daily. This satisfied me in some sort; and, by selling off some of the
goods that had been sent me from Surat, and putting away some of my
cattle, I had hope of being able to live; for which purpose I sent two
of my carriages, with their servants and cattle, to remain out of town,
and thus relieved myself from this public calamity. There was not a
misery or inconvenience that I was not subjected to, in thus following
the court of the Mogul, owing to the want of good management in the
government, and the intemperature of the climate.

[Footnote 210: It is almost certain that the lions of these early
voyages and travels, at least in India, were tigers.--E.]

Sec.7. _A New-Year's Gift.--Suspicions entertained of the English.--Trade
of Dabul.--Dissatisfaction of the Persian Ambassador.--English Ships of
War in the Indian Seas_.

On the 12th March, 1617, I carried, as a new-year's gift to the king, a
pair of very handsome knives belonging to myself, and six glasses
belonging to the Company, making an apology for the smallness of the
present, which was well received, and the king used me very graciously,
saying, that whatever came from my hands he looked on as a sufficient
present, and as a proof of my love, and that it was now his part to give
me. He gave orders to an officer to send for Mr Bidulph, to pay him his
demands to his satisfaction, and all others who were indebted to us were
ordered by name to pay what they owed to the Company. The king said
likewise, that he would write to the prince in our favour. But I found
him unwilling to part with any of our things, of which the best sweet
bag then lay before him. I replied, that I was very unwilling to go
empty-handed. The king then commanded that I should come up and stand
beside him on the steps of the throne, where stood on one side the
Persian ambassador, and the old king of Candahar on the other, with whom
I ranked. As soon as I had taken my place, the king asked me for a
knife, which I sent him next day. The king then called the Persian to
stand before him, to whom he gave a jewel and a young elephant, for
which he kneeled and saluted the ground with his head.

On this occasion the same throne and furniture were used as last year,
the upper end of the hall being adorned with the pictures of the king my
master, the queen, the princess Elizabeth, Sir Thomas Smith, and some
others, with two pieces of beautiful Persian tapestry hung below them.
The throne was of gold, bespangled all over with rubies, emeralds, and
turquoises. On one side, on a little stage or scaffold, was a company of
women-singers. I this day sent a dispatch to Surat, giving my advice
respecting the trade of Persia, and of what had passed on that subject
with the ambassador, and sent some remembrance to the governor, Ibrahim
Khan. I had a letter from him in return, stating that the English nation
had been wronged without his knowledge; but as his authority was now
augmented by Prince Churrum, we might rest confident in his protection,
as while he lived and held authority at that place, we should never more
be liable to abuses, but should be allowed to reside and trade in
perfect freedom and security.

The 13th I sent as a present to Asaph Khan a richly embroidered pair of
gloves, and a fair wrought night-cap of my own. He received the cap, but
returned the gloves, as useless in this country, and requested to have
some Alicant wine, which I sent him next night. Aganor, whose diligence
now gave me great hope of success in my desires, sent his Banian
secretary to inform me that he had orders for the dispatch, of the
merchant goods, and that his man should attend Mr Bidulph to finish that
business; that the patterns should be sent me, and that the Mogul meant
to give me a robe, and money to bear my charges in going to wait upon
the prince. I returned for answer, that I had no need of a garment or of
money, but begged his majesty would graciously consider the injuries of
which I had complained, and of which I had already given an account in
writing, and that he would please to give me a letter to the prince,
with some of our own presents which were intended for him, or else state
my excuse in writing, that his majesty had intercepted and appropriated
the whole. This was all I wished, as instead of gifts from the king, I
only required justice.

The 21st I discovered that the Mogul suspected that I meant to steal out
of the country. These doubts had been insinuated by the prince, either
as a cover for his own guilt, or out of fear, or perhaps as a cunning
pretence to cover his own designs. He had informed the king that the
English meant next year to surprise Surat, and retain possession of that
place. Indeed, their own folly gave some colour to the idea; as lately,
upon one of the usual brawls at that place, our people had landed 200
musqueteers, with whom they marched towards Surat; and, during their
march, some of the jovial tars gave out to all they met that they meant
to take the place. This was a most absurd bravado, for a handful of men
to march twelve miles against a walled town that was able to oppose them
with 1000 horse, and as many foot armed with match-locks, and having
besides to pass a river which could be defended by a handful of men
against an army. It gave, however, just occasion both of scorn and
offence; and the prince, perhaps to serve some ends of his own, took
occasion from it to strengthen the fortifications of the town and
castle, and to send down ordnance for their defence; perhaps a good
precaution to have an open door to flee to in case his brother should
live, and have the means of checking his ambitious views. But this
information concurring with my discontents here, and some free language
on that occasion, and my pressing demands to be allowed to go to
Burhanpoor, together with flying reports that we had taken Goa, and were
preparing a great fleet in England, raised suspicions in the mind of the
king, though he concealed them as well as he could from me. By my
explanations, however, I satisfied the king thoroughly, though I was by
no means so, having been fed only with words, and knew well that our
residence was only permitted out of fear. The complaints I was enforced
to make at this court against the misconduct of its officers towards us,
greatly offended all the great men, as being in some sort their own
case; for they all live by farming the several governments, in which
they all practise every kind of tyranny against the natives under their
jurisdiction, oppressing them with continual exactions, and are
exceedingly averse from any way being opened by which the king may be
informed of their infamous proceedings. They grind the people under
their government, to extract money from them, often hanging men up by
the heels to make them confess that they are rich, or to ransom
themselves from faults merely imputed with a view to fleece them. Thus
my complaints against exaction and injustice made me hated of all about
the court, as an informer.

The 25th I received a letter from Captain Pepwell, then in Dabul roads,
stating,--That, according to advice, he had stopped the junk bound for
Mokha; but having well weighed the caution I had given him respecting
the correspondence between that prince and Masulipatam, where the
Solomon then was, he had freed her without spoil. By this courtesy he
had procured such good entertainment as is seldom had in the Indies,
being allowed free trade, with a promise of taking 300 pieces of
broad-cloth yearly, and had sold a good quantity of lead for ready
money, besides some ordnance. This part of his procedure I do not like
much, as tending to arm the Indians, and the Portuguese, their friends,
against the Moguls. If these courtesies proceeded not from the junk
being still under his command, they give good prospect of an yearly sale
at that port. However, the freeing of this junk gives me good assurance
that Captain Pepwell will do nothing prejudicial to the Company, and
will deliver himself honestly from the jealousies entertained of him at
Dabul. He signifies his intention of proceeding to Calicut, and if that
factory be not likely to succeed, he proposes transferring it to Dabul.

The 27th, by a foot-post from Masulipatam, I received advice that the
Solomon had put to sea, and that the Hosiander was arrived from Bantam,
with the bad news of the loss of the Hector and Concord, while careening
in the roads of Jacatra, in the island of Java; but with the good news
that the Dragon, Clove, and Defence were laden homewards from Bantam. I
took the opportunity of this post to convey a letter to the governor of
Dabul respecting the overture made by him of trade to that port; and,
though I had no great opinion of the place, I would neither have it
entirely neglected, nor would I encourage the next fleet to proceed
there, unless on better assurance than a forced friendship, and offers
made when their junk was in our power. I signified the causes of our
having stopped their goods formerly for refusing trade to Sir Henry
Middleton; but finding him now better disposed, and willing to establish
a league of trade and amity, and to take a good quantity of our cloth, I
required to know if he were hearty in these motions; and willing to act
as a man of honour; as a pledge of which, I requested him to procure for
us a firmaun from his sovereign, with such privileges as were fit for
merchants, with a royal engagement under his seal to fulfil all the
friendly offers made to us by this officer; desiring this firmaun might
be transmitted to me with all expedition, to my present residence at
the Mogul court. By this, I said, I should be satisfied that they meant
to treat us with good faith, and on its reception, I would undertake, on
the behalf of the king of England, that a firm and lasting peace should
be established with his master, whose subjects should have free passage
on the seas without molestation from our ships; and should send yearly a
ship to trade at his port, or, if desired, should establish a resident
factory there. I have no doubt, either through fear or favour, that some
good sales may be made there yearly, but I doubt of being able to
procure any valuable investments.

In this I proceed cautiously, as all men ought on such occasions, not
with too eager apparent desire, nor swallowing hungrily any offered
conditions, without due assurances. Strict care in the first settling is
of the utmost importance, as you can never mend your first
establishment, and may often impair it. Every man succeeds best at
first, when new and a stranger; for, by the natural levity of these
barbarians, they are fond of changes, and grow weary of things in their
usual train. I have committed this dispatch to the care of Mr Bangham,
whom I have directed to make diligent enquiry into the commodities,
advantages, and inconveniences attendant on our projected trade, and to
make himself acquainted with the humours and affections of the Deccaners
towards us.

On the 30th of April the Persian ambassador sent to excuse himself for
going away without paying his respects to me, alleging illness, but his
messenger said he was not so sick as he pretended; but, finding no
success in his negociations with the king, he had taken his leave, and
made a present of thirty-five horses at his departure. In return, the
king gave him 3000 rupees, which he took in great scorn. Upon which, to
justify himself, the king caused two lists to be drawn up, in one of
which all the presents made by the ambassador were enumerated, with
their values, meanly rated, much lower than their real worth; and, in
the other, all the gifts the king had presented to him since his
arrival,--as slaves, melons, pine-apples, plantains, hawks, plumes of
feathers, the elephant, and not even forgetting the drink he had
received, all charged at extremely high prices, much above their value.
These two lists were laid before the ambassador, with their amounts
summed up, offering him the rest of the money to make up the balance.
Owing to this bad usage, the Persian feigned himself sick of a fever, as
an excuse for not waiting upon Asaph Khan and Etemon Dowlet, for which
reason he could not come through the town to visit me, without
discovering the counterfeit, but desired his messenger to acquaint me
with the truth, which Aganor as freely delivered, and with no small
bitterness against the king, and to which I seemed unwilling to listen.
The ambassador also desired him to assure me that he was ready to serve
my nation in his country, to the utmost of his power. I presented him
with some Alicant wine, and a few knives, to be taken to his master, and
so we parted. The 12th May I received news of a great blow given by the
Turkish army to the Persians, the former having taken and utterly
destroyed Tauris; and that Shah Abbas was unable to keep the field.

On the night of the 25th, a lion and a wolf[211] broke into my quarters,
and gave us great alarm, carrying off some sheep and goats that were in
my court-yard, and leaping with them over a high wall. I sent to ask
leave to kill them, as in that country no person may meddle with lions
except the king. Receiving permission, and the animals returning next
night, I ran out into the court upon the alarm, and the beast missing
his prey, seized upon a little dog before me, and escaped; but my
servants killed the wolf, which I sent to the king.

[Footnote 211: More likely to have been a tyger and hyena.--E.]

The 14th of June, a cabinet belonging to the jesuits was sent up from
Cambay, containing medicines and other necessaries, and a letter, which
were betrayed by the bringer, and delivered to the king. He opened the
cabinet, and sent for the _padre_ to read the letter, and to see every
thing contained in the boxes; but, finding nothing to his liking, he
returned all. I mention this circumstance as a caution to all who deal
in this country, to be careful of what they write or send, as it is the
humour of this prince to seize and see every thing, lest any curiosity
or toy should escape his greed.

The 18th, I had letters from Ahmedabad, advising that indigo had greatly
fallen in price, in consequence of the non-arrival of the flotilla from
Goa. The unicorn's horn had been returned, as without virtue, concerning
which I sent new advice.[212] Many complaints were made concerning Surat
and others, which I do not insert. I received two letters from
Burhanpoor, stating the doubtfulness of recovering the debt due to Mr
Ralph Fitch. Spragge had returned from the leskar or camp of the Deccan
army, where Melick Amber, with much show of honour, had given instant
orders for searching the whole camp; but the Persian had fled to
Visiapour, so that the business was referred by letter to a Dutchman who
resided there. The general of the Deccan army desired Spragge to be the
means of sending English cloth and swords to his camp, which is within
six days march of Burhanpoor; and, in my opinion, this might be a good
employment for some idle men, and an excellent opportunity to get vent
for our dead commodities.

[Footnote 212: This of the unicorn's horn, or rather the horn of a
rhinoceros, may allude to some supposed inherent virtue of detecting
poison, anciently attributed to cups made of that material.--E.]

The 30th of July I received news from Surat of two Dutch ships being
cast away on the coast near Damaun. They were from the southwards, laden
with spices and China silks, and bound for the Red Sea; but losing the
season, with much bad weather, they had tried to take shelter in
Socatora, or some other port on the coast of Arabia, but failing after
beating about many weeks, they bore away for Surat, hoping to be able to
ride out the adverse monsoon in safety, as they had done in other years.
But the years differ, and being forced to come to anchor, they had to
cut away their masts by the violence of the gale; the smaller vessel of
sixty tons was beaten to pieces, and the cables of the other breaking,
she was driven ashore in oosy ground, within musket shot of the land.
The ship kept upright; but having lost their long-boat, and the skiff
being unable to live, four men got ashore on a raft. The spring-tides
heaved her up so near the shore, that much of her goods and all her
people were saved.

_Maree Rustam_, who had been king of Candahar, came to visit me on the
21st of August, and brought a present of wine and fruit, staying about
half an hour, and concluded his visit by begging a bottle of wine. This
day Sultan Cusero had his first prospect of long-hoped liberty, being
allowed to leave his prison, and to take the air and his pleasure in a
banqueting house near mine. Sultan Churrum had contracted a marriage at
Burhanpoor, without waiting for the king's consent, for which he had
fallen under displeasure; and some secret practices of his against the
life of his brother had been discovered, on which he was ordered to
court in order to clear himself. By the advice of their father, Etimon
Dowlet, Noormahal and Asaph Khan now made proposals of friendship and
alliance with Cusero. This news has diffused universal joy among the
people, who now begin to hope that their good prince may recover his
full liberty. The 22d the king feasted Asaph Khan. The 25th Asaph Khan
feasted Noormahal. It is reported the Prince Cusero is to make a firm
alliance, as above stated, and is to take a wife of his father's choice.
This will produce his entire liberty, and the ruin of our proud
oppressor, Churrum.

The 1st of September was the solemnity of the king's birth-day, when he
is publicly weighed, to which I went. I was conducted into a beautiful
garden, in the middle of which was a great square pond or tank, set all
round with trees and flowers, and in the middle was a pavilion or
pleasure-house, under which hung the scales in which the king was to be
weighed. The scales were of beaten gold, set with many small stones, as
rubies and turquoises. They hung by chains of gold, large and massy, yet
strengthened by silken ropes for more security. The beam and tressels
from which it hung were covered with thin plates of gold. In this place
all the nobles of the court attended, sitting round on rich carpets; and
waiting the king's arrival. He appeared at length, cloathed, or laden
rather, with diamonds, rubies, pearls, and other precious vanities,
making a great and glorious shew. His sword, target, and throne were
corresponding in riches and splendour. His head, neck, breast, and arms,
above the elbows, and at the wrist, were all decorated with chains of
precious stones, and every one of his fingers had two or three rich
rings. His legs were as it were fettered with chains of diamonds, rubies
as large as walnuts, and some larger, and such pearls as amazed me. He
got into one of the scales, crouching or sitting on his legs like a
woman; and there were put into the other scale, to counterpoise his
weight, many bags said to contain silver, which were changed six times,
and I understood his weight was 9000 rupees, which are almost equal to a
thousand pounds sterling. After this, he was weighed against gold,
jewels, and precious stones, as I was told, for I saw none, as these
were all in bags, and might only have been pebbles. Then against cloth
of gold, silk stuffs, cotton goods, spices, and all sort of commodities;
but I had to believe all as reported, as these were all in packages.
Lastly, against meal, butter, and corn, all of which is said to be
distributed to the Banians, with all the rest of the stuff, but I saw
all carefully carried away, and nothing distributed. The silver only is
reserved for the poor, and serves for the ensuing year, as it is the
king's custom at night frequently to call for some of these before him,
to whom, with great familiarity and humility, he distributes some of
this money with his own hands.

While the king was sitting in the scale, he looked upon me and smiled,
but spoke not, as my interpreter could not be admitted. After he was
weighed, he ascended the throne, and had basins of nuts, almonds, and
spices of all sorts, artificially made of thin silver, which he threw
about, and for which his great men scrambled prostrate on their bellies.
I thought it not decent for me to do so, which seeing, he reached one
basin almost full, and poured the contents into my cloak. The nobles
were so bold as to put in their hands to help themselves, and so thick,
that they had soon left me none, if I had not pocketed up a remainder.
Till I had myself been present, I was told that he scattered gold on
this occasion, but found it to be only silver, and so thin, that all I
had at first, being thousands of small pieces, had not weighed sixty
rupees, of which I saved to the amount of twenty rupees, yet a good
dishful, which I keep to shew the ostentation of this display of
liberality; for, by my proportion, I think all he cast away could not
exceed the value of an hundred pounds. At night he drinks with his
nobles from rich plate, to which I was invited; but, being told that I
must not refuse to drink, and their liquors being excessively hot and
strong, I durst not stay to endanger my health, being already somewhat
indisposed with a slight dysentery.

On the 9th September the king rode out to take the air on the banks of
the river _Darbadath_, [Nerbuddah] a distance of five cosses. As he was
to pass my house, I mounted my horse to meet him; and, as it is the
custom for all men whose gates he passes, to make him some present,
which is taken as a good sign, and is called _mombareck_, or good news;
and as I had nothing to give, neither could go with nothing, nor stay
without offence, I ventured to take with me a fair book, well bound,
filleted, and gilt, being the last edition of Mercator's Maps of the
World, which I presented, saying, That I had nothing worthy the
acceptance of so great a king, but begged to offer him the world, in
which he had so great and rich a share. He accepted it in good part,
laying his hand repeatedly on his breast, saying, that every thing which
came from me was welcome. He asked about the arrival of our ships, which
I said we daily expected. He then said, he had some fat wild-hogs lately
sent him from Goa, and if I would eat any he would send me some at his
return, I made him due reverence, answering, that any thing from his
majesty was to me a feast.

He rode on upon his elephant, and when I offered to accompany him to the
gate, the way being stony, he desired me to return, bidding God keep me.
He asked which was my house, and being told, praised it, as indeed it
was one of the best in the place, though only an old temple and a large
tomb, enclosed by a wall. Repeating his farewell, he said the way was
bad, and desired me to go home, with much shew of courtesy and kindness,
on which I took my leave.

On the 16th I went to repay the visit of Maree Rustam, prince of
Candahar, who sent word at my arrival that he dared not receive any
visit unless he asked leave of the king, or acquainted Etimon Dowlet or
Asaph Khan, which he would do at the next durbar. I made answer, that he
needed not, as I never meant any more to trouble myself about so uncivil
a person. That I knew well this was a mere shift out of ill manners, as
the king would be no more angry for his receiving me at his house than
for coming to mine, and that I cared not for seeing him, and had only
come in pure civility to return his visit. His man desired me to wait
till he had reported what I said to his master, but I would not. At
night I waited upon the king at court, who spoke to me about the book of
maps; but I forbore to speak to him about our debts. But on the 25th,
though very weak, I went again to court to make trial of the king about
our debts. _Muckshud_, one of our debtors, having pled in excuse for not
paying that he had missed receiving his _prigany_, and knew not how to
pay unless he sold his house. I delivered the merchants petition to the
king, which he caused to be read aloud by Asaph Khan; all the names of
the debtors, with the sums they owed, and their respective sureties,
being distinctly enumerated. The king then sent for Arad Khan, the chief
officer of his household, and the cutwall, and gave them some orders
which I did not understand. Then reading over the names, and finding
some of them dead, and some strangers, he made enquiry as to their
abilities and qualities, and what goods they had received. Concerning
Rulph,[213] Asaph Khan undertook to speak to the prince on the subject,
and to get that affair concluded when he came.

[Footnote 213: In the edition by Churchill, this person is named Sulph,
but no elucidation is given.--E.]

My interpreter was now called in, and the king, turning to me, said that
our merchants had trusted people according to their own fancies, and to
whom they pleased, not coming to him with an inventory of their goods,
and therefore, if their debtors were insufficient, it was their own
faults, and they had no reason to expect payment of their money from
him. This I supposed to allude to his servant _Hergonen_, lately dead,
whose goods had been seized to the king's use. He added, however, as
this was the first time, he would now assist me, and cause our money to
be paid: but, if the English should hereafter deliver their goods to his
servants without money, they must stand to the hazard themselves. But if
when they brought their commodities to court, they would bring the
inventory of the whole to him, he would first serve himself, and then
distribute the rest among such as were willing to buy them; and then, if
any failed in payments, he would pay the money himself.

This indeed is the custom of the Persian merchants, who bring all to the
king, as I have often seen. He first takes his own choice, and delivers
the rest among his nobles, his scribes writing down the names of all to
whom they are delivered, and the sums, another officer settling the
prices. After which a copy is given to the merchant, who goes to their
houses for his money; and if they do not pay, there is a particular
officer who has orders to enforce payment. It was then told to my
interpreter that Arad Khan was to call the debtors before him, and cause
them to pay. This did not satisfy our merchants, but it seemed to me a
just and gracious answer, and better than private persons usually get
from great princes.

Hearing that I had been sick and was in want of wine, the king ordered
me to have five bottles, and when these were done that I should send for
five more, and so from time to time as I needed. He sent me also the
fattest wild-hog I ever saw, which had been sent from Goa by Mucrob
Khan. This was sent to me at midnight by a _huddy_, with this message,
that it had eaten nothing but sugar and butter since it came to the
king. I accepted this as a sign of great favour, which, in this court, I
know to be a great one. He then sent for the book of maps, saying, that
he had shewed it to his _mulahs_, and not one of them could read a word
of it, wherefore I might have it again. To this I answered, that his
majesty in this would use his pleasure; and so it was returned.

The 26th, a rajah of the Rajpoots being in rebellion in the hills, not
above twenty cosses from the leskar, the king sent out two Omrahs with a
party of horse to fetch him in a prisoner. But he stood on his defence,
slew one of the omrahs and twelve _maansipdares_, [munsubdars] and about
500 men, sending an insulting message to the king to send his son
against him, as he was no prey to be subdued by ordinary forces.

The 2d September, Sultan Churrum made his entry into Mundu, accompanied
by all the great men, in wonderous triumph. Contrary to all our
expectations, the king received him as if he had been an only son. All
the great men and the queen-mother[214] went to meet him at the distance
of five cosses from the town. I had sent to Asaph Khan to excuse me not
meeting him, for I was not able to stir from sickness, and besides, had
no presents to give. I also sent some of my servants with my just excuse
to the prince, to which he, in his pride, only answered by a nod.

[Footnote 214: Both in the Pilgrims and in Churchill's Collection this
personage is termed the king's mother; but it is more probable she was
the mother of Sultan Churrum.--E.]

The 5th of September I received advice of our ships being arrived at
Surat, the admiral amissing, but all the rest well, and that they had
taken two English rovers or pirates, which were found in chase of the
queen-mother's ship returning from the Red Sea, which they fortunately
rescued and brought safe in. Had this ship been taken, we had all been
in trouble. With these letters, I received the Company's letter, the
invoice of the goods, and instructions for Persia, with various other
notes of advice. They advised me also, that, owing to the admiral's
absence, they knew not what course to take with the pirates they had
taken. I immediately sent orders to Surat concerning all business, as
will appear in my letters.

The 6th, I rode to visit the prince at his usual hour of giving
audience, intending to bid him welcome, and to acquaint him with our
business, meaning to shew him all proper respect; and, that I might not
come empty-handed, I bought a fine gold chain, made in China, which I
proposed to have presented to him. On sending in to acquaint him that I
was in waiting, he returned a message, desiring me to come next morning
at sun-rise, when he sat to be worshipped, or to wait till he rode to
court, which I must have done at his door. I took this in high dudgeon,
having never been denied access by the king his father; but such is this
prince's pride, that he might even teach Lucifer. This made me answer
roundly, that I was not the prince's slave, but the free ambassador of a
great king; and that I would never more visit or attend upon him who had
denied me justice; but I should see him at night with the king, to whom
only I should now address myself, and so I departed. I went at night to
the king, who received me graciously. I made my reverence to the prince,
who stood beside his father, but he would not even once stir his head.
Then I acquainted the king, that, according to his order, I had brought
an abstract to him of our merchandize, and waited his commands. After
his usual manner, he asked many questions as to what were brought, and
seemed mightily satisfied with what was in the inventory, especially
with the tapestry, promising me all the favour and privileges I could
desire. He enquired for dogs, but I could say nothing on that subject.
He then asked for jewels, but I told him these were dearer in England
than in India, at which he rested satisfied. I durst not name the pearls
for many reasons, but chiefly as I knew our people in that case would be
way-laid by the prince, and it would have cost me infinite trouble to
get them back. I thought they might easily be brought on shore, and so
to court, by stealth, and I thought they would be the more valued the
less they were expected: but my main reason of concealment was, that I
expected to make friends by their means; therefore; when Asaph Khan
pressed me on that head, I desired him to make the answer already
mentioned of their dearness, saying that I would speak to him farther
when alone. He readily understood me, and made my excuse accordingly.

Seeing the king to be well pleased, I thought it a good time to move
him again about our debts; and having my petition ready, I opened it and
held it up, as offering it to the king. He happened not to notice this,
and it being discovered by some others what was its contents, who knew
the king would be enraged that his order was neglected, one of them
stept up to me, and gently drew down my hand, requesting me not to
present that petition. I answered, that Arad Khan had absolutely refused
me justice, and I had no other resource. Arad heard this, being by, and
went in much fear to Asaph Khan, desiring him to hinder me from making
my complaint. I answered, that our ships were arrived, and we could
neither brook nor endure such delays and loss of time. Thereupon they
consulted together, and calling the cutwall, gave directions for him to
put the king's orders, into execution. The cutwall, accordingly, beset
the tents of our debtors that very night, and catched some of them; so
that we shall now have justice. I had many thanks from all the omrahs
for the protection given to the queen's ship, and the civility shown by
our people to the passengers. This they said they had properly
represented to the king, who took it kindly, and they all declared they
were obliged in honour to love our nation, and would do us every service
in their power; yet they all wondered we could not govern our own
people, and that any should presume to take ships out of the kingdom,
and to rob upon the seas without leave of our king.

When the king arose, Asaph Khan carried me with hint to his
retiring-place, where we first translated the inventory of our goods
into Persian, to shew the king an hour after. In this inventory I
inserted the money with some addition, that the king might see we
brought profit into his dominions by our trade. I next inserted the
cloths of different kinds, with the fine wares; and, lastly, the gross
commodities, concluding by praying his majesty to give orders for what
he wished to purchase, and then to give us liberty of selling the rest.
When this was finished, Asaph Khan asked why I wished to speak with him
in private, desiring me to speak my mind with freedom, bowing, and
protesting such friendship as I never could have expected. I told him,
that my reason for asking this private conference was to have his
advice. It was certainly true that I had some things which were not
enumerated, but had been so badly used last year that I durst not trust
any one; but, to shew my confidence in him, I was willing to open
myself to him, on his oath of secrecy, which he readily gave. I then
told him that I had a rich pearl, and some other strings of fair pearls,
and knew not whether it were fit to tell the king, lest the prince might
be displeased. I informed him likewise, how I had gone in the morning to
visit the prince, and of his discourtesy, and my consequent
determination; yet I knew his favour was necessary for us, and I had
hopes to recover it by means of this pearl, which I had purposely
concealed for him. This was my purpose, and the reason of my
concealment; and as he was father-in-law to the prince, and the king's
favourite, I was desirous to please both, and therefore begged his
advice.

After embracing me, he said I had done discreetly, and should acquaint
neither; for, if I did, I should never get out of trouble. If the king
were to know of it, he would indeed use me courteously, but would make a
great stir to get it into his hands, and then, according to custom, I
might sue in vain to recover my own. The prince, I knew, was ravenously
greedy and tyrannical, and wearied all with his scandalous exactions. He
desired me to steal all ashore, trusting none, and explained to me many
means of conveyance, bidding me observe the usage of the Portuguese on
the like occasions; adding, that he wished to purchase the pearl, and if
I would grant his desire, would deposite its value in my hands, whatever
I chose to ask, and, in recompence for this confidence I had reposed in
him, he would hereafter be my solicitor in all things, and assured me I
could do nothing without him. I answered, that I was most willing to let
him have the pearl, and hoped he would never betray my confidence.
Having received his oath, and a ceremony of mutual covenant, by crossing
thumbs according to the custom of the country, we embraced. I promised
to be guided entirely by him, and he engaged to do every thing I
required for the safe conveyance of the other things, engaging to give
me firmauns so that no person should touch any thing, but all should
come safely to me, to dispose of at my pleasure.

He engaged likewise to reconcile me to the prince, and would take me
with him the next time he went to visit him, and would make the prince
use me with all manner of grace and favour; adding, that I should have a
particular judge assigned me to take care of our business, and to give
us every satisfaction we could desire. He also advised me to make a
present to his sister, Queen Noormahal, and she would prevail upon the
king to give me money. To this I replied, that I wished only for the
good usage of my countrymen. He then carried me to the king, to whom I
presented the inventory translated into Persian, and was graciously
received. He asked me if the arras were a present, to which I answered
in the affirmative, as the prince was by, lest it might be seized. In
conclusion, the king said he would take a considerable quantity of our
cloths and other commodities, desiring me to cause them to be brought up
speedily, and directed Asaph Khan to make out an order for their free
passage in the prince's name. I was well pleased with the success of
this day; for though I knew that there was no faith to be placed in
these barbarians, yet I was sure Asaph Khan would deal truly in this, as
he was to help himself, and durst not betray me, lest he should miss the
pearl, neither could I suspect him afterwards, as he could not betray my
secret without discovering his own falsehood to the prince.

Sec.8. _Asaph Khan protects the English for hope of Gain, as also
Noormahal.--Arrival of Mr Steel.--Danger to the Public from private
Trade.--Stirs about a fort_.

On the 12th October, according to his promise, Asaph Khan carried me
along with him to visit the prince, and introduced me into his private
apartment, when I presented ham with a small Chinese gold chain in a
china cup. He used me indifferently, but Asaph Khan persuaded him to
alter his course towards us, representing that he gained yearly by us a
lack of rupees, and that as our trade increased every year, it would in
time bring him greater profit; but that if we were harshly used, we
would be enforced to quit both Surat and the country, from which great
inconveniences might arise. We were in some measure his subjects, and
if, from desire of procuring rarities, he used us ill, we would
necessarily strive to the utmost to conceal all we brought from his
knowledge; but if he gave us that liberty and encouragement which was
fitting, we would then use our endeavours to bring every thing to him.
He represented, that my only study was to give content to his highness,
and to procure his favour and protection, and therefore that he ought to
receive me honourably when I came to visit him, and according to my
quality, which would give satisfaction to my nation, and encourage me to
serve him. Finally, be moved his highness to give me a firmaun for our
present use, which he easily obtained, with a promise of all manner of
satisfaction. The prince accordingly gave immediate orders to his
secretary to draw it up in every point to our content, and to write a
letter to the governor recommending it to his attention; adding, that I
should at all times have any other letters I desired.

It is thus easy to be seen what base and unworthy men I have to deal
with. For the sordid hope only of buying some toys, Asaph Khan has
become so reconciled to me as to betray his son-in-law, and is
obsequious even to flattery. The ground of all his friendship is his
desire to purchase the gold taken in the prize, and some other knacks;
for which purpose he desires to send down one of his servants, which I
could not deny without losing him, after having so long laboured to gain
his favour; neither was this any disadvantage to us, as his payment is
secure, and will save us much trouble and charge in selling elsewhere,
especially the wine and other luggage that is apt to spoil in carriage.
For this purpose he obtained an order from the prince under false
pretences, and wrote himself in our favour to the governor of Surat,
doing us all manner of kindness. There is a necessity for his
friendship, as his word is a law in this empire, and therefore I did not
choose to seem to notice his unworthiness. I hope by this procedure to
win him to our advantage, or at least to make our present good use of
him. On this occasion I moved him to procure us a firmaun for trade with
Bengal, which he has promised, though he would never before hearken to
that request. He likewise now prosecutes our debtors as if they were his
own; and in passing the residence of the cutwall on his elephant, he
called upon him to command dispatch, which was a most unusual favour.
Upon this _Groo_ was immediately imprisoned, and _Muckshud_ had only two
days allowed him to pay us. Thus I doubt not that in ten days we shall
recover to the amount of 44,000 rupees, though our debtors are the most
shifting false knaves in all India.

On the 21st, a servant came to me from Asaph Khan, bearing a message
from Noormahal, intimating that she had moved the prince for another
firmaun, which she had obtained, and by which all our goods were taken
under her protection; and that she was ready to send down her servant
with authority to take order for our good establishment, and to see that
we were no way wronged. He said farther, that Asaph Khan had done this,
for fear of the prince's violence, and to guard against his custom of
delays; and that now when the queen his sister had desired to be our
protectress, he was sure the prince would not meddle; and farther
assured me, upon his honour, that I should receive every thing consigned
to me, for which the queen had written the most positive orders, and had
directed her servant to assist our factors, that we might never more
have any cause of complaint at Surat. He desired, therefore, that I
might write a few lines to the captains and factors, directing them to
use the queen's servant kindly, and allow him to buy for her some toys,
such as I could spare. This I durst not deny, though I clearly saw the
greediness which was covered under this request; and I gave him a note,
as desired, making a condition that I should see a copy of the firmaun,
which was already sealed, and could not be seen without leave.

By all this you may see how easy it were to sell commodities here, by a
little good management. Last year we were not looked at; but now, that I
have translated the inventory of fine wares for the king, yet concealing
the pearls, every one is ready to run down to Surat, to make purchases.
Noormahal and Asaph Khan now study how to do me good offices; and many
of the great men are soliciting me for letters, that they may send down
their servants, so that if you had trebled the present consignment, it
might all have been bought up aboard ship, and have saved you the
customs, expence of carriage, and much spoil. I have therefore directed
the factory to sell to the servants of Noormahal and Asaph Khan,
whatsoever can be spared, so as to leave me a decent proportion for my
uses at court. By this, much trouble and charges will be saved, the
prince prevented from plunder and exactions, and our friends confirmed;
and yet I hope to have enough remaining to please the king and his son.
At the delivery of their presents, Asaph Khan has undertaken to procure
the phirmaunds for our trade at Bengal or any other port, and even to
procure us a general privilege for free trade and residence in every
part of the king's dominions.

On the 24th of October the king departed to a considerable distance from
Mundu,[215] and went from place to place among the mountains, leaving us
quite at a loss what way we should take, as no one knew his purpose. On
the 25th I had a warrant for ten camels at the king's rates of hire; and
on the 29th I removed to follow the king, being forced to quit Mundu,
which was now entirely deserted. The 31st I arrived at the king's tents,
but found he had gone with few company on a hunting party for ten days,
no person being allowed to follow without leave. The leskar or camp was
scattered about in many parts, suffering great inconveniences from bad
water, scarcity and consequent dearness of provisions, sickness, and all
sorts of calamities incident to so great a multitude; yet nothing can
prevent the king from following his pleasures. I here learnt that it was
quite uncertain whether the king proposed going to Agra or Guzerat; and,
though the latter was reported, the former was held to be more probable,
as his counsellors wished to be at rest. Yet, because the king was
expected to linger here about a month, I was advised and thought it best
to send for the goods and presents, and endeavour to conclude my
business, rather as defer it upon uncertainties. By this means, I hoped
to obtain some rest, which I much needed, as I was very weak, and not
likely to recover by daily travel, and the use of cold raw muddy water.

[Footnote 215: In the edition of Churchill, the king is said to have
removed twenty-four cosses from Mundu, while in the Pilgrims it is
called only four cosses.--E.]

Richard Steel and Jackson arrived on the 2d November, 1617, with the
pearls and other small matters, which they had brought privately on
shore according to my order, which I received and gave them acquittance
for. I had a conference with Mr Steel about his projects of water-works,
intended to advance the sale of lead, which I did not approve of,
because I knew the character of this people, and that this affair must
be begun at our expence, while after trial we should not enjoy the
profit, but the natives be taught.[216] Besides, it did not promise any
advantages for the sale of our commodity, as the lead would be trebled
in price by land-carriage, and could not be delivered at Agra so cheap
as other lead could be purchased there. Yet I was willing that he should
make a trial, by carrying his workmen to Ahmedabad, and meeting me
there; where, by the aid of Mukrob Khan, who only among these people is
a friend to new inventions, I would make offer to the king of their
inventions, and try what conditions might be procured; but, in my
opinion, it is all money and labour thrown away. The company must shut
their ears against these projectors, who have their own emoluments much
more in view than the profits of their masters. Many things look fair in
discourse, and in theory satisfy curious imaginations, which in practice
are found difficult and fanciful. It is no easy matter to alter the
established customs of this kingdom; where some drink only of rain
water, some only that of a holy river, and others only of such as is
brought at their own cost.

[Footnote 216: This project is no where explained, but might possibly be
intended for conveying water, by means of machinery and leaden pipes,
for the supply of some palace or city in India.--E.]

As for his second project, of inducing the caravans and merchants of
Lahore and Agra, who are in use to travel by Candahar into Persia, to
come by the river Indus and to go by sea in our ships to Jasques or the
Persian gulf it is a mere dream. Some men may approve of it in
conversation, but it will never be adopted in practice. The river Indus
is but indifferently navigable downwards, and its mouth is already
occupied by the Portuguese; while its navigation upwards, against the
stream, is very difficult. Finally, we must warrant their goods, which
cannot be done by a fleet; neither did even the Portuguese transport any
of these goods, excepting only those of Scindy and Tatta, which traded
by means of their own junks, having _cartas_ or passes from the
Portuguese, for which the natives paid a small matter, to secure them
from being captured by the Portuguese cruizers; and the emoluments of
these passes came into the pockets of the chiefs of Diu, Damaun, and
Ormus. Even if all other difficulties were removed, yet will the caravan
of Lahore be never induced to take this passage, as it mostly consists
of returning Persians and Armenians, who know the journey from Jasques
to be almost as bad as that through Candahar; and the small trade from
the environs of Scindy is not worth mentioning. Yet, for his better
satisfaction, I am content that he may learn his errors by his own
experience, so that it be not done at the charges of the company: But I
suppose he will let it fall to the ground, not knowing at which end to
begin.

As to the third project, for uniting the trade of the Red Sea with this
of Surat, I recommended to him to use his endeavours; for it is already
begun. The peril of this trade in the Guzerat ships is very obvious,
owing to pirates in these seas; wherefore I have no doubt that many
merchants may be induced to load their goods in our ships on freight; by
which means we should make ourselves many useful friends among these
people, supply our own wants, save the export of bullion, and for this
year employ one of the ships belonging to the old account, that should
return in September, receiving the remains of this joint stock, which
will be sufficient to re-load a great ship, and would otherwise be
transported at great loss. This I explained and urged, shewing which
way it might be accomplished, and recommended by him to the commander,
the Cape merchants and your factors, as will appear by my letters. This
measure, if followed, must evidently be to your profit, even if nothing
were procured towards it by freight from the Guzerat merchants; as,
having so many empty vessels for so small a stock, and two pirate ships
fallen into your hands, they had better even go empty as not go. There
are many good chances in the Red Sea and in the way, and though they did
nothing else than bring back the goods you have at Mokha and other ports
in that sea, this would repay the charges of the voyage and be ready in
time.

I find Mr Steel high in his conceits, insomuch that he seems to have
forgotten the respect due to me. He and Mr Kerridge are at variance,
which I use every endeavour to assuage. As for his wife, I have told
Steel that she cannot remain in this country without much inconvenience
to us, and injury to his masters, as she could not be allowed her
expences of travelling and living at the charges of the Company; that he
must live frugally and like a merchant, as others do, and must therefore
send home his wife. If he did so, he was welcome to remain in the
Company's service; but otherwise, I should have to take measures with
them both, much against my inclination. Having thus persuaded him, I
likewise endeavoured to deal in the same manner about Captain Towerson's
wife. You know not the danger, the trouble, and the inconvenience, of
granting these liberties. For this purpose, I persuaded Abraham, his
father-in-law, to hold fast; stating the gripings of this court, and the
small hope of any relief by this alliance, from which he expected great
matters, and endeavoured to persuade him to return quietly. To further
this, I wrote to your chief factor, that such things as he had brought
and were vendible, should be bought for your use by bill of exchange,
and at such profit to him as might answer both parties; but I utterly
prohibited the taking of his trash, to remain a dead stock on your
hands, on any conditions. Such inconveniences do you bring upon your
hands by these unreasonable liberties.

By the strict commands in your letter respecting private trade, as well
respecting your own servants as others, I find you do not mean him to
have that liberty he expects; for he is furnished to the value of above
L1000, first cost here, and Steel to at least L200. This, as he proposes
sending home his wife, and his merit is so good towards you, I shall
send home; as I presume you will admit of this to get rid of such
cattle. I will not buy these goods however, but order them to be marked
and consigned to you, by which you will have the measure in your own
hands. By these liberties, you discourage all your old servants. Some
may do all things for fair words, and some will do nothing for good
actions. I could instance some, gone home two years since, who only
employed themselves in managing their own stock, and did no other
business, who now live at home in pleasure; and others that raised their
fortunes on your monies, trading therewith from port to port, and are
now returned rich and unquestioned. Last year a mariner had twenty-six
_churles_ of indigo, others many fardles; another had to the value of
7000 mahmudies in bastas, chosen at Baroach and purchased with your
monies, and he would not probably chuse the worst for himself; a fourth
did the same to the value of above L150. I do not mention these things
out of spite or ill will, but to induce you to equality of proceeding
with your servants, that an impartial restraint be imposed upon all, and
that by such instances your profits may not be all swallowed up.

For effecting these purposes, the sending the woman home, and the
prosecution of trade to the Red Sea, I have sent back Richard Steel to
Surat with the necessary orders. As it is now declared that the king
intends going to Guzerat, I have altered my purpose about the goods and
presents; and have appointed Richard Steel, after having dispatched
other matters, to meet me there with the goods and presents, and his
engineers. I have also sent my advice and directions to Captain Pring,
to make out an inventory of all the monies and goods in the two pirate
ships, and to land the whole, making it over to your stock; to give a
passage home to some of the chiefs, and to take the rest into your
service, referring to you at home to deal with the owners. My own fixed
opinion is, that their capture is legal and justifiable, and all their
goods forfeited. If you are pleased to restore any thing, be it at your
pleasure; but the more rigour you show to these, the better example you
will give to such scandalous piracies; for, if this course be pursued,
you may bid adieu to all trade at Surat and in the Red Sea, and let the
Turkey Company stand clear of the revenge of the Grand Signior.

I went to Asaph Khan on the 6th November, and shewed him the pearls
according to promise. As I had been previously informed, he told me the
sorts were not fit for that country; yet he was so pleased that I had
kept my word with him, that I believe I may say to you in the words of
Pharaoh, "The land is before you, dwell where you will, you and your
servants." We talked not about the price, but he vowed the utmost
secrecy, and that for my sake he would give more for them than their
value, not returning any, and would pay ready money. Of this he
professed to be in no want, and even offered to lend me whatever I
needed. I have promised to visit his sister, whom he has made our
protectress; and indeed, every contentment that good words can give, I
have received, besides good deeds. When the presents arrive, I shall
take care not to be too liberal to your loss; a little shall serve in
that way. Indeed Asaph Khan himself has given me this advice, saying
that such things are as well taken in this country sold as given, which
I find by the experience of others to be true.

Finishing these conferences in his bed-chamber, Asaph Khan rose to go to
dinner, having invited me and my people; but he and his friends dined
without, appointing us our mess apart, for they scruple to eat with us.
I had good cheer, and was well attended, the residue being given to my
servants. After dinner, I moved about the debt due by Groo, and told him
of the delays. He desired me to say no more, as he had undertaken that
business; that Groo, at his orders, was finishing accounts with a
jeweller, and he had given orders, as the money was paid, that it should
remain in the hands of the cutwall for us. This I found afterwards to be
true, and the cutwall has promised to finish in three days, desiring me
to send no more to Asaph Khan on that business.

I must not omit to mention here, an anecdote of baseness or favour, call
it which you please. When the prisons are full of condemned men, the
king commands some to be executed, and sends others to his omrahs, to be
redeemed at a price. This he esteems a courtesy, as giving the means of
exercising charity: But he takes the money, and so sells the virtue.
About a month before our remove, he sent to me to buy three Abyssinians,
whom they suppose to be all Christians, at the price of forty rupees
each. I answered, that I could not purchase men as slaves, as was done
by others, by which they had profit for their money; but that I was
willing to give twenty rupees each for them in charity, to save their
lives and restore them to liberty. The king was well pleased with my
answer, and ordered them to be sent me. They expected the money, which I
was in no haste to give, and even hoped it had been forgotten. But the
king's words are all written down[217], and are as irrevocable decrees.
Seeing that I sent not for the malefactors, his officers delivered them
into the hands of my _procurator_, in my absence this day, taking his
note for the sixty rupees, which I paid at my return, and set free the
prisoners.

[Footnote 217: Dixit, et edictum est; fatur, et est factum.--_Purch_.]

Having notice of a new phirmaund sent down to Surat to disarm all the
English, and some other restrictions upon their liberty, owing to a
complaint sent up to the prince, that we intended to build a fort at
Swally, and that our ships were laden with bricks and lime for that
purpose, I visited Asaph Khan on the 10th November, to enquire into this
matter. This jealousy arose from our people having landed a few bricks
on shore, for building a furnace to refound the ship's bell; yet the
alarm was so hot at court, that I was called to make answer, when I
represented how absurd was this imaginary fear, how dishonourable for
the king, and how unfit the place was for any such purpose to us, having
neither water nor harbourage. The jealousy was however so very strongly
imprinted in their minds, because I had formerly asked a river at Gogo
for that purpose, that I could hardly satisfy the prince but that we
intended some such sinister end. You may judge from this how difficult
it were to get a port for yourselves, if you were so disposed.
Notwithstanding all remonstrances, this furnace must be demolished, and
a _huddey_ of horse sent down to see it done. The disarming of our men
was what chiefly disobliged our people, though the weapons were only
lodged in the custom-house, and those only belonging to the ship's
company. I told Asaph Khan, that we could not endure this slavery, nor
would I stay longer in the country, as the prince gave us one day a
phirmaund for our good usage, with a grant of privileges, and
countermand all the next by contradictory orders, in which proceedings
there was neither honour nor good faith, and I could not answer for my
continuing to reside among them. Asaph Khan said, he would speak to the
king at night on the subject, in the presence of the prince, and
afterwards give me an answer.

I went again to wait upon Asaph Khan on the 18th, when he made many
protestations of the Mogul's affection to my sovereign and nation, and
to me, and assured me he had risked the prince's disfavour for our
sakes, and had full assurance of a complete redress of all our
grievances: and that he proposed getting the _prigany_ of Surat
transferred to himself, which the prince would have to resign, as he had
been made governor of Ahmedabad, Cambay, and that territory. To satisfy
me that he did not dissemble, he desired me to come at night to court,
bringing the king my master's letter and the translation, as the time
was favourable for its delivery; desiring me at the same time to persist
in my complaint, and to offer taking leave, when I should see what he
would say for us. Accordingly, I went at night to wait upon the king,
whom I found surrounded by a very full court. The king was sitting on
the ground, and when I delivered the letter, it was laid before him, of
which he took no great notice, being busy at the time. Asaph Khan
whispered to his father, Etimon Dowlet, desiring him to read the letter
and assist us, which he could better do than himself. Etimon Dowlet took
up both letters, giving that in English into the king's hands, and read
the translation to the king, who answered many of the complaints. On
coming to that point, of procuring our quiet trade, by his authority
with the Portuguese, he demanded if we wanted him to make peace with
them? I answered, that his majesty knew long since I had offered to be
governed entirely by him, and referred that matter to his wisdom, and
waited therefore to know his pleasure. On this he said, that he would
undertake to reconcile us, and to cause agreement to be made in his
seas, which he would signify in his answer to my master's letter, in
which he would farther satisfy his majesty in all his other friendly
desires.

Notwithstanding of this, I asked leave to go before to Ahmedabad, to
meet the king's presents, and to prepare for my return home. Upon this,
a question arose between the king and the prince, who complained that he
derived no profit from us, and was very willing to be rid of us. Asaph
Khan then took up the discourse, and plainly told the king, that we
brought both profit and security to the port of Surat and to the
kingdom, but were very rudely treated by the prince's servants, and that
we could not continue our trade and residence, unless matters were
amended; for which reason it would be more honourable for his majesty to
licence and protect us, than to treat us discourteously. The prince
angrily replied, That he had never wronged us, and had lately given us a
phirmaund at the desire of Asaph Khan. It is true, replied Asaph Khan,
that you granted him a phirmaund to his satisfaction; but in ten days
you sent down another, virtually to contradict and annul the former; and
as he stood as surety between both, and had undertaken our redress on
the prince's word, the shame and dishonour of this double procedure fell
upon him. He said he spoke for no ends, but for the king's honour and
justice, as he owed me nothing, nor I him, and for the truth of his
words he appealed to me, who complained that our goods were taken away
from us by force, and that Rulph,[218] who began this two years ago,
would never pay us, and his officers continued the same procedure every
season. If the prince were weary of the English, he might turn us away;
but then he must expect that we would seek for redress at our own hands
upon the seas. He demanded whether the king or the prince gave me the
means of living, or, as they did not, at whose expence I was maintained?
saying, that I was an ambassador and a stranger, who lived in this
country and followed the progress of the king at great charges; and if
our goods continued to be taken from us by force, so that we could
neither get back our goods, nor yet their value in money, it would be
impossible for us to subsist.

[Footnote 218: On a former occasion, where this person is mentioned, it
has been said that his name, in the edition of this journal given by
Churchill, is written Sulph. From the circumstances in the context at
this place, it is possible that Sulpheckar Khan, or Zulfeccar Khan,
governor of Surat under Sultan Churrum, may be here meant.--E.]

This was delivered with some heat, and the king, catching at the word
force, repeated it to his son, whom he sharply reprehended. The prince
promised to see me paid for all that had been taken. He said likewise
that he had taken nothing, having only caused the presents to be sealed;
and, as his officers had received no customs on these, he desired to
have them opened in his presence. This I absolutely refused to consent
to, telling the king that I only did my duty to my master, in insisting
to deliver the presents free from duty, and that, when I had so done, I
should give the prince full satisfaction in all other things. At this
time, Etimon Dowlet, who had been made our friend by his son Asaph Khan,
whispered to the king, and read a clause or two from my master's letter,
on which the king made the prince stand aside. Asaph Khan joined in this
private conference, which they told me was for our good; and in
conclusion, the prince was commanded to suffer all the goods to come
quietly to me, and to give me such privileges for our trade as were fit,
and as should be proposed by Asaph Khan.

The prince would not yield the presents, unless Asaph Khan became his
surety that he should have a share, which he did, and we were then all
agreed on that point. The king paid me many compliments in words, and
even gave me two pieces of _pawne_ out of the dish then before him,
desiring me to partake of what he was eating. I then took my leave for
Ahmedabad; and that same night I began my journey, leaving my tents, as
I expected to reach that city the next day: But I had to ride two
nights, with the intermediate day and half of the next, with excessively
little accommodation or refreshment; and arrived at Ahmedabad on the
15th at noon.

The 8th January, 1618, there was some question about presents by the
prince, whom I told that his were ready whenever he was ready to receive
them. He asked me, why I had broken the seals? On which I said, that it
would have been dishonourable and discourteous in me to have delivered
the king's presents in bonds, and having waited his highness' licence
during twenty days, but seeing no hope of its arrival, I had been under
the necessity of breaking open the seals. Some heat was likely to have
arisen on this subject, but a gentleman from the king, who was sent to
observe what passed between us, told us both that the king commanded our
presence before him immediately, at a garden where he then was, on the
river side, a coss from the town. The prince went there immediately in
his palanquin, and I followed in a coach, well attended upon by the
servants of the king and prince. On my arrival, the women were going in,
on which occasion no man dare enter except the prince, who accordingly
made bitter complaints against me for having broke open the seals,
taking out from the packages whatever I pleased, without his knowledge.
Asaph Khan was called, who was my surety, and the prince laid the blame
of all this upon him, but he strenuously denied all knowledge or
participation; yet I had not accused him, but took it all upon myself,
knowing he would deny it, as is the custom, to excuse himself, and I
knew myself better able to bear it.

I was then sent for to the water-side, where the king had been sitting
in private, and went in, having the presents along with me, but the king
was gone into the female apartments. Asaph Khan blamed me for breaking
his word, saying, that the prince had shamed him. I answered, through
Jaddow, that he well knew I had his consent, of which this man was a
witness. He denied this to us both, and when I again said, that,
although I would not lay the blame on him, that it was still true, as
this man could witness; Jaddow refused to interpret my answer, saying,
that he durst not tell Asaph Khan to his face that he lied. This is a
quite usual thing among them; for if any command comes from the king
which he afterwards forgets or denies, he that brought the message will
deny it stoutly. I bore up as high as I could, on which some of the
great men said that it was a great affront, of which no other man durst
have been guilty, while others smiled. I answered, it was by no means so
great as the prince had often done to me. We thus spent the day, during
which the king never appeared, having privately stole away, leaving us
all in anxious expectation.

At night, word came that the king was gone, when I offered to have gone
home, but was so well attended, that I was in some measure constrained
to force my way. While on the road, new messengers came to seek me, and
I had to return to court, without having either eaten or drank. The king
was not however come back, and I could not get free from my attendants,
who yet used me very respectfully. After waiting an hour, a sudden order
was given to put out all the lights. The king now came in an open
waggon, drawn by bullocks, having his favourite Noormahal along with
him, himself acting as waggoner, and no man near. When he and his women
were housed, the prince came in on horseback, and immediately called for
me into the place where the king was. It was now midnight, and I found
the king and prince only attended upon by two or three eunuchs. Putting
on an angry countenance, the king, as he had been instructed by his son,
told me I had broken my word, and he would trust me no more. I answered
roundly, that I held it fit to give freely, not upon compulsion, and had
committed no offence, according to my judgment; and if their customs
were so very different from ours, I had erred only from ignorance, and
ought therefore to be pardoned. After many disputes, the prince offered
his friendship, with many fair promises, and we were all reconciled.

I then opened the chests, gave the king his presents, and the prince
his, and sent in those intended for Noormahal. We were about two hours
engaged in viewing them. The king was well pleased with the tapestry,
but said it was too coarse, and desired to have a suit of the same
quality with the sweet bags. Three articles were detained besides the
presents; and for these the prince said he would pay, as his father had
taken them. He likewise desired me to come to see him in the morning,
promising to be my protector and procurator, which I willingly accepted
in all things except the goods.

I waited upon the prince on the 10th, when I was well received, and had
orders for a phirmaund about the murdered man[219]. He likewise made a
public declaration of his reconcilement, desiring all his officers to
take notice of it, and act accordingly. He likewise ordered his chief
_Raia_ to be in future my procurator, and to draw out whatever
phirmaunds I required. I presented to him Captain Towerson, and some
others of the English, whom he received graciously; and, in confirmation
of our renewed friendship, he presented me with a robe of cloth of
silver, promising to be the protector of our nation in all things we
could desire. I then told him about Mr Steel and his workmen, when he
desired me to bring a small present at night to the king, to whom he
should present them, which I did. He kept his word, and spoke in our
favour to the king, who seemed disposed to entertain them. On this
occasion I presented Captain Towerson to the king, who called him up,
and after a few questions, rose. At the _Gitshel Choes_[220] I presented
Mr Steel and his workmen. The king called for Mr Paynter, and gave him
ten pounds, promising to take him and all the rest into his service. On
this occasion the king sat all night in a hat which I had given him.

[Footnote 219: This circumstance is perhaps explained in the sequel, as
relating to the death of a person at Burhanpoor.--E.]

[Footnote 220: This is probably meant for the same public audience
called, in other parts of the journal, the Gazul Khan.--E.]

The 13th, the Dutch came to court, bringing a great present of China
ware, saunders-wood, parrots, and cloves, but were not allowed to
approach the third degree, or raised platform. After some time, the
prince asked me, who they were? I answered, that they were Hollanders
who resided at Surat. He then enquired if they were our friends? I
answered, that they were of a nation which was dependent upon the king
of England, but not welcome in all parts, and that I did not know their
business. He then said, since they were our friends, that I ought to
call them up. So I was obliged to call upon them, that they might
deliver their presents, on which occasion they were placed beside our
merchants, yet without any farther speech or conference. Finally, every
thing I asked was complied with, or at least promised, and I now wait
for performance and money. I am satisfied, that, without this
contestation, I had never succeeded in our just demands; for I told the
prince's messenger, in the presence of all the English, that if he chose
to use force against me or my goods, he certainly might, but it should
cost blood, for I would set my _chop_ upon his master's ship, and send
her to England.

On the 18th I received notice from Surat of the imprisonment of Spragge
and Howard at Burhanpoor, where their house and goods were seized, and
their lives in question, on the following account:--The cutwall had been
drinking at their house, and one of his men had died that night, on
which they were accused of having poisoned him, and the cutwall, in
excuse for having been at their house, pretended that he had gone to
fetch away a man's wife who was detained by Thomas Spragge. What may be
the truth of this affair I know not; but information has been sent to
the king against them. I went therefore to the prince, who had promised
to undertake all our causes, but could not get speech of him, though I
had likewise to complain of force having been used against a caravan of
ours on the way, notwithstanding a phirmaund from the rajah of the
country, on both of which subjects I shall present a petition at night
to the king. My trouble with this barbarous and unjust people is beyond
all endurance. When at the prince's, I found the promised phirmaund
drawn up indeed, but half of the agreed conditions were omitted, upon
which I refused to accept it, and desired leave to depart, that I might
treat with them in the sea.[221]

[Footnote 221: This obscure expression seems to imply a threat of taking
vengeance, or making reprisals at sea, for the oppressions of the Mogul
government against the English trade.--E.]

On the 21st, a command was issued to set free the English at Burhanpoor,
and to restore their goods; on which occasion the king observed, that,
if they had killed the Mahometan who came to drink at their house, he
had only met with his just reward. Another order was issued, commanding
Partap-shah to repay us all exactions whatsoever, and that he should
hereafter take no duties upon our goods in their way to the sea-port,
threatening, in case of failure, to deliver his son into my hands. On
the 22d, I went in person to receive these phirmaunds, and carried the
merchants along with me, together with some pearls the prince was eager
to see, and which were pretended to belong to Mr Towerson. The prince
had received some vague accounts of our having pearls to the value of
twenty or thirty thousand pounds, which he hoped to have extracted from
us. When his secretary saw our small pearls, he observed that his master
had _maunds_ of such, and if we had no better, we might take these away.
You may judge how basely covetous these people are of jewels. I told him
that we had procured these from a gentlewoman to satisfy the prince, and
as they could not be made better, it was uncivil to be angry with
merchants who had done their best to shew their good will.

I then spoke to him about the phirmaunds, when he bluntly told me I
should have none; for as we had deceived the prince's hopes, he would
disappoint us. I had asked leave to depart, and I might come to take
leave whenever I pleased. To this I answered, that nothing could please
me more, but that I should requite their injustice in another place, for
I should now apply to the king, and depend no more on them, as I saw
their conduct was made up of covetousness and unworthiness. So I arose
to depart, but he recalled me, desiring that I might come next day to
the king and prince together, when I should have complete satisfaction.


       *       *       *       *       *

"And now, reader, we are at a stand: some more idle, or more busy
spirits, willing either to take their rest, or to exchange their labour;
and some perhaps wishing they had the whole journal, and not thus
contracted into extracts of those things out of it which I conceived
more fit for the public. And, for the whole, myself could have wished
it, but neither with the honourable Company, nor elsewhere, could I
learn of it; the worthy knight himself being now employed in like
honourable embassage from his majesty to the Great Turk. Yet, to supply
the defect of the journal, I have given thee the chorography of the
country, together with certain letters of his, written from India to
honourable lords, and his friends in England; out of all which may be
hewed and framed a delightful commentary of the Mogul and his subjects.
Take them therefore, reader, and use them as a prospective glass, by
which thou mayst take easy and near view of these remote regions,
people, rites, and religions."--_Purchas_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Pilgrims, in supplement to the journal of Sir Thomas Roe, Purchas
has inserted a formal complimentary letter from king James to the Great
Mogul, or emperor of Hindoostan, together with another from the Mogul to
king James, containing nothing besides hyperbolical expressions of
regard; both of which are here omitted, as entirely devoid of interest,
amusement, or information. Purchas has also added several letters said
to have been found among the papers of Sir Thomas Roe, with some others
which he says were transcribed from _Sir Thomas Roe's own book_. As
these letters merely repeat circumstances and opinions already more
fully and more methodically expressed in the preceding journal, they
could only have served unnecessarily to swell our pages, without any
adequate advantage, and are therefore omitted.

Purchas also informs us that Sir Thomas Roe, before he left the court of
the Great Mogul on his return for England, requested to be favoured with
a recommendatory letter from the Mogul to king James. This request was
granted with the utmost readiness, and a letter written accordingly; but
the Mogul, or his ministers, shewed much scrupulousness about the
placement of the seal to this letter, lest, if placed under the writing,
it might disparage the dignity of the Mogul, or, if placed over the
letter, king James might feel disobliged. On this account, the letter
was delivered to Sir Thomas unsealed, and the seal was sent separately,
that it might be afterwards affixed, according to the pleasure of the
king of England.

This seal was of silver, and Purchas has given an engraving, or _fac
simile_ of it, consisting of an inner and larger circle, bearing the
style or title of the reigning king, or _Padishah_ Jehanguire;
surrounded circularly by eight smaller circles, containing the series of
his direct ancestors, from Timor, or Tamerlane, downwards. These are all
of course in the Persian language and characters; but Purchas gives
likewise a copy or translation of the same in English letters. It seemed
quite superfluous to insert here the Persian _fac simile_, being merely
writing without ornament, armorial bearing, or cognizance. The following
is the series, expressed in English characters; the last being the
central circle, which contains the name and title of the reigning
emperor:--

   1. Ebn Amir Temur Saheb Quran.
   2. Ebn Miran Shah.
   3. Ebn Mirza Soltan Mohamed.
   4. Ebn Soltan Abu Said.
   5. Ebn Mirza Amar Shah.
   6. Ebn Bahar Padishah.
   7. Ebn Humaiun Padishah.
   8. Ebn Akbar Padishah.
   9. Abu Amozaphar Nurdin Jebanguire Padishah.


SECTION VII.

RELATION OF A VOYAGE TO INDIA IN 1616, WITH OBSERVATIONS RESPECTING THE
DOMINIONS OF THE GREAT MOGUL, BY MR. EDWARD TERRY.[222]

INTRODUCTION.

According to Purchas, Mr Edward Terry was master of arts, and a student
of Christ Church in Oxford, and went out to India as chaplain to Sir
Thomas Roe. In the first subdivision of this narrative, we have combined
the observations of Captain Alexander Childe, who was commander of the
ship James, during the same voyage, under Captain Benjamin Joseph, of
the ship Charles, who was slain in a sea-fight with a Portuguese carack,
off one of the Komoro islands. The notes extracted by Purchas from the
journal of Captain Childe,[223] are so short and unsatisfactory, that we
have been induced to suppress them, except so far as they serve to
elucidate the narrative of Terry, in the first subdivision of this
section.--E.

[Footnote 222: Purch. Pilgr. II 1464.]

[Footnote 223: Id. I. 606.]

Sec.1. _Occurrences during the Voyage from England to Surat_.

Apologies often call truth into question, and having nothing but truth
to offer in excuse for this narrative, I omit all unnecessary preface,
desiring only that the reader may believe what I have faithfully
related. Our fleet, consisting of six goodly ships, the Charles,
Unicorn, James, Globe, Swan, and Rose, under the supreme command of
Captain Benjamin Joseph, who sailed as general in the Charles, our
admiral ship, fell down from Gravesend to Tilbury-hope on the 3d of
February, 1616.

After long and anxious expectation, it pleased God to send us a fair
wind at N.E. on the 9th March, when we departed from that road, and set
sail for the East Indies. The wind continued favourable till the 16th,
at night, when we were in the bay of Biscay, at which time we were
assailed by a most fearful storm, during which we lost sight both of the
Globe and the Rose. The Globe rejoined us on the 26th following, but the
Rose was no more heard of till six months afterwards, when she arrived
at Bantam. The storm continued with violence from the 16th to the 21st.
The 28th we got sight of the grand Canary, and of the Peak of Teneriffe,
which is so extremely high that it may be seen in a clear day more than
forty leagues out at sea, as the mariners report. The 31st, being
Easter-day, we passed under the tropic of Cancer, and on the 7th of
April had the sun in our zenith. The 16th, we met with these winds
called _tornadoes_, which are so variable and uncertain, as sometimes to
blow from all the thirty-two points of the compass within the space of a
single hour. These winds are accompanied by much thunder and lightning,
and excessive rains, of so noisome a nature, as immediately to cause
people's clothes to stink on their backs; and wherever this rain-water
stagnates, even for a short space of time, it brings forth many
offensive animalcules. The tornadoes began with us when in about 12 deg. of
N. latitude, and continued till we were two degrees to the south of the
equinoctial line, which we passed on the 28th of April. The 19th of May,
being Whitsunday, we passed the tropic of Capricorn, so that we were
complete seven weeks under the torrid zone.

Almost every day, while between the tropics, we saw various kinds of
fish, in greater abundance than elsewhere. As the whale, or mighty
_Leviathan_, whom God hath created to take his pastime in the seas;
Dolphins also, and Albicores, with Bonitoes, flying-fishes, and many
others. Some whales were of an exceeding greatness, which, in calm
weather, would often rise and shew themselves above the water, appearing
like vast rocks; and, while rising, they would spout up a great quantity
of water into the air, with much noise, which fell down again around
them like heavy rain. The dolphin is called, from the swiftness of its
motion, the arrow of the sea. This fish differs from many others, in
having teeth on the top of its tongue. It is pleasing to the eye, the
smell, and the taste, having a changeable colour, finned like a roach,
covered with very small scales, giving out a delightful scent above all
other fishes, and is in taste as good as any. These dolphins are very
apt to follow our ships, not, so far as I think, from any love they bear
for men, as some authors write, but to feed upon what may be thrown
overboard. Whence it comes to pass that they often become food to us;
for, when they swim close by the ships, they are struck by a broad
instrument full of barbed points, called a harping-iron, to which a rope
is fastened, by which to pull the instrument and the fish on board. This
beautiful dolphin may be taken as an emblem of a race of men, who, under
sweet countenances, carry sharp tongues. The bonitoes and albicores are
much like our mackerels in colour, shape, and taste, but grow to a very
large size. The flying-fishes live the most unhappy lives of all others,
as they are persecuted in the water by the dolphins, bonitoes, and
albicores, and when they endeavour to escape from their enemies in the
water, by rising up in flight, they are assailed by ravenous fowls in
the air, somewhat like our kites, which hover over the water in waiting
for their appearance in the other element. These flying-fishes are like
men who profess two trades and thrive in neither.

Early in the morning of the 12th June, we espied our long-wished-for
harbour, the bay of Saldanha, [Table-bay] about twelve leagues short
from the Cape of Good Hope, into which we came happily to anchor that
same forenoon. We here found one of the Company's ships, the Lion,
commanded by Captain Newport, come from Surat, and homeward-bound for
England. We made ourselves merry with each other on this happy meeting;
and having a fair gale, the Lion sailed on the night of the 14th. We
found here water in abundance, but little refreshments for our sick men,
except fresh fish, as the natives brought us nothing. We remained in
this harbour till the 28th, on which day we departed, the Swan steering
her course for Bantam. The 29th we doubled the Cape of Good Hope, in the
lat. of 35 deg. S. Off this cape there continually sets a most violent
current to the westwards, whence it happens, when it is met by a strong
contrary wind, their impetuous opposition occasions so rough a sea that
some ships have been swallowed up, and many more endangered among these
mountainous waves. Few ships pass this way without encountering a storm.

The 22d of July we got sight of the great island of Madagascar, commonly
called of St Lawrence, being between that island and the main, but
touched not there. Proceeding on our course, on the 1st of August we
fell in with a part of the main land of Africa, called Boobam,[224] in
lat. 16 deg. 35' S. the variation being 13 deg. 12'. The 5th we drew near the
little islands of Mohelia, Gazidia, and St Juan de Castro, [Moelia,
Hinzuan or Johanna, Mayotta or St Christopher, and Augasi,] generally
known by the name of the Komoro islands, in about the lat. of 12 deg. S.

[Footnote 224: The head-land of Mosambique is probably here meant.--E.]

Early in the morning of the 6th of August, our men in the tops looking
out for land, espied a sail about three or four leagues off directly in
our course. About noon, the Globe, which was our smallest ship, and
sailed better than the rest of the fleet, came up with her on the
broadside to windward, and hailed her according to the custom of the
sea, asking whence she came? She answered, indirectly, that she came
from the sea, and her people insulted ours most outrageously, calling
them thieves, rogues, heretics, and devils; and, in conclusion of their
rude compliments, spoke in the loud language of the cannon's roar,
discharging seven pieces of large artillery at our Globe, six of the
balls piercing her hull, and maiming some of her men, but killing none.
Our Globe replied in the same voice, and afterwards fell astern and
stood in for our general and the rest of our fleet, now four sail in
all, shewing us the discourtesy of the Portuguese.

About three in the afternoon, the Charles, our admiral, came up with the
Portuguese ship, which was the admiral of the caracks that sailed this
year from Lisbon, but had parted from all the rest of their fleet. When
within pistol-shot, Captain Benjamin Joseph, our commander, proceeded
deliberately to work, offering treaty before he attempted revenge. So we
saluted her with our trumpets, to which she replied with her
wind-instruments. Captain Joseph then called out, that their commander
might come on board, to make satisfaction for the wrong they had done to
our consort. They made answer, that they had no boat; on which our
general said he would send them one, and immediately caused his barge to
be manned and sent to the carack, which brought back one of their
officers and two mean men, with this answer from their commander, that
he had resolved never to leave his ship, to which he might be forced,
but would not be commanded to leave her.

On receiving this message, Captain Joseph used them civilly who had
brought it, and commanded them to be shewn our ship, and how she was
prepared to vindicate our honour. This made the poor Portuguese much
afraid, and they desired Captain Joseph to write a few words to their
commander, which, added to their persuasions, might perchance induce him
to come to terms. Willing to preserve his honour, and to prevent the
effusion of blood, Captain Joseph caused a few words to be written to
the Portuguese commander, to the following effect:--"Whereas the
commander of the carack has offered violence to our ship the Globe,
while sailing peaceably beside him, he is desired to come aboard
immediately, and give satisfaction for that wrong, or else at his
peril," &c. He then sent back the Portuguese, accompanied by one of our
master's mates, carrying the writing, together with this verbal message,
"That if he refused to come, he would force him, or sink by his side."
The words of dying men are said to be prophetic, so these his words came
to pass, for he was slain not long after by a great shot from the
carack.

Notwithstanding this message, the Portuguese commander remained firmly
to his resolute answer. Wherefore, on the return of our men, Captain
Joseph himself fired the three first shots, which surely did them much
mischief; as we conjectured, by the loud outcry we heard among them
after these shots were fired. The shot now flew thick from both sides;
and our captain, chearing his men to behave gallantly, ascended the
half-deck, where he had not been above ten minutes when a great shot
from the quarter of the carack deprived him of life in the twinkling of
an eye. It hit him fair in the breast, beating his heart and other parts
out of his body, which lay round him among his blood. After he was
slain, our master continued the fight for about half an hour, when,
considering that another person was to succeed in the supreme command,
and the night approaching, he thought proper to desist, and having
fallen astern, he hung out a flag as a signal of council, to call the
captain of the vice-admiral on board, Captain Henry Pepwell, who was to
succeed, together with the other masters, that they might consult about
the prosecution of this enterprize. As the night was now come, it was
resolved not to proceed any farther for the present. So the carack
proceeded on her course, putting up a light on her poop, as if in
defiance of us to follow, and about midnight came to anchor under the
island of Moelia; and when we perceived this island, we too let fall our
anchors.

Early in the morning of the 7th, before day began to dawn, we prepared
for a new assault, first recommending ourselves to God in prayer. When
morning came, we found the carack so close to the shore, and the nearest
of our other ships at least a league from us, that we held our hands for
that day, waiting till the carack might weigh and stand out to sea, as
fitter there to deal with her. In the afternoon, we chested our slain
commander, and committed him to the deep, over against the isle of
Moelia, omitting any ceremony of firing funeral-guns usual on such
occasions, that the enemy might not know our loss.

A little before night the carack put to sea, when we also weighed and
made sail after her. The day now left us, and our proud enemy,
unwilling, as it seems, to have the appearance of escaping by flight,
put forth a light on his poop as before, as if for us to follow him,
which we did to some purpose. The night being well spent, we again
commended ourselves and our cause to God in prayer. Soon afterwards, the
day began to dawn, and appeared as if covered by a red mantle, which
proved a bloody one to many who now beheld the light for the last time.
It was now resolved that our four ships were to take their turns in
succession, to endeavour to force this proud Portuguese either to bend
or break. Our ship, the Charles, played her part first;[225] and ere she
had been half an hour engaged with her adversary, a shot from the carack
hitting one of our iron guns on the half-deck, flew all in pieces,
dangerously wounding our new general, and three other mariners who stood
beside him. Captain Pepwell's left eye was beaten out, and he received
two other wounds in his head, and a third in his leg, a ragged piece of
the broken shot sticking fast in the bone, which seemed, by his
complaining, to afflict him more than the rest. Thus was our new
commander welcomed to his authority, and we all considered his wounds as
mortal; but he lived till about fourteen months afterwards, when he died
peaceably in his bed, on his way back to England.

[Footnote 225: This account of the battle is chiefly taken from Terry,
who is more particular in his narrative; but Childe says that Captain
Pepwell, the new general, gave him leave to begin this day's action, as
his ship sailed better, and that, after three or four broadsides, he
gave place to the general. According to modern naval tactics, all four
at once would have assailed the enemy, taking vantage stations on her
quarters and bows.--E.]

By the same shot, Mr Richard Hounsell, the master of our ship, had a
great piece of the flesh of his arm carried off, which rendered him
unserviceable for a time. The captain and master being thus disabled,
deputed their authority to the chief master's mate, who behaved with
great prudence and resolution. Thus we continued one after the other to
fight all day, the vice-admiral and the Globe and James taking their
turns in succession. Between three and four in the afternoon, the
mainmast of the carack fell overboard, and presently afterwards the
foremast and mizen followed, and she had received so many and large
wounds in her thick sides, that her case was quite desperate, and she
must soon either yield or perish. Her commander, Don Emanuel de Meneses,
a brave and resolute person, stood in for the shore in this distressed
condition, being not far from the island of Gazidia.[226] We pursued as
far as we durst venture, without hazard of shipwreck, but gave over at
five o'clock, when about a league from the shore, which is extremely
steep, and no ground to be had within less than a cable's length of the
rocks, the shore being moreover to leeward.

[Footnote 226: According to Childe, it was the most northern of the
islands, named Komoro, or Augasi, not far north from Moelia, where the
fight began,--E.]

We now sent off our barge with a flag of truce to speak the carack, and
as he waved us with a similar flag, Mr Connock, our chief merchant, who
was employed on this occasion, boldly went aboard the carack, and
delivered a message to Don Emanuel, stating, that he brought an offer of
life and peace if he would accept it; and as he deserved well for his
undaunted valour, so he should be honourably and respectfully treated if
he would put himself into our hands, and sent to Goa in safety. He,
however, as an oak gathering strength from his wounds,[227] and
contemning the misery he could not prevent, resolutely answered Mr
Connock to the following purpose: "That no misfortune should make him
alter his former resolution; for he was determined again to stand out to
sea, if possible, and to encounter us again; and then, if forced by fire
and sword, he might by bad chance be taken, but he would never yield;
and, if taken alive, he hoped to find the respect due to a gentleman,
till when we had our answer."

[Footnote 227: Duris, ut ilex tonsa bipennibus-ducit opes animumque
ferro.--_Terry._]

Our messenger was thus dismissed, and shortly afterwards this sore
distressed ship, being entirely unmanageable for want of masts and
sails, was forced by the winds and waves upon the adjacent island of
Gazidia or Komoro, where she stuck fast between two rocks. Those who
remained alive in the carack got ashore by means of their boats; and
when all were landed, willing, as it would seem, to consume what they
could not keep, they set their carack on fire, that she might not become
our prize.[228] After leaving their ill-fated carack, the poor
Portuguese were most inhumanly used by the barbarous islanders, who
spoiled them of every thing they had brought on shore for their succour,
and slew some of them for opposing their cupidity. Doubtless they had
been all massacred, had they not been relieved by two small Arab vessels
who were there engaged in trade, and which, I suppose in hope of a great
reward, took them in, and conveyed them in safety to their own city of
Goa.

[Footnote 228: Childe says, he could not say whether she was fired
accidentally or on purpose.--E.]

In the morning of the 9th, Mr Alexander Childe, who commanded one of the
English ships, sent his mate, Anthony Fugars, ashore in his long-boat,
to see if any of the Portuguese were saved, to fetch such away, and to
learn how she was set on fire. But the carack was still burning, and not
a man belonging to her was to be seen. There were many negro islanders
on the coast, over against the carack, who held up a flag of truce to
invite the English on shore, but it was impossible to land in that
place, or any where within three leagues to the east or west, as the
rocks were all extremely high and rugged.

In this long conflict, only five men were lost out of our four ships,
three belonging to the admiral, and two out of the James. Besides whom,
there were about twenty wounded in our fleet, all of whom afterwards
recovered. But, of 700 who sailed in the carack, there came not above
250 to Goa, as we were afterwards credibly informed. In this fearful
engagement, our ship, the Charles, discharged 375 great shot against the
adversary, as reported by our gunners, besides 100 musqueteers who plied
their small arms all the time. Neither were the enemy idle, for our ship
received at least 100 great shot from them, many of which dangerously
took place in her hull. Our foremast was shot through the middle, our
mainmast wounded, the main stay, and many of the main shrouds, cut
asunder.

After we had seen the carack set on fire, which was about midnight of
the 8th, we stood off and on till morning, to see if we might find any
thing in her ashes. Finding this ineffectual, we sought about for some
place where we might find succour and refreshment for our sick and
wounded on shore. The land was very high, and the sea every where too
deep for anchoring, so that it was the 10th before we could find a good
harbour, which was in the S.W. part of the island, where we anchored.
The James came to anchor in twenty-two fathoms, with one of her anchors,
while the other was only in fourteen. This harbour was over against a
town called Mattoma.

This island seemed very pleasant, full of goodly trees, covered all over
with green pasture, and abounding in beeves, goats, poultry,
sugar-canes, rice, plantains, lemons, oranges, and cocoa-nuts, with many
other wholesome things; of all which we procured sufficient to relieve
our whole company for a small quantity of white paper, a few glass
beads, and penny knives. For instance, we bought as many oranges as
would fill a hat for half a quarter of a sheet of white paper, and all
other kinds of provision in the same proportion. The islanders brought
much of their fruits to us in their little canoes, which are long and
narrow boats, like troughs, hollowed out of single trees; but their
cattle we bought on shore. I observed the people to be straight,
well-limbed, and able-bodied men, of a very dark tawny colour. Most of
the men, and all the women, were entirely naked, except merely enough to
hide their parts of shame. Some few of the men wore long garments, after
the fashion of the Arabs, whose language they spoke, and were likewise
of the Mahometan religion, and so rigid, that they would not suffer us
to come near their places of worship. They have good convenient
dwellings, and fair sepulchres for their dead.

They scorned to live under strict obedience to a king, whose residence
was some miles up the country, as they required to have his leave, which
was sent for, before they would sell us any provisions. When informed of
our arrival, their king sent a message of welcome to our commander,
together with a present of beeves, goats, and choice fruits; in return
for which, he was well recompensed and contented, by a present of paper,
and other English toys. We saw some Spanish money among them, of which
they made so small account, that some of our men got rials of eight, in
exchange for a little paper, or a few beads. What use they made of the
paper, we could not guess. The cocoa-nut tree, of which this island has
abundance, may have the pre-eminence of all trees, in my opinion, by its
universal usefulness. Without the help of any other, one may build and
furnish out a ship for sea, with every thing requisite. Of the body of
this tree may be made timbers, planks, and masts; its gum may serve for
paying the bottom; the rind of the same tree will make sails and
cordage; and the large nut, being full of kernel and pleasant liquor,
will serve those who navigate the ship both for meat and drink, as also
for merchandize.

Being well stored with these nuts, and other good provisions, after six
days abode here, the breaches in our ships received in fight being all
repaired, and our men well refreshed, we put again to sea on the 16th of
August, with a prosperous wind. On the 24th, we passed under the line,
without any heat to offend us, bending our course for Socotora, near the
mouth of the Red Sea, an island whence comes our Socotorine aloes. But
an adverse wind from the coast of Arabia prevented us from being able to
fetch that island, which we passed on the 1st September.

In the year before, our English fleet touched at this island, on which
occasion the petty king came to the water-side, and hearing some of our
wind-instruments, asked if they ever played David's Psalms, which he had
heard of, being a Mahometan. He was answered by one who stood by, that
they did. On which he observed, that it was an evil invention of him who
first mingled music with religion; as God, before that, was worshipped
in heart, but by this only in sound. I mean not by this story to condemn
the use of music in churches; leaving it to him who bids us praise the
Lord with stringed instruments and organs, to plead that cause.

Missing our port of Socotora, we proceeded on our voyage; and, on the
4th of September, we celebrated a solemn funeral in memory of our slain
commander; when, after sermon, the great guns and small arms gave a loud
peal to his honourable remembrance. At night on the 6th September, to
our great admiration and fear, the water of the sea seemed as white as
milk. Others of our nation since, passing in the same course, have
observed the same phenomenon, of which I am yet to learn the cause, as
it was far from any shore, and we could find no ground.

On the 21st of September we discovered the main land of India; and on
the 22d had sight of Diu and Damaun, cities inhabited by the Portuguese.
The 25th we came safely to anchor in Swally roads, within the bay of
Cambay, which is the harbour for our fleet while in this part of India,
when we were visited by the merchants of the Surat factory, the
principal of whom was Mr Thomas Kerridge.

Sec.2. _Description of the Mogul Empire_

Although this account of Hindoostan, or the Mogul empire in India, be
very incorrect, and in some places hardly intelligible, it is here
retained, as a curious record of the knowledge possessed on that subject
by the English about 200 years ago. We have two editions of this account
in Purchas, one appended to his narrative of Sir Thomas Roe, and the
other in this relation by Terry, which he acknowledges to be the most
correct, and which therefore is alone retained. On the present occasion,
instead of encumbering the bottoms of our pages with the display of
numerous explanatory notes on this topographical list of places and
provinces, a running commentary has been introduced into the text, so
far as seemed necessary, yet distinguished sufficiently from the
original notices by Terry. The observations, by way of commentary, are
marked, as this paragraph.--E.

       *       *       *       *       *

The large empire of the Great Mogul is bounded on the east by the
kingdom of Maug;[229] on the west by Persia; on the north by the
mountains of Caucasus [Hindoo-Kho] and Tartary; and on the south by the
ocean, the Deccan, and the bay of Bengal. The Deccan is divided among
three Mahometan kings and some Indian rajahs. This extensive monarchy of
the Mogul is called, in the Persian language, by the Mahometan
inhabitants, Indostan or Hindoostan, meaning the land of the Hindoos,
and is divided into _thirty-seven_ distinct and large provinces, which
were anciently separate kingdoms. Their several names, with their
principal cities, their rivers, situations, and borders, together with
their length and breadth, I shall now enumerate, beginning at the
north-west.

[Footnote 229: Meckely, now a province of the Birman empire; perhaps
called Maug in the text, from a barbarous tribe called the Muggs, or
Maugs, who inhabit, or did inhabit, the mountains east of Bengal, and
who are said to have laid waste and depopulated the Sunderbunds, or
Delta of the Ganges.--E.] 1. _Candahar,_ the chief city of which is of
the same name, lies N.W. from the heart or centre of the Mogul
territory, bordering upon Persia, of which kingdom it was formerly a
province.

2. _Cabul,_ with its chief city of the same name, lies in the extremest
north-west corner of this empire, bordering to the north on Tartary for
a great way. The river Nilab takes its rise in this country, and runs to
the southwards, till it discharges its waters into the Indus.--This is a
material error. The Nilab is the main stream of the Indus, and rises far
to the north in Little Thibet, a great way N.E. of Cabul. The river of
Cabul is the Kameh, which runs S.E. and joins the Nilab, Sinde, or
Indus, a few miles above Attock. Another river, in the south of Cabul,
called the Cow, or Coumul, follows a similar direction, and falls into
the western side of the Indus, about forty miles below the Kameh.--E.

3. _Multan,_ Moultan or Mooltan, having its chief city of the same name,
is south [south-east] from Cabul and Candahar, and on the west joins
with Persia.--This is an error, as Hajykan, to be noticed next in
order, is interposed.--E.

4. _Hajacan,_ or Hajykan, the kingdom of the Baloches, who are a stout
warlike people, has no renowned city. The famous river Indus, called
_Skind_ [Sind or Sindeh] by the inhabitants, borders it on the east, and
Lar, or Laristan, meets it on the west, a province belonging to Shah
Abbas, the present king of Persia.--In modern geography, the country of
the Ballogees, or Baloches, is placed considerably more to the
north-west, bordering on the south-east of Candahar; and the Sewees are
placed more immediately west of this province. The seats, however, of
barbarous hordes, in a waste and almost desert country, are seldom
stationary for any continuance; and the Ballogees and Sewees are
probably congeneric tribes, much intermixed, and having no fixed
boundaries. We have formerly seen the Baloches, or a tribe of that
nation, inhabiting the oceanic coast of Persia about Guadel, and one of
their tribes may have been in possession of Hajykan, which perhaps
derived its name from their chief or khan having made the Haji, or
pilgrimage of Mecca. The assertion that Hajykan joins with Lar, or
Laristan, is grossly erroneous, as the eastern provinces of Persia which
confine with Hindoostan, are Segistan in the north, bordering with
Candahar, and Mekran in the south, bordering with the provinces of
Hindoostan which are to the west of the Indus. Lar or Laristan is a
Persian province within the gulf of Persia, at least 850 English miles
from the most westerly part of Hindoostan.--E.

5. _Buckor_, or Backar, its chief city being Buckor-Suckor. The river
Indus pervades this province, which it greatly enriches.--In modern
maps, the city of Backar is placed in a small island in the middle of
the Indus, at the junction of the Dummoddy from the N.E. Suckar, whence
probably our word sugar is derived, is given as a distinct place, on the
western side of the Indus. Indeed, in the map of India given in the
Pilgrims, Backar and Suckar are made distinct places, but their
situations are reversed.--E.

6. _Tatta_, with its chief city of the same name. This province is
exceedingly fertile and pleasant, being divided into many islands by the
Indus, the chief arm of which meets the sea at Synde, a place very
famous for curious handicrafts.--The most western branch of the Indus,
called the Pitty river, from a place of that name on its western shore
near the mouth, is probably that here meant. That branch leads to
Larry-bunder, the sea-port of Tatta; and the Synde of Terry is probably
the Diul-sinde of other authors, a place situated somewhat in this
neighbourhood, but which is not to be found in modern maps.--E.

7. _Soret_, the chief city of which is called Janagur, is a small, but
rich province, which lies west from Guzerat, having the ocean to the
south.--Soret is not now recognized as a distinct province or district,
but seems the modern Werrear, the western district of Guzerat,
Rhadunpoor appearing to be its chief town. Janagur, in this district, is
on the west side of the river Butlass, or Banass, which runs into the
head of the gulf of Cutch.--E.

8. _Jesselmere_, of which the chief city has the same name, joins with
Soret Backar and Tatta, being to the south of Soret and Tatta, and
having Backar on the west.

9. _Attock_, the chief city being of the same name, lies on the east
side of the Indus, which parts it from Hajykan.--This account is
erroneous, as Attock-Benares is much farther up the river Indus than
Hajykan, having the eastern extremity of Cabul on the opposite side of
the Indus.--E.

10. _Punjab_, which signifies the _five waters_, because it is seated
among five rivers, all tributaries to the Indus, which, somewhat to the
south of Lahore, form only one river. This is a great kingdom, and
extremely rich and fertile. Lahore, the chief city, is well built, very
large, populous, and rich, being the chief mart of trade in all India.

11. _Chishmeere_, Kyshmir, Cachmir, or Cashmere, its chief city being
Siranakar. The river Phat passes through this country, and, after
creeping about many islands, falls into the Indus.--The rivers of
Cashmere, here called the Phat, are the Chota-sing, or Jellum, in the N.
and the Jellium, or Colhumah, in the S. which unite in the W. to form
the Jhylum or Babut, the Phat or Bhat of Terry and Purchas, and the
Hydaspes of the ancients, one of the _five rivers_ of the Indus. The
present capital of Cashmere is likewise named Cashmere; but has in its
close neighbourhood a town or fortress called Sheergur, the Siranakar of
Terry.--E.

12. _Banchish_, with its chief city named Bishur. It lies east southerly
from Cashmere, from which it is divided by the river Indus.--No such
province or city is to be found in the modern geography of Hindoostan,
neither any names in the indicated direction that have any resemblance
to these. In the map of the Mogul empire in the Pilgrims, appended to
the journal of Sir Thomas Roe, Banchish and Bishar are placed on a river
named the Kaul, being the _fourth_ of the Punjab or five rivers,
counting from the west, and therefore probably the Ravey, or Hydraotes
of the ancients. Near the head of that river, and to the east of
Cashmere, is a town, called Kishtewar, which may possibly have been the
Bishur of Terry: But there is a little-known district near the head of
the Jumna, S.S.E. from Cashmere, named Besseer, that has considerable
resemblance in sound to Bishur, and is in the indicated direction.--E.

13. _Jeugapor_, with its chief city likewise so named, lies on the Kaul,
one of the five rivers that water the Punjab.--The only place upon the
Ravey, which answers to the Kaul, which has the smallest resemblance
with Jengapor, or Jenupur, as it is likewise called by Purchas, is
Shawpoor, N.E. from Agra. Yet Jaypoor, otherwise called Jyenagur, in
Ajmeer, is more probably the district and city here meant, though not in
the Punjab.--E.

14. _Jenba_, its chief city so called, lies east of the Punjab.--This
may possibly be Jambae, north of Lahore.--E.

15. _Delli_, or Delhi, its chief city being of the same name, lies
between Jenba and Agra, the river Jemni, which runs through Agra and
falls into the Ganges, begins in this province. Delhi is a great and
ancient city, the seat of the Mogul's ancestors, and where most of them
are interred.--The Jumnah, or Jemni of Terry, rises far to the north of
Delhi, in the high-peaked mountain of Cantal to the east of
Cashmere.--E.

16. _Bando_, its chief city so called, borders with Agra on the
west.--No such name is to be found in modern maps.--E.

17. _Malwa_ is a very fertile province, of which Rantipore is the chief
city.--In the other edition of this list in the Pilgrims, Ugen, Nar, and
Sering, or Oojain, Indore, and Serong, are said to have been the
capitals of Malwa. The Rantipore of Terry may have been that now called
Ramypoor.--E.

18. _Chitor_, an ancient and great kingdom, its chief city being of the
same name.--Chitore is in the south of Ajmeer. In the edition of this
list given by Purchas at the end of the journal of Sir Thomas Roe, he
gives the following account of Chitore: "Chitore stands upon a mighty
hill, and is walled round in a circuit of ten English miles. There still
remain at this place above an hundred temples, the palace of the
ancient kings, and many brave pillars of carved stone. There is but one
ascent to the place, cut out of the solid rock, and passing through four
magnificent gateways. Within the walls are the ruins of 100,000 houses
of stone, but it is now uninhabited. This was doubtless one of the
residences of Porus, and was won from the Ranna, his descendant, by
Akbar shah, the father of the reigning Mogul. The Ranna fled into the
fastnesses of his mountains, and took up his residence at Odeypoor; but
was at length induced, in 1614, to acknowledge the Mogul as his superior
lord, by Sultan Churrum, third son of the present emperor Shah
Jehanguire. This kingdom lies N.W. from Candeish, N.E. from Guzerat, and
in the way between Agra and Surat; the Ranna keeping among the hills to
the west of Ahmedabad.--"_Purch._

19. _Guzerat_ is a goodly and mighty kingdom, and exceedingly rich,
which incloses the bay of Cambay. The river Taptee waters the city of
Surat, which trades to the Red Sea, to Acheen, and to divers other
places.

20. _Khamdesh_, the chief city of which is Brampore, [Boorhanpoor, or
Burhampore,] which is large and populous. Adjoining to this province is
a petty prince called Partap-shah, tributary to the Mogul; and this is
the most southerly part of the Mogul dominions.

21. _Berar_, the chief city of which is called Shahpoor. The
southernmost part of this province likewise bounds the Mogul
empire.--The Shahpoor of Terry may possibly be Saipoor in the north of
Berar. In modern days, the chief cities of the great province or kingdom
of Berar, now belonging to a Mahratta chief; are Nagpoor, Ruthunpoor,
and Sonepoor.--E.

22. _Narwar_, its chief city being Gohud, is watered by a fair river
that falls into the Ganges.--This province of Narwar, now called Gohud,
from its chief city, is to be carefully distinguished from Marwar to the
westwards.--E.

22. _Gualior_, with its chief city of the same name, in which the Mogul
has a great treasury in bullion. In this city likewise there is an
exceedingly strong castle, in which state prisoners are kept.--Gualior
is, properly speaking, in the same province or district with Gohud.--E.

24. _Agra_ is a principal and great province, its chief city being of
the same name. From Agra to Lahore, the two chief cities of this empire,
the distance is about 400 English miles, the country in all that
distance being without a hill, and the road being planted the whole way
with trees on both sides, forming a beautiful avenue.

25. _Sanbal_, with its chief city of the same name. The river Jumna
parts this province from that called Narwar.--This province and city are
not to be traced in modern maps.--E.

26. _Bakar_, the chief city of which is Bikaneer, lies on the west side
of the Ganges.--Nothing resembling either name can now be found in the
indicated situation in modern maps. Bicaneer is a district and town in
the desert, far west of the Ganges.--E.

27. _Nagracutt_, or Nakarkut, with its chief city of the same name, in
which there is a temple most richly adorned, the ceiling and pavement
being of plates of pure gold. In this place they have an idol called
Matta, visited yearly by many thousands of the Indians, who, from
devotion, cut out part of their tongues, which they sacrifice at his
altar. In this province likewise, there is another famous place of
pilgrimage, Jallamaka, where there are daily to be seen incessant
eruptions of fire, out of cold springs and hard rocks, before which the
idolaters fall down and worship.--In the edition of this list, appended
by Purchas to the journal of Sir Thomas Roe, this district and city are
said to be in the northeasternmost confines of the Mogul dominions, N.E.
from the head of the bay of Bengal. This description is however entirely
at variance with the accompanying map in the Pilgrims, in which
Nagracutt and its capital are placed east from the Punjab; the capital
being on the easternmost of the five rivers of the Setlege, and towards
its head. In the edition of this list given by Churchill, as an appendix
likewise to Sir Thomas Roe, Nagracutt is said to lie to the north,
between the Punjab and Jamboe. In our best modern maps, no district or
place, having the smallest resemblance in name, is to be found in any of
these indicated situations. Terry gives no reference as to situation; so
that we may conjecture that Nagracutt may refer to Nucker-gaut, the
passage of the Ganges through the Sewalick mountains, between Serinagur
and Hindoostan.--E.

28. _Siba_, the chief city of which is Hardwair, or Hurdwar, where the
famous river Ganges seems to begin, and issues out of a rock, which the
superstitious Gentiles imagine resembles a cow's head, which animal they
hold in the highest veneration; and to this place they resort daily in
great numbers to wash themselves.

29. _Kakares_, the principal cities being Dankalec and Purhola. This
country is very mountainous, and is divided from Tartary by the
mountains of Caucasus, being the farthest north of any part of the Mogul
dominions.--In the map of Purchas, this province or kingdom is called
Kares, and is placed directly to the north of where the Ganges breaks
through the Sewalick mountains, above Hurdwar, at the _Cow's-mouth_. In
that direction are the little-known districts of Serinagur,
Badry-cazram, and others; but no names either of towns or districts that
in the least resemble those given by Terry.--E.

30. _Gor_, its chief city of the same name. This province is full of
mountains, and in it begins the river Persilis, which discharges its
waters into the Ganges.--In the other copy of this list in Purchas, so
often already referred to, Gor is said to lie in the northern part of
the Mogul dominions. From this, and the mountainous nature of the
country, as stated by Terry, it may possibly be Gorcah, one of the
little-known _twenty-four rajahs_, to the west of Napaul; and the
Persilis of Terry may be the Sursutty or the Marshandy, both head
streams of the Gunduck.--E.

31. _Pitan_, and its chief city so named. The river Kanda waters this
province, and falls into the Ganges on its confines.--This is probably
one of the _twenty-four_ rajahs, called Peytahn, in the mountainous
country to the north of Oude, which is watered by several of the head
streams of the Gunduck and Booree or Rapty rivers.--E.

32. _Kanduana_, the chief city of which is called Karhakatenka. The
river Sersili parts it from Pitan; and this province, with Pitan and
Gor, are the north-east boundaries of this great monarchy.--The
indicated connection with Gor and Pitan, or Gorcah and Peytahn, would
lead to suppose that Napaul is here meant. Karhakatenka may possibly be
some name of Catmandoo, or may have some reference to Kyraut, a district
in the east of Napaul, bordering on Bootan. The river Sersili of this
district is evidently the Persilis mentioned in Gor, and may refer to
the Sursutty.--E.

33. _Patna_, the chief city of which has the same name. The river
Ganges bounds this province on the west, and the Sersilis on the east.
It is a very fertile province.--In the former edition of this list by
Purchas, this province is said to be watered by four rivers, the Ganges,
Jumna, Sersili, and Kanda, all of which rivers here unite. Patna is
seated on the south side of the Ganges, which is joined a little way
higher up by the Jumna. Opposite to Patna the Gunduck falls into the
Ganges, probably the Kanda of Purchas, of which the Sursutty, formerly
supposed to be the same with the Sersili, or Persilis, is one of the
feeders. Patna is well known as a principal city of Bahar.--E.

34. _Jesual_, the chief city of which is called Rajapore, lies east of
Patna.--This may possibly refer to the district and city of Hajipoor in
Bahar, to the N.E. of Patna.--E.

35. _Mevat_, the chief city of which province is Narnol, is a very
mountainous country.--In the map of the Pilgrims, Mevat and Narnol are
placed to the east of Jesual, but the geography of this part of
Hindoostan in that map is utterly unintelligible, and no conjecture can
be hazarded respecting either Mevat or Narnol.--E.

36. _Udessa_, the chief city of which is called Jokanat, is the most
easterly territory in the kingdom of the Mogul.--In the other edition of
this list given by Purchas, Udessa, or Udeza, is said to border on the
kingdom of Maug, a savage people dwelling between this province and the
kingdom of Pegu. Its eastern situation would lead to the province of
Chittagong or Islambabad. The Maugs, or Mugs, are probably the barbarous
mountaineers of Meckley to the north of Aracan; but no names in modern
maps have any reference to Udessa, Udeza, or Jokanat, unless Jokanat be
some strange corruption of Chittagong.--E.

37. _Bengal_, a mighty and fertile kingdom, bounded by the gulf or bay
of the same name, into which the river Ganges discharges itself by four
great branches, into which it divides.--In the other edition of this
list, by Purchas, so often referred to, Ragamahall and Dakaka, or
Rajemal and Dacca, are mentioned as the chief cities of Bengal. It would
require far too long a commentary, to explain some farther ignorant
indications of the havens and provinces of Bengal, contained in that
former list, and in the map of the Pilgrims; both being so faulty in
positions, and so corrupted in the names, as to be useless and
unintelligible. By the labours of Rennel, as since extended and improved
by Arrowsmith, the geography of Bengal is now as completely elucidated
as that of Britain.--E.

Here I must take notice of a material error in our geographers, who, in
their globes and maps, make Hindoostan and China neighbours, though many
large countries are interposed between them. Their great distance may
appear, from the long travels of the Indian merchants, who are usually
more than two years in their journey and return, between Agra and the
wall of China. The length of these before-named provinces, from N.W. to
S.E. is at least 1000 cosses, every Indian coss being two English miles.
From N. to S. the extent is about 1400 miles. The greatest breadth, from
N.E. to S.W. is about 1500 miles. The northernmost part is in 43 deg. of
north latitude.[230]

[Footnote 230: The northern mountains of Cashmere, are only in lat. 35 deg.
30' N. so that the 43 deg. of the text is probably a mistake for 34 deg..--E.]

To give an exact account of all these provinces, were more than I am
able to undertake; yet, from what I have observed of a few, I may
venture to conjecture concerning the rest, and I am convinced that the
Great Mogul, considering the extent of his territories, his wealth, and
the rich commodities of his dominions, is the greatest known monarch of
the east, if not in the whole world. This widely extended sovereignty is
so rich and fertile, and so abounding in all things for the use of man,
that it is able to subsist and flourish of itself, without the help of
any neighbour. To speak first of food, which nature requires most. This
land abounds in singularly good wheat, rice, barley, and various other
grains, from which to make bread, the staff of life. Their wheat grows
like ours, but the grain is somewhat larger and whiter, of which the
inhabitants make most pure and well-relished bread. The common people
make their bread in cakes, which they bake or fire on portable iron
hearths or plates, which they carry with them on their journeys, using
them in their tents. This seems to be an ancient custom, as appears from
the instance of Sarah in our bible, when she entertained the angels.

To their bread, they have great abundance of other excellent provisions,
as butter and cheese in great plenty, made from the milk of their
numerous cows, sheep, and goats. They have likewise a large animal,
called a buffalo, having a thick smooth skin without hair, the females
of which give excellent milk. Their flesh resembles beef, but is not so
sweet or wholesome. They have plenty of venison of several kinds, as red
and fallow deer, elks, and antelopes. These are not any where kept in
parks, the whole empire being as it were a forest, so that they are seen
every where in travelling through the country; and they are free game
for all men, except within a certain distance of where the king happens
to reside. They have also plenty of hares, with a variety of land and
water fowl, and abundance of fish, which it were too tedious to
enumerate. Of fowls, they have geese, ducks, pigeons, partridges,
quails, pheasants, and many other good sorts, all to be had at low
rates. I have seen a good sheep bought for about the value of our
shilling: four couple of hens for the same price; a hare for a penny;
three partridges for the same money; and so in proportion for other
things.

The cattle of this country differ from ours, in having a great bunch of
grisly flesh on the meeting of their shoulders. Their sheep have great
bob-tails of considerable weight, and their flesh is as good as our
English mutton, but their wool is very coarse. They have also abundance
of salt, and sugar is so plentiful, that it sells, when well refined,
for two-pence a pound, or less. Their fruits are numerous, excellent,
abundant, and cheap; as musk-melons, water-melons, pomegranates,
pomecitrons, lemons, oranges, dates, figs, grapes, plantains, which are
long round yellow fruits, which taste like our Norwich pears; mangoes,
in shape and colour like our apricots, but more luscious, and ananas or
pine-apples, to crown all, which taste like a pleasing compound of
strawberries, claret-wine, rose-water, and sugar. In the northern parts
of the empire, they have plenty of apples and pears. They have every
where abundance of excellent roots, as carrots, potatoes, and others;
also garlic and onions, and choice herbs for sallads. In the southern
parts, ginger grows almost every where.

I must here mention a pleasant clear liquor called _taddy_, which issues
from a spungy tree, growing straight and tall without boughs to the top,
and there spreads out in branches resembling our English colewarts. They
make their incisions, under which they hang small earthenware pots; and
the liquor which flows out in the night is as pleasant to the taste as
any white wine, if drank in the morning early, but it alters in the day
by the sun's heat, becoming heady, ill-tasted and unwholesome. It is a
most penetrating medicinal drink, if taken early and in moderation, as
some have experienced to their great happiness, by relieving them from
the tortures of the stone, that tyrant of maladies and opprobrium of
the doctors.

At Surat, and thence to Agra and beyond, it only rains during one season
of the year, which begins when the sun comes to the northern tropic, and
continues till he returns again to the line. These violent rains are
ushered in, and take their leave, by most fearful tempests of thunder
and lightning, more terrible than I can express, but which seldom do any
harm. The reason of this may be the subtile nature of the air, breeding
fewer _thunder-stones_, than where the air is grosser and more cloudy.
In these three months, it rains every day more or less, and sometimes
for a whole quarter of the moon without intermission. Which abundance of
rain, together with the heat of the sun, so enriches the soil, which
they never force by manure, that it becomes fruitful for all the rest of
the year, as that of Egypt is by the inundations of the Nile. After this
season of rain is over, the sky becomes so clear, that scarcely is a
single cloud to be seen for the other nine months. The goodness of the
soil is evident from this circumstance, that though the ground, after
the nine months of dry weather, looks altogether like barren sands, it
puts on an universal coat of green within seven days after the rains
begin to fall. Farther to confirm this, among the many hundreds of acres
I have seen in corn in India, I never saw any that did not grow up as
thick as it could well stand. Their ground is tilled by ploughs drawn by
oxen; the seed-time being in May or the beginning of June, and the
harvest in November and December, the most temperate months in all the
year. The ground is not inclosed, except near towns and villages, which
stand very thick. They do not mow their grass for hay as we do; but cut
it either green or withered, when wanted. They sow abundance of tobacco,
but know not the way to cure it and make it strong, as is done in
America.

The country is beautified by many woods, in which are a great variety of
goodly trees; but I never saw any there of the kinds we have in England.
In general their trees are full of sap, which I ascribe to the fatness
of the soil. Some have leaves as broad as bucklers; others are much
divided into small portions, like the leaves of ferns. Such are those of
the tamarind tree, which bears an acid fruit in a pod somewhat like our
beans, and is most wholesome to cool and purify the blood. One of their
trees is worthy of being particularly noticed: Out of its branches there
grow certain sprigs or fibres, which hang downwards, and extend till
they touch the ground, in which they strike roots, and become
afterwards new trunks and firm supporters to the boughs and arms; whence
these trees come in time to grow to a great height, and extend to an
incredible breadth.[231] All trees in the southern parts of India are
perpetually clothed in verdure Their flowers rather delight the eye than
please the sense of smelling, having beautiful colours, but few of them,
except roses and one or two other kinds, are any way fragrant.

[Footnote 231: The Banian tree, a species of Indian fig.--E.]

India is watered by many goodly rivers, the two chief of which are the
Indus and the Ganges. There is this remarkable in the water of the
Ganges, that a pint of it weighs less by an ounce than that of any other
river in the empire; and therefore, wherever the Mogul happens to
reside, it is brought to him for his drinking. Besides rivers, there are
abundance of well-fed springs, on which they bestow great cost in many
places, constructing many stone-buildings in the form of ponds, which
they call _tanks_, some of which exceed a mile or two in circuit, made
round or square or polygonal, girt all round with handsome stone-walls,
within which are steps of well-dressed stone encompassing the water, for
people to go down on every aide to procure supplies. These tanks are
filled during the rainy season, and contain water for the supply of
those who dwell far from springs or rivers, till the wet season again
returns. Water, the most ancient beverage in the world, is the common
drink of India, being more sweet and pleasant than ours, and agrees
better with the constitution in this hot country than any other liquor.
Some small quantity of wine is made among them, which they call arrack,
but is not common, being distilled from sugar, and the spicy rind of a
tree, which they call _jagra_. This is very wholesome, if used in
moderation. Many of the people, who are strict in their religion, use no
wine at all. They use a liquor which is more wholesome than pleasant,
called _cohha_; being a black seed boiled in water, which does not much
alter the taste of the water, but is an excellent helper of digestion,
serving to quicken the spirits, and to purify the blood.[232] There is
also another help for digestion and to comfort the stomach, used by
those who refrain from wine. This is an herb called betel, or _paune_,
its leaf resembling that of our ivy. They chew this leaf along with a
hard nut, called _areka_, somewhat like a nutmeg, mixing a little pure
white lime among the leaves; and when they have extracted the juice,
they throw away the remains. This has many rare qualities: It preserves
the teeth, comforts the brain, strengthens the stomach, and prevents a
bad breath.

[Footnote 232: The author here describes coffee, now so universally
known in Europe.--E.]

Their houses are generally very mean, except in the cities, where I have
seen many fair buildings. Many of the houses in these are high, with
flat roofs, where, in the cool of the mornings and evenings, they enjoy
the fresh air. Their houses have no chimneys, as they use no fires,
except for dressing their victuals. In their upper rooms, they have many
windows and doors, for admitting light and air, but use no glass. The
materials of their best houses are bricks and stone, well squared and
built, as I have observed in Ahmedabad, which may serve as an instance
for all. This is an extensive and rich city, compassed about with a
strong stone-wall, and entered by twelve handsome gates. Both in their
towns and villages, they have usually many fair trees among the houses,
being a great defence against the violence of the sun. These trees are
commonly so numerous and thick, that a city or town, when seen at a
distance from some commanding eminence, seems a wood or thicket.

The staple commodities of this empire are indigo and cotton. To produce
cotton, they sow seeds, which grow up into bushes like our rose-trees.
These produce first a yellow blossom, which falls off, and leaves a pod
about the size of a man's thumb, in which the substance at first is
moist and yellow. As this ripens, it swells larger, till at length it
bursts the covering, the cotton being then as white as snow. It is then
gathered. These shrubs continue to bear for three or four years, when
they have to be rooted out, and new ones substituted. Of this vegetable
wool, or cotton, they fabricate various kinds of pure white cloth, some
of which I have seen as fine as our best lawns, if not finer. Some of
the coarser sorts they dye in various colours, or stain with a variety
of curious figures.

The ships that go usually from Surat to Mokha, are of exceeding great
burden, some of them, as I believe, exceeding 1400 or 1600 tons; but
they are ill built, and though they have good ordnance, they are unable
for any defence. In these ships there are yearly a vast number of
passengers: As, for instance, in that year in which we left India, there
came 1700 persons, most of whom went not for profit, but out of
devotion, to visit the sepulchre of Mahomet at Medina near Mecca, about
150 leagues from Mokha. Those who have been upon this pilgrimage are
ever after called _hoggeis_, [_hajim_] or holy men. This ship, from
Surat for the Red Sea, begins her voyage about the 20th of March and
returns to Surat about the end of September following. The voyage is
short, and might easily be made in two months; but during the long
season of the rains, and a little before and after, the winds are mostly
so violent that there is no putting to sea without extreme hazard. The
cargo of this ship, on its return, is usually worth L200,000 sterling,
mostly in gold and silver. Besides this, and the quantities of money
which come yearly out of Europe, which I do not pretend to calculate,
many streams of silver flow continually thither, and there abide. It is
lawful for all to bring in silver, and to carry away commodities, but it
is a capital crime to carry away any great sums.

All the coin or bullion that comes to this country is presently melted
down and refined, and coined with the stamp of the Mogul, being his name
and title in Persian characters. This coin is purer silver than any
other that I know, being of virgin silver without alloy, so that in the
Spanish dollar, the purest money in Europe, there is some loss. Their
money is called _rupees_, which are of divers values, the meanest being
worth two shillings, and the best about two shillings and nine-pence.
This is their general money of account. There is in Guzerat a coin of
inferior value, called _mamoodies_, worth about twelve-pence each. Both
these and the rupees are likewise coined in halves and quarters; so that
three-pence is the smallest piece of current silver in the country. That
which passes current for small change is brass money, which they call
_pices_, of which three, or thereabout, are worth an English penny.
These are made so massy, that the brass in them, when put to other uses,
is well worth the quantity of silver at which they are rated. Their
silver money is made both square and round; but so thick, that it never
breaks or wears out.

For farther commodities; India yields great store of silk, which they
weave very ingeniously, sometimes mixed with gold or silver. They make
velvets, sattins, and taffetas, but not so rich as those of Italy. This
country also produces many drugs and gums, and particularly the gum-lac,
from which hard sealing-wax is made. The earth also yields abundant
minerals, as lead, iron, copper, and brass, and, as they say, silver;
yet, though this be true, they need not work their silver mines, being
already so abundantly supplied with that metal from other nations. They
have spices from other countries, and especially from Sumatra, Java, and
the Molucca islands. They have curious pleasure gardens, planted with
fruit-trees and delightful flowers, to which nature lends daily such
ample supply, that they seem never to fade. In these places they have
pleasant fountains, in which to bathe, and other delights by various
conveyances of water, whose silent murmurs sooth their senses to sleep,
in the hot season of the day.

Lest this remote country might seem an earthly paradise, without any
inconveniences, I must notice that it contains many lions, tigers,
wolves, and jackals, which are a kind of wild dogs, besides many other
noxious and hurtful animals. In their rivers they have many crocodiles,
and on the land many overgrown snakes and serpents, with other venomous
and pernicious creatures. In the houses we often meet with scorpions,
whose stinging is most painful and even deadly, unless the part be
immediately anointed with an oil made of scorpions.[233] The abundance
of flies in those parts is likewise an extreme annoyance; as, in the
heat of the day, their numbers are so prodigious, that we cannot have
peace or rest for them in any part. They cover our meat the moment it is
set on the table, wherefore we are obliged to have men standing ready to
drive them away with napkins, while we are eating. In the night,
likewise, we are much disquieted with musquetos, like our gnats, but
somewhat less; and, in the cities, there are such numbers of large
hungry rats, that they often bite people as they sleep in their beds.

[Footnote 233: This is a mere fancy, as any bland oil is equally
efficacious.--E.]

In this country the winds, which are called monsoons, blow constantly,
or altering only a few points, for six months from the south, and other
six months from the north. The months of April and May, and the
beginning of June, till the rains come, are extremely hot; and the wind,
which then sometimes blows gently over the parched ground, becomes so
heated, as much oppresses all who are exposed to it: Yet God so
mercifully provides for our relief, that most commonly he sends so
strong a gale as greatly tempers the sultry air. Sometimes the wind
blows very high during the hot and dry season, raising up vast
quantities of dust and sand, like dark clouds pregnant with rain, and
which often prodigiously annoy the people among whom they fall. But
there is no country without its inconveniences; for the wise Disposer of
all events hath attempered bitter things with sweet, to teach mankind
that there is no true or perfect contentment to be found, but only in
the kingdom of God.

This country has many excellent horses, which the inhabitants know well
how to manage. Besides those bred in the country, they have many of the
Tartarian, Persian, and Arabian breeds, which last is considered as the
best in the world. They are about as large as ours, and are valued among
them at as dear a rate as we usually esteem ours, perhaps higher. They
are kept very daintily, every good horse being allowed one man to dress
and feed him. Their provender is a species of grain called _donna_,
somewhat like our pease, which are boiled, and then given cold to the
horses, mixed with coarse sugar; and twice or thrice a week they have
butter given them to scour their bodies. There are likewise in this
country a great number of camels, dromedaries, mules, asses, and some
rhinoceroses. These are huge beasts, bigger than the fattest oxen to be
seen in England, and their skins lie upon their bodies in plaits or
wrinkles.

They have many elephants, the Great Mogul having not fewer than 1400 for
his own use, and all the nobles of the country have more or less, some
having to the number of an hundred. Though the largest of all
terrestrial animals, the elephants are wonderfully tractable, except
that they are mad at times; but at all other times, a little boy is able
to rule the largest of them. I have seen some thirteen feet high; but I
have been often told that some are fifteen feet in height at the least.
Their colour is universally black, their skins very thick and smooth,
and without hair. They take much delight to bathe themselves in water,
and they swim better than any beast I know. They lie down and rise again
at pleasure, as other beasts do. Their pace is not swift, being only
about three miles an hour; but they are the surest footed beasts in the
world, as they never endanger their riders by stumbling. They are the
most docile of all creatures, and of those we account merely possessed
of instinct, they come nearest to reason. Lipsius, _Cent_. 1, _Epist_.
50, in his observations, taken from others, writes more concerning them
than I can confirm, or than any can credit, as I conceive; yet I can
vouch for many things which seem to be acts of reason rather than of
mere brute sense, which we call instinct. For instance, an elephant will
do almost any thing which his keeper commands. If he would have him
terrify a man, he will make towards him as if he meant to tread him in
pieces, yet does him no hurt. If he would have him to abuse a man, he
will take up dirt, or kennel water, in his trunk, and dash it in his
face. Their trunks are long grisly snouts, hanging down betwixt their
tusks, by some called their hand, which they use very dexterously on all
occasions.

An English merchant, of good credit, told me the following story of an
elephant, as having happened to his own knowledge at Ajimeer, the place
where the Mogul then resided:--This elephant used often to pass through
the bazar, or market-place, where a woman who there sold herbs used to
give him a handful as he passed her stall. This elephant afterwards went
mad,[234] and, having broken his fetters, took his way furiously through
the market-place, whence all the people fled as quickly as possible to
get out of his way. Among these was his old friend the herb-woman, who,
in her haste and terror, forgot to take away her little child. On coming
to the place where this woman was in use to sit, the elephant stopped,
and seeing the child among the herbs, he took it up gently in his trunk,
and laid it carefully on a stall under the projecting roof of a house
hard by, without doing it the smallest injury, and then continued his
furious course. A travelling Jesuit, named Acosta, relates a similar
story of an elephant at Goa, as from his own experience.--The king keeps
certain elephants for the execution of malefactors. When one of these is
brought forth to dispatch a criminal, if his keeper desires that the
offender be destroyed speedily, this vast creature will instantly crush
him to atoms under his foot; but if desired to torture him, will break
his limbs successively, as men are broken on the wheel.

[Footnote 234: This temporary madness of the male elephants is usual in
the rutting season.--E.]

The Mogul takes great delight in these stately animals, and often, when
he sits in state, calls for some of the finest and largest to be
brought, which are taught to bend before him, as in reverence, when they
come into his presence. They often fight before him, beginning their
combats like rams, by running furiously against each other, and butting
with their foreheads. They afterwards use their tusks and teeth,
fighting with the utmost fury, yet are they most careful to preserve
their keepers, so that few of them receive any hurt in these
rencounters. They are governed by a hooked instrument of steel, made
like the iron end of a boat-hook, with which their keepers, who sit on
their necks, put them back, or goad them on, at pleasure.

The king has many of his elephants trained up for war; each of which
carries an iron gun about six feet long, which is fastened to a strong
square frame of wood on his back, made fast by strong girths or ropes
round his body. This gun carries a bullet about the size of a small
tennis-ball, and is let into the timber with a loop of iron. The four
corners of the wooden frame have each a silken banner on a short pole,
and a gunner sits within, to shoot as occasion serves, managing the gun
like a harquebuss, or large wall-piece. When the king travels, he is
attended by many elephants armed in this manner, as part of his guard.
He keeps many of them likewise, merely for state, which go before him,
and are adorned with bosses of brass, and some have their bosses made of
silver, or even of gold; having likewise many bells jingling about them,
in the sound of which the animal delights. They have handsome housings,
of cloth, or velvet, or of cloth of silver, or cloth of gold; and, for
the greater state, have large royal banners of silk carried before them,
on which the king's ensign is depicted, being a lion in the sun. These
state-elephants are each allowed three or four men at least to wait upon
them. Other elephants are appointed for carrying his women, who sit in
pretty convenient receptacles fastened on their backs, made of slight
turned pillars, richly covered, each holding four persons, who sit
within. These are represented by our painters as resembling castles.
Others again are employed to carry his baggage. He has one very fine
elephant that has submitted, like the rest, to wear feathers, but could
never be brought to endure a man, or any other burden, on his back.

Although the country be very fertile, and all kinds of provisions cheap,
yet these animals, because of their vast bulk, are very chargeable in
keeping; such as are well fed costing four or five shillings each,
daily. They are kept out of doors, being fastened with a strong chain by
one of their hind legs to a tree, or a strong post. Thus standing out in
the sun, the flies are often extremely troublesome to them; on which
occasions they tread the dry ground into dust with their feet, and throw
it over their bodies with their trunks, to drive away the flies. The
males are usually mad once a year after the females, at which time they
are extremely mischievous, and will strike any one who comes in their
way, except their own keeper; and such is their vast strength, that they
will kill a horse or a camel with one blow of their trunks. This fury
lasts only a few days; when they return to their usual docility. At
these times they are kept apart from all company, and fettered with
strong chains to prevent mischief. If by chance they get loose in their
state of phrenzy, they run at everything they see in motion; and, in
this case, the only possible means of stopping them is by lighting a
kind of artificial fire-works called wild-fire, the sparkling and
cracking of which make them stand still and tremble.

The king allows four females to each of his great elephants, which are
called their wives. The testes of the males are said to lie about his
forehead, and the teats of the female are between her fore-legs. She
goes twelve months with young. The elephant is thirty years old before
he attains his full growth, and they live to seventy or eighty years of
age. Although very numerous, elephants are yet so highly prized in
India, that some of the best are valued at a thousand pounds or more.

Sec.3. _Of the People of Hindoostan, and their Manners and Customs_.

The whole inhabitants of Hindoostan were anciently Gentiles, or
notorious idolaters, generally denominated Hindoos, hot ever since the
time of Tamerlane they have been mixed with Mahometans.[235] There are,
besides, many Persians, Tartars, Abyssinians, and Arminians, and some
few of almost every nation in Asia, if not in Europe, that reside here.
Among these are some Jews, but not esteemed, for their very name is
proverbial, as a term of reproach. In stature, the natives of Hindoostan
are equal to ourselves, being in general very straight and well-made,
for I never saw any deformed person in that country. They are of a dark
tawny or olive colour, having their hair as black as a raven, but not
curled. They love not to see either a man or a woman very fair, as they
say that is the colour of lepers, which are common among them. Most of
the Mahometans, except their molahs or priests, or such as are old and
retired, keep their chins shaved, but allow the hair on their upper-lips
to grow long. They usually shave all the hair from their heads, leaving
only one lock on their crowns for Mahomet to pull them by up to heaven.
Both among the Gentiles and Mahometans they have excellent barbers. The
people often bathe and wash their bodies, and anoint themselves with
perfumed oils.

[Footnote 235: The Mahomedans made extensive conquests in India long
before the era of Timor.--E.]

The dresses of the men and women differ very little from each other, and
are mostly made of white cotton cloth. In fashion, they sit close to
the shape to the middle, and from thence hang loose to below the knee.
Under this they wear long close breeches down to their ancles, crumpled
about the small of their legs like boots. Their feet are put bare into
their shoes, which are made like slippers, that they may be readily put
off on entering their houses, the floors of which are covered with
excellent carpets of the country manufacture, as good as any made in
Turkey or Persia. Instead of these carpets, some have other
floor-cloths, according to the quality of the owner. On these they sit
when conversing or eating, like tailors on the shop-board. The men's
heads are covered by turbans, being sashes, or long webs of thin cloth,
white or coloured, wreathed many times about. They do not uncover their
heads in making reverence, instead of which they bow their bodies,
placing the right hand on the top of the head, after which they touch
the earth with that hand, as if indicating that the party saluted may
tread upon them if he please. Those who are equals take each other by
the chin or beard, as Joab did Amasa; but salute in love, not in
treachery.

The Mahometan women, except such as are poor or dishonest, never appear
abroad. Though not fair, they are all well favoured, have their heads
covered with veils, and their hair hanging down behind, twisted with
silk. Those of quality are decorated with many jewels hung around their
necks, and about their wrists and arms; and they have several holes
round their ears in which they hang pendents, besides that every woman
has a hole in her nostrils, in which to wear a ring, which seems to have
been an ancient ornament, being mentioned in the Old Testament. Their
women are happy above all others I have ever heard of; in the ease with
which they bear their children, being one day able to ride with their
infants unborn, and to ride again the next with their child in their
arms.

The language of the common people of this country, called Hindoostanee,
is smooth, and easily pronounced, and is written from left to right, as
we do. The learned tongues are the Persian and Arabic, which are written
backwards, from right to left, like the Hebrew. There is but little
learning among them, which may be owing to the scarcity of books, which
are all in manuscript, and therefore few and dear; but they are a people
of good capacity, and were they to cultivate literature among them,
would assuredly produce many excellent works. They have heard of
Aristotle, whom they name _Aplis_, and have some of his writings
translated into Arabic. The noble physician, Avicenna, was a native of
Samarcandia, the country of Tamerlane, and in this science they possess
good skill. The most prevalent diseases of this country are dysenteries,
hot fevers, and calentures, in all which they prescribe abstinence as a
principal remedy. The filthy disease produced by incontinence is
likewise common among them. They delight much in music, having many
instruments, both stringed and wind; but, to my ears, their music seemed
all discordant. They write many pretty poems, and compose histories and
annals of their own country. They profess great skill in astrology, and
the king places great confidence in men of that profession, so that he
will not undertake a journey, nor do any thing whatever of importance,
unless after his wizard has indicated a prosperous hour for the
undertaking.

The idolaters begin their year on the 1st of March, and the Mahometans
at the instant when the sun enters Aries, as calculated by their
astrologers. From which time the king keeps a festival, called the
_norose_, or nine days, for which time it continues, like that made by
Ahasuerus in the third year of his reign. On this occasion, all his
nobles assemble, bringing great gifts, which he repays with princely
rewards. Being myself present on this occasion, I beheld most incredible
riches, to my amazement, in gold, pearls, precious stones, and many
brilliant vanities. I saw this festival celebrated at Mandoa, where the
Mogul has a most spacious house or palace, larger than any I ever
beheld, in which the many beautiful vaults and arches evince the
exquisite skill of his artists in architecture. At Agra he has a palace,
in which are two large towers, at least ten feet square, covered with
plates of pure gold.

The walls of his houses have no hangings, on account of the heat, but
are either painted or beautified with a white lime, purer even than that
we term Spanish. The floors are either paved with stone or are made of
lime and sand, like our Paris plaster, and are spread with rich carpets.
None lodge within the King's house but his women and eunuchs, and some
little boys, whom he always keeps about him for a wicked use. He always
eats in private among his women, being served with a great variety of
exquisitely dressed meats, which being proved by his taster, are put
into golden vessels, as they say, covered and sealed up, and brought in
by the eunuchs. He has meats made ready at all hours, and calls for
them at pleasure. These people do not feed freely, as we do, on full
dishes of beef or mutton, but use much rice, boiled up along with pieces
of flesh, or dressed in a variety of ways. They have not many roasted or
baked meats, but stew most of their meat. Among their many dishes, I
shall only notice one, called by them _deupario_. This is made of
venison cut into slices, to which are put onions and sweet herbs, with
some roots, and a little spice and butter, forming the most savoury dish
I ever tasted; and I almost think it is the same dish that Jacob made
ready for his father Isaac when he got his blessing.

In this kingdom there are no inns or houses of entertainment for
travellers and strangers. But, in the cities and large towns, there are
handsome buildings for their reception, called _serais_, which are not
inhabited, in which any passengers may have rooms freely, but must bring
with them their bedding, cooks, and all other necessaries for dressing
their victuals. These things are usually carried by travellers on
camels, or in carts drawn by oxen; taking likewise tents along with
them, to use when they do not find serais. The inferior people ride on
oxen, horses, mules, camels, or dromedaries, the women riding in the
same manner as the men; or else they use a kind of slight coaches on two
wheels, covered at top, and close behind, but open before and at the
sides, unless when they contain women, in which case they are close all
round. These coaches will conveniently hold two persons, besides the
driver, and are drawn by a pair of oxen, matched in colour, many of them
being white, and not large. The oxen are guided by cords which go
through the middle cartilage of the nose, and so between the horns into
the hand of the driver. The oxen are dressed and harnessed like horses,
and being naturally nimble, use makes them so expert, that they will go
twenty miles a-day or more, at a good pace. The better sort ride on
elephants, or are carried singly on men's shoulders, in a slight thing
called a _palanquin_, like a couch, but covered by a canopy. This would
appear to have been an ancient effeminacy used in Rome, as Juvenal
describes a fat lawyer who filled one of them:

_Causidici nova, cam venial lectica Mathonis; plena ipso--_

They delight much in hawking, and in hunting hares, deer, and other wild
animals. Their dogs of chase somewhat resemble our greyhounds, but are
much less, and do not open when in pursuit of their game. They use
leopards also in hunting, which attain the game they pursue by leaping.
They have a very cunning device for catching wild-fowl, in the following
manner:--A fellow goes into the water, having the skin of any kind of
fowl he wishes to catch, so artificially stuffed, that it seems alive.
Keeping his whole body under water except his face, which is covered by
this counterfeit, he goes among the wild-fowl which swim in the water,
and pulls them under by the legs. They shoot much for their amusement
with bows, which are curiously made of buffaloe's horn, glewed together,
their arrows being made of small canes, excellently headed and
feathered, and are so expert in archery, that they will kill birds
flying. Others take great delight in managing their horses. Though they
have not a quarter of a mile to go, they will either ride on horseback
or be carried, as men of any quality hold it dishonourable to go on foot
any where.

In their houses, they play much at that most ingenious game which we
call chess, or else at draughts. They have likewise cards, but quite
different from ours. Sometimes they are amused by cunning jugglers, or
mountebanks, who allow themselves to be bitten by snakes which they
carry about in baskets, immediately curing themselves by means of
certain powders which they smell to. They are likewise often amused by
the tricks of apes and monkeys. In the southern parts of Hindoostan,
there are great numbers of large white apes, some of which are as tall
as our largest greyhounds. Some of those birds which make their nests on
trees are much afraid of the apes, and nature has instructed them in a
subtle device to secure themselves, by building their nests on the most
extreme twigs, and hanging them there like purse-nets, so that the apes
cannot possibly come to them.

Every city or great town in India has markets twice a-day, in the cool
of the morning just after sun-rise, and again in the evening a little
before it sets; and in these they sell almost every thing by weight. In
the heat of the day, every one keeps within doors, where those of any
rank lie on couches, or sit cross-legged on carpets, having servants
about them, who beat the air with fans of stiffened leather, or the
like, to cool them. While thus taking their ease, they often call their
barbers, who tenderly grip and beat upon their arms and other parts of
their bodies, instead of exercise, to stir the blood. This is a most
gratifying thing, and is much used in this hot climate.

The Mahometans and Hindoos are much to be commended for their
truthfulness as servants; for a stranger may safely travel alone among
them with a great charge of money or goods, all through the country,
having them for his guard, and will never be neglected or injured by
them. They follow their masters on foot, carrying swords and bucklers,
or bows and arrows, for their defence; and so plentiful are provisions
in this country, that one may hire them on very easy terms, as they do
not desire more than five shillings each moon, paid the day after the
change, to provide themselves in all necessaries; and for this small
pittance give diligent and faithful service. Such is their filial piety,
that they will often give the half of these pitiful wages to their
parents, to relieve their necessities, preferring almost to famish
themselves rather than see them want.

Both among the Mahometans and Hindoos there are many men of most
undaunted courage. The _Baloches_ are of great note on this account
among the Mahometans, being the inhabitants of _Hjykan_, adjoining to
the kingdom of Persia; as also the Patans, taking their denomination
from a province in the kingdom of Bengal.[236] These tribes dare look
their enemies in the face, and maintain the reputation of valour at the
hazard of their lives. Among the many sects of the Hindoos, there is but
one race of warriors, called _Rashbootes_, or Rajaputs, many of whom
subsist by plunder, laying in wait in great troops to surprise poor
passengers, and butchering all who have the misfortune to fall into
their hands. These excepted, all the rest of the natives are in general
pusillanimous, and had rather quarrel than fight, being so poor in
spirit, in comparison with Europeans, that the Mogul often says,
proverbially, That one Portuguese will beat three of them, and one
Englishman three Portuguese.

[Footnote 236: This is a strange mistake, confounding the city of Patna,
in Bengal, in the east of Hindoostan, with the Patans, a race of
mountaineers between Cabul and Candahar, far to the west of India,
called likewise Afgans, and their country Afghanistan.--E.]

In regard to arms for war, they have good ordnance, which, so far as I
could learn, were very anciently used in this country.[237] I have
already described the iron pieces carried on elephants. They have
smaller guns for the use of their foot-soldiers, who are somewhat long
in taking aim, but come as near the mark as any I ever saw. All their
pieces are fired with match, and they make excellent gun-powder. They
use also lances, swords, and targets, and bows and arrows. Their swords
are made crooked like faulchions, and very sharp; but, for want of skill
in tempering, will break rather than bend; wherefore our sword-blades,
which will bend and become straight again, are often sold at high
prices. I have seen horsemen in this country, thus accoutered, carrying
as it were a whole armory at once; a good sword by their sides, under
which a sheaf of arrows; on their back a gun fastened with belts, a
buckler on their shoulders; a bow in a case hanging on their left side,
and a good lance in their hand, two yards and a half long, with an
excellent steel head. Yet, for all these weapons, dare he not resist a
man of true courage, armed only with the worst of all these. The armies
in these eastern wars often consist of incredible multitudes, and they
talk of some which have exceeded that we read of in the Bible, which
Zerah, king of Ethiopia, brought against Asia. Their martial music
consists of kettle-drums and long wind-instruments. In their battles,
both sides usually begin with most furious onsets; but, in a short time,
for want of good discipline, they fall into disorder, and one side is
routed with much slaughter.

[Footnote 237: Vertoman says the Portuguese who deserted at the first
discovery of India, and entered into the service of the native princes,
taught them this art.--_Purch_.

I have somewhere read, many years ago, but cannot recollect the
authority, "That, when Alexander besieged a certain city in India, the
Brachmans, by the power of magic, raised a cloud of smoke around the
walls, whence broke frequent flashes of lightning, with thunder, and the
thunderbolts slew many of his soldiers." This would infer the very
ancient use of fire-arms of some kind in India.--E.]

The Mahometans have fair places of worship, which they call _mesquits_,
well built of stone. That side which looks to the westwards is a
close-built wall, while that towards the east is erected on pillars, the
length being from north to south. At the corners of their great mosques,
in the cities, there are high turrets or pinnacles, called _minarets_,
to the tops of which their molahs or priests resort at certain times of
day, proclaiming their prophet in Arabic, in these words,--_Alla illa
Alla, Mahomet resul Alla_; that is, There is no God but God, and Mahomet
is the ambassador of God. This is used instead of bells, which they
cannot endure in their temples, to put religious persons in mind of
their duty. On one occasion, while Mr Coryat was residing in Agra, he
got up into a turret over against the priest, and on hearing these
words, he contradicted him, calling out, in a loud voice,--_La Alla illa
Alla, Hazaret Esa Ebn-Alla_; there is no God but God, and Christ, the
Son of God, is his prophet. He farther added, that Mahomet was an
impostor, in any other country of Asia, in which Mahomet is zealously
followed, this bold attempt had surely forfeited his life, with all the
tortures which cruelty could invent, or tyranny inflict; but in this
country every one is permitted to follow his own religion, and may even
dispute against theirs with impunity.

In regard to their burials, every Mahometan of quality provides a fair
sepulchre for himself and his family, in his life-time, surrounding a
considerable space of ground with a high wall, and generally in the
neighbourhood of some tank, or else near springs of water, that they may
make pleasant fountains. Within the enclosure, he erects a round or
square tomb, either on pillars or of closed walls, with a door for
entrance. The rest of the enclosure is planted with trees and flowers,
as if they would make the elysian fields of the poets, in which their
souls may repose in delight. They have many such goodly monuments built
in memory of those they esteem as saints, of whom they have an ample
calendar, in these there are lamps continually burning, and thither many
resort in blind devotion, to contemplate the happiness enjoyed by these
_peires_, as they call the holy men. Among many sumptuous piles
dedicated to this use, the most splendid of them all is to be seen at
_Secuadra_, a village three miles from Agra. This was begun by Akbar
Shah, the father of the present king, and finished by his son, the
reigning Mogul. Akbar lies here interred, and Jehanguire Shah means to
be here buried when he dies.

The molahs, or priests of the Mahometans, employ much of their time as
scribes, doing business for other men, having liberty to marry as well
as the laity, from whom they are no way distinguished by their dress.
Some live retiredly, spending their time in meditation, or in delivering
precepts of morality to the people. They are in roach esteem, as are
another set called _Seids_, who derive their pedigree from Mahomet. The
priests neither read nor preach in the mosques; yet there is a set form
of prayers in Arabic, not understood by most of the people, but which
they repeat as fluently as the molahs. They likewise repeat the name of
God, and that of Mahomet, a certain number of times every day, telling
over their beads, like the misled papists, who seem to regard the number
of prayers more than their sincerity. Before going into their mosques
they wash their feet, and, in entering, put off their shoes. On
beginning their devotions, they stop their ears, and fix their eyes,
that no extraneous circumstances may divert their thoughts, and then
utter their prayers in a soft and still voice, using many words
significantly expressive of the omnipotence, goodness, eternity, and
other attributes of God. Likewise many words full of humility,
confessing their unworthiness with many submissive gestures. While
praying, they frequently prostrate themselves on their faces,
acknowledging that they are burdens upon the earth, poisonous to the
air, and the like, and therefore dare not look up to heaven, but comfort
themselves in the mercy of God, through the intercession of their false
prophet. Many among them, to the shame of us Christians, pray five tunes
a-day, whatever may happen to be their interruptions of pleasure or
profit. Their set times are at the hours of six, nine, twelve, three,
and six, respectively.

The manner in which they divide the day is quite different from us; as
they divide the day and the night each into four equal parts, which they
denominate _pores_, and these again are each subdivided into eight
smaller parts, called _grees_. [Hence each _pore_ contains three of our
hours, and each _gree_ is equal to 22-1/2 of our minutes.] These are
measured, according to an ancient custom, by means of water, dropping
from one small vessel into another, beside which there always stand
servants appointed for the purpose, who strike with a hammer upon a
concave plate of metal, like the inner portion of a plate, hung by a
wire, thus denoting the _pores_ and _grees_ successively as they
pass.[238] Like the mother and her seven sons, mentioned in the
Maccabees, such is the temperance of many, both among the Mahometans and
Gentiles, that they will rather die than eat or drink of any thing
forbidden by their law. Such meats and drinks as their law allows, they
use only in moderation, to satisfy nature, not to please their
appetites, hating gluttony, and esteeming drunkenness a sin, as it
really is, or a second madness; and indeed their language has only one
word, mest, for a drunkard and a madman.

[Footnote 238: This device for measuring time is the same with the
_clepsydra_, or water-clocks, of the ancients.--_Purch._]

They keep yearly a solemn feast, or Lent, which they call _Ram jan_,
[Ramadan] about the month of August, which continues a whole moon;
during which time, those who are strict in their religious observances,
avoid the embraces of their women, and abstain from meat or drink so
long as the sun is above the horizon, but eat after it sets, at their
pleasure. Towards the close of this Lent, or ramadan, they consecrate
one day of mourning, in memory of their departed friends; on which
occasions, I have seen many of the meaner people making bitter
lamentations. Besides this ordinary and stated time of sadness, many
foolish women are in use, oft times in the year, so long as they
survive, to water the graves of their husbands or children with the
tears of affectionate regret. On the night succeeding the day of general
mourning, they light up innumerable lamps, and other lights, which they
set on the sides and tops of their houses, and all other most
conspicuous places, taking no food till these are burnt out. When the
ramadan is entirely ended, the most devout Mahometans assemble at some
noted mosque, where some portion of the _Alcoran_ is publicly read; this
being their holy book, like our Bible, which they never touch without
some mark of reverence. They keep a festival in November, which they
call _Buccaree_, signifying the _ram-feast_; on which occasion they kill
and roast a ram, in memory, as they say, of the ram which redeemed
Ishmael, when about to be sacrificed by his father Abraham. They have
many other feasts or holidays consecrated to Mahomet, and their
_pieres_, or pretended saints.

They have the books of Moses, whom they name _Moosa curym Alla_, the
righteous of God. Abraham they call _Ibrahim calim Alla_, the faithful
of God. Thus Ishmael is called the true sacrifice of God; David is named
_Dahoode_, the prophet of God; Solomon is _Seliman_, the wisdom of God,
and so forth; all neatly expressed, as the former instances, in short
Arabic epithets. In honour of these our scripture worthies, they
frequently sing songs or ditties of praise; and, besides, all of them,
except those of the ruder sort, when at any time they happen to mention
our Saviour, always call him _Hazaret Eesa_, the Lord Jesus; and ever
speak of him with respect and reverence, saying, that he was a good and
just man, who lived without sin, and did greater miracles than were ever
performed before or since. They even call him _Rhahew Alla_, which
signifies the breath of God, but cannot conceive how he could be the
Son of God, and therefore deny that. Yet the Mahometans look upon us as
unclean, and will neither eat with us, nor of any thing that is cooked
in our vessels.

There are many men among the Mahometans called _Dervises_, who
relinquish the world, and spend their days in solitude, expecting a
recompence in a better life. The strict and severe penances these men
voluntarily endure, far exceed all those so much boasted of by the
Romanist monks. Some of these live alone on the tops of hills, remote
from all society, spending their lives in contemplation, and will rather
die of famine than move from their cells, being relieved from devotion
by those who dwell nearest them. Some again impose long fasts upon
themselves, till nature be almost exhausted. Many of those whom they
call religious men, wear no garments beyond a mere clout to cover their
shame, and beg for all their provisions, like the mendicant friars of
Europe. These men usually dwell about the outskirts of the cities and
towns, like the man mentioned by our blessed Saviour at the city of the
_Gadarens_, who had devils, and wore no clothes, neither abode in any
house, but dwelt among the tombs. They make little fires during the day,
sleeping at night among the warm ashes, with which they besmear their
bodies. These men never suffer a razor to come upon their heads, and
some of them let their nails grow like to bird's claws, as it is written
of Nebuchadnezzar, when driven out from among the society of men. There
is also a sort of men among them called _mendee_, who often cut and
slash their flesh with knives, like the priests of Baal. I have seen
others, who, from supposed devotion, put such massy fetters of iron on
their legs, that they are hardly able to move, yet walk in that manner
many miles upon pilgrimages, barefooted, upon the parching ground, to
visit the sepulchres of their deluding saints; thus, _tantum religio
potuit suadere malorum_, taking more pains to go to hell than any
Christian that I know does to attain heaven. These do not marry. Such
Mahometans as choose to marry, are allowed four wives by the law of
Mahomet, but they keep as many concubines as they can maintain. The
priests content themselves with one wife.

Notwithstanding their polygamy, such is the violent jealousy of these
lustful Mahometans, that they will scarcely allow even the fathers and
brothers of their beloved wives or concubines to converse with them,
except in their own presence. Owing to this restraint, it has become
odious for such women as have the reputation of virtue, to be seen at
any time by strangers. If any of them dishonour their husbands beds, or,
being unmarried, are found incontinent, even their own brothers will put
them to death rather than they should escape punishment; and for such
unnatural actions they shall be commended, rather than called in
question. Yet is there full toleration for harlots, who are as little
ashamed of receiving visits as the men are of frequenting their houses.
The women of any fashion are waited upon by eunuchs instead of
women-servants; and these eunuchs are deprived in their youth of every
thing that can provoke jealousy. Their marriages are solemnised in great
pomp. After the molah has joined their hands, with certain ceremonies
and words of benediction, they begin their revels at the first watch of
the night. Whether the man be poor or rich, he mounts on horseback,
attended by his friends, having many _oressets_, or great lights,
carried before him, and accompanied by drums, and wind-instruments of
music, and various pageantry. The woman follows with her friends, in
covered coaches. And having thus paraded through the principal places of
the city or town, they return home and partake of a banquet, the men and
women being in separate apartments. They are mostly married at the age
of twelve or thirteen, the matches being made by their mothers.

Sec.4. _Of the Sects, Opinions, Rites, Priests, and other Circumstances of
the Hindoo Religion; with other Observations_.

The Hindoos[239] are distributed into eighty and four several sects, all
of which differ materially in opinions. This has often filled me with
wonder; but I know that they are all deluded by Satan, who is the father
of division. Their illiterate priests are called _Bramins_, being the
same with the _Brachmanni_ of the ancients; and, for aught I could
learn, are so sottishly ignorant and unsteady, that they know not what
they believe. They have little round-built temples, which they call
_pagodas_, in which are images in most monstrous shapes, which they
worship. Some of them dream, of Elysian fields, to which their souls
pass over a Styx or Acheron, and there assume new bodies. Others hold
that ere long, this world shall have an end, after which they shall live
here again, upon a new earth. They talk of four books which were sent
them about 6000 years ago by their prophet _Ram_, two of which were
sealed up and might not be opened, the other two being read by the
Bramins only. They say that there are seven orbs, above which is the
seat of God; and they hold that God knoweth not of petty things, or, if
he doth, regardeth them not. They circumscribe God in place or
dimensions, alleging that he may be seen, but far off as in a mist, and
not near or clearly. They believe in the existence of devils or evil
spirits; but that they are so bound in chains, as to be incapable of
doing hurt. They call man Adam, from the first man of that name; whose
wife, as they say, when tempted with the forbidden fruit, swallowed it
down; but, as her husband was about to do the same, it was stopped in
his throat by the hand of God: Whence men have a protuberance in that
part, which we call the _pomum adami_, which women have not.

[Footnote 239: By Terry, the Hindoos are uniformly denominated the
_Gentiles_, a word of vague and general meaning, merely signifying
idolaters, or unbelievers, literally the nations, as contradistinguished
from the Jews. By some authors, the natives of Hindoostan are called
Gentoos, a word of uncertain origin. The term of Hindoo seems the more
appropriate name; at least it has now become universal.--E.]

As anciently among the Jews, the priesthood is hereditary with this
people; every son of a Bramin being a priest, and marries with the
daughter of a Bramin. So also among all the Hindoos, the men take their
wives among the daughters of those who are of the same tribe, sect, and
occupation, with their own fathers. Thus the son of a merchant marries a
merchant's daughter, and every man's son that lives by his labour,
marries the daughter of one of the same profession with himself, so that
they never advance themselves to higher situations. The Hindoos take but
one wife, of whom they are not so fearful as are the Mahometans of their
numerous women, for they are suffered to go abroad. They are always
married very young, at six or seven years of age, their parents making
the contracts, and they come together when twelve years old. Their
nuptials are celebrated with as much pomp and jollity as those of the
Mahometans. The habits of the Hindoos differ little from those of the
Mahometans, already described; but many of their women wear rings on
their toes, and therefore go barefooted. They have likewise broad rings
of brass, or of more valuable metal, according to their rank and wealth,
which they wear about the small of their legs, being made to put off and
on. These seem to resemble the tinkling ornaments about the feet,
mentioned by the prophet Isaiah, or the ornaments of the legs, anciently
in use among the Jewish women. They have also such on their arms. The
laps of their ears are pierced when young, and the hole is daily
stretched and widened, by things put in on purpose, so that it at length
becomes large enough to hold a ring as broad as a little saucer, made
hollow in its edges to contain the flesh. Both men and women wash their
bodies every day before they eat, and they sit entirely naked at their
food, excepting only the covering of modesty. This outward washing, as
they think, tends to cleanse them from sin, not unlike the Pharisees in
scripture, who would not eat with unwashed hands. Hence, they ascribe a
certain divine influence to rivers, but above all to the Ganges, daily
flocking thither in great companies, and throwing in pieces of gold and
silver, according to their devotion or abilities, after which they wash
themselves in the sacred stream. Both men and women paint their
foreheads, or other parts of their faces, with red or yellow spots.

In regard to their grosser opinions, they do not believe in the
resurrection of the flesh, and therefore burn the bodies of their dead,
near some river if they can, into which they strew the ashes. Their
widows never marry again; but, after the loss of their husbands, cut
their hair close off, and spend all their remaining life in neglect;
whence it happens, that many young women are ambitious to die with
honour, as they esteem it, throwing themselves for lore of their
departed husbands into the flames, as they think, of martyrdom.
Following their dead husband to the pile, and there embracing his
corpse, they are there consumed in the same fire. This they do
voluntarily, and without compulsion, their parents, relations, and
friends joyfully accompanying them; and, when the pile of this hellish
sacrifice begins to burn, all the assembled multitude shout and make a
noise, that the screams of the tortured living victims may not be heard.
This abominable custom is not very much unlike the custom of the
Ammonites, who made their children pass through the fire to Moloch,
during which they caused certain tabrets or drums to sound, whence the
place was called _Tophet_, signifying a tabret. There is one sect among
the Hindoos, called _Parsees_, who neither burn nor inter their dead.
They surround certain pieces of ground with high walls, remote from
houses or public roads, and there deposit their dead, wrapped in sheets,
which thus have no other tombs but the maws of ravenous fowls.[240]

[Footnote 240: These Parsees, called _Parcees_ in the Pilgrims, and
Guebres by other writers, are a remnant of the ancient Persians, who are
fire-worshippers, or followers of Zerdust, the Zoroaster of the
Greeks.--E.]

The Hindoos are, generally speaking, an industrious race; being either
cultivators of the ground, or otherwise diligently employed in various
occupations. Among them there are many curious artificers, who are the
best imitators in the world, as they will make any thing new very
exactly after a pattern. The Mahometans, on the contrary, are generally
idle, being _all for to morrow_, a common saying among them, and live by
the labours of the Hindoos. Some of these poor deluded idolaters will
eat of nothing which has had life, feeding on grain, herbs, milk,
butter, cheese, and sweet-meats, of which last they have various kinds,
the best and most wholesome of which is green ginger remarkably well
preserved. Some tribes eat fish, and of no other living thing. The
Rajaput tribe eat swine's flesh, which is held in abomination by the
Mahometans. Some will eat of one kind of flesh, and some of another; but
all the Hindoos universally abstain from beef owing to the reverence
they entertain for cows; and therefore give large sums yearly to the
Mogul, besides his other exactions, as a ransom for the lives of these
sacred animals. Whence, though they have other and good provisions in
abundance, we meet with very little meat in that country.

The most tender-hearted among the idolaters are called _Banians,_ who
hold the _metempsychosis_ of Pythagoras as a prime article of their
faith, believing that the souls of the best men and women, when freed
from the prison of their human bodies, transmigrate into the bodies of
cows, which they consider as the best of all creatures. They hold that
the souls of the wicked go into the bodies of viler beasts; as the souls
of gluttons into swine, those of the voluptuous and incontinent into
apes and monkies; the souls of the cruel, furious, and revengeful, into
lions, tigers, and wolves; the souls of the envious into serpents; and
so forth, according to their qualities and dispositions; transmigrating
successively from one to another of the same kind, _ad infinitum;_ and,
by consequence, believing in the eternal duration of the world. Thus,
according to them, there does not exist even a silly fly but is actuated
by a soul formerly human, considering these to have formerly belonged to
light women; and so incorrigible are their sottish opinions, that they
cannot be persuaded out of them by any reasoning. Owing to these
opinions, they will not put to death the most offensive animals, not
even the most venemous snakes, saying, that it is their nature to do
harm, and that man is gifted with reason to shun these noxious
creatures, but not at liberty to destroy them.

Many men devote their fortunes to works of charity, as in building
_serais,_ or lodging-houses for travellers, digging wells, or
constructing tanks near highways, that the travellers may have water;
and where such cannot be had, they will hire poor men to sit by the
way-sides, and offer water to the passengers. The day of rest among the
Hindoos is Thursday, as Friday is among the Mahometans, Saturday with
the Jews, and Sunday with the Christians.[241] They have many solemn
festivals, and they make pilgrimages, among which the most famous are
_Nagracut_ and _Syba,_ formerly mentioned; where, if Mr Coryat may be
believed, who says he carefully observed the same, people cut off part
of their tongues out of devotion. It were easy to enlarge on this
subject, but I will not any farther describe their stupid idolatry. The
sum of the whole is, that both the Hindoos and Mahometans ground all
their opinions on tradition, not on reason, and are content to perish
with their fore-fathers, out of preposterous zeal and fond perverseness,
never rightly considering the grounds of their belief.

[Footnote 241: Monday is the day of rest with the people of Pegu. In
Java, each individual keeps that day holy on which he has begun some
great work.--_Purch._]

Both the Mahometans and Hindoos are under subjection to the Great Mogul,
the term _Mogul_ signifying a circumcised man, so that Great Mogul means
the Chief of the Circumcision. The present king is the ninth in lineal
descent from that famous eastern conqueror, whom we name Tamerlane, and
who in their histories is named Timor. Towards the close of his life, he
had the misfortune to fall from his horse, which made him halt during
the remainder of his days, whence he was called Timur-lang, or Timur the
lame. The emperor styles himself The King of Justice, the Light of the
Law of Mahomet, and the Conqueror of the World. He himself judges and
determines on all matters of importance which occur near his residence,
judging according to allegations and proofs, by his own sense of right.
The trials are conducted quickly, and the sentences speedily executed,
culprits being hanged, beheaded, impaled, torn by dogs, destroyed by
elephants, bitten by serpents, or other devices, according to the nature
of the crimes; the executions being generally in the public
market-place. The governors of provinces and cities administer justice
in a similar manner. I could never hear of any written law, the will of
the king and his substitutes being the law. His vicegerents are not
allowed to continue long in one place, lest they acquire popularity, and
are therefore usually removed yearly. They receive the letters of the
king with every possible indication of respect. They look to receive
presents from all who have occasion to apply to them; and, if not often
gratified with these, will ask for them, and will even send back such as
they do not approve, demanding better to be substituted. The cadi has
power to imprison debtors and sureties, who are bound by written deeds;
and men in power, for payment of debts due to them, will often sell the
persons, wives, and children of their debtors, which is warranted by the
customs of the land.

The king appears in public three times every day. His first appearance
is at sun-rise, from a bow-window looking; towards the east, where great
multitudes assemble to salute him, or give him the _salam,_ calling out
_padishah salamet,_ which signifies Live, O King! At noon he again sits
in public seeing his elephants fight, or some other pastimes. A little
before sun-set, he shews himself a third time, at a window looking to
the west, whence he retires amid the sound of drums and wind-instruments
of music, the acclamations of the people adding to the noise. At any of
these three appearances, all who have any suit to him hold up their
petitions to be seen, and are heard in their own causes. Between seven
and nine in the evening, he again sits in private, attended by his
nobles.

No subject of this empire holds any lands by inheritance, neither have
they any titles but such as depend on the will of the king. Owing to
this, many of the grandees live up fully to the extent of their means.
Merchants also, and others, are very careful to conceal their wealth,
lest they be made spunges. Some small means of living are allowed by the
king to the sons of his great men, which they can never make better,
unless they succeed to the favour enjoyed by their fathers. His pensions
are reckoned by the numbers of horsemen allotted to each; and of these
he pays a million in the whole extent of his empire, to the amount of
twenty-five pounds being yearly allowed for each horseman, which are
drawn from lands, specified in the particular grants or commissions.
There are about twenty of his courtiers who have each the pay of 5000
horse; others of 4000, 3000, 2000, and so downwards. He who has the pay
of 5000, is bound to have 2000 always on foot ready for service, and so
in like proportion for all others. This absolute dependence renders
them dissolute parasites. When the Mogul gives advancement to any one,
he adds a new name or title, as Pharaoh did to Joseph. These names or
titles are very significant; as _Mahobet Khan_, the beloved lord; _Khan
Jahaun,_ the lord of my heart; _Khan Allum,_ the lord of the world, &c.

The principal officers of state are, the treasurer, the master of the
eunuchs, who is steward and comptroller of the household, the secretary,
the master of the elephants, the tent-master, and the keeper of the
wardrobe. The subordinate titles of honour are Khan, Mirza, Omrah or
Captain, Haddee, which last is a soldier or horseman. Gorgeous apparel
is in a great measure prohibited, owing to the great heat of the sun;
even the Great Mogul himself being usually clothed in a garment of pure
white calico or fine muslin. Blue, being the colour of mourning, may not
be worn in his presence, neither the name of death pronounced in his
hearing. This circumstance is usually expressed by some circumlocution,
as that such a person has sacrificed himself at the feet of his majesty.

Owing to the great heat of this country, there is but little demand for
English cloth, which is almost only employed for the housings of
elephants and horses, and the linings of coaches. This sovereign
assuredly exceeds all others in the splendour of his thrones, and the
variety and richness of his jewels. In his palace at Agra, he has a
throne upon a raised platform, to which he ascends by several steps, on
the top of which are four figures of lions of massy silver, gilded and
set with precious stones, and supporting a dome or canopy of pure gold.
I may mention, that when I was at his court, he had a tame lion which
went up and down at liberty, as harmless as a dog. The jewels with which
he daily adorns his head, neck, and arms, and the hilts of his sword and
dagger, are rich and valuable beyond all computation. On his birthday,
which happens on the 1st of September, he being now sixty years of age,
he is weighed, and an account thereof carefully noted down by his
physicians, who thereby guess at his bodily condition.[242]

[Footnote 242: See of these and other things, formerly stated, in the
Journal of Sir Thomas Roe, and therefore here omitted. _Purch._]

The following are parts of two letters from the Great Mogul to his
majesty King James I. translated out of Persian, and sent through Sir
Thomas Roe, one written a year before the other. What followed in both
letters, was merely complimentary assurances of his love for the
English. These letters were rolled up and covered with cloth of gold,
the covering being sealed up at both ends, which is the fashion in that
country. Copies were sent to the lord ambassador, from which these
specimens were translated out of the Persian language.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When your majesty shall open this letter, let your royal heart be fresh
as a sweet garden. Let all people make lowly reverence at your gate, and
may your throne be exalted among the kings of the prophet Jesus. May
your majesty be the greatest of all monarchs; and may others draw
counsel and wisdom from you, as from a fountain, that the law of the
divine Jesus may revive and flourish under your protection. Your letters
of love and friendship, and the tokens of your affection towards me, I
have received by the hands of your ambassador, Sir Thomas Roe, who well
deserves to be your trusted servant, and who delivered them to me in a
happy hour. Upon them mine eyes were so fixed, that I could not easily
remove them to any other object, and have accepted them with much joy,"
&c.--The other began as follows:

       *       *       *       *       *

"How gracious is your majesty, whose greatness God preserve and prosper.
As upon a rose in a garden of pleasure, so are mine eyes fixed upon your
majesty. May God maintain your greatness, so that your monarchy may
prosper and increase, that you may obtain all your desires, worthy the
greatness of your renown. As your heart is noble and upright, so may God
give you a prosperous reign, because you powerfully defend the majesty
of Jesus, which may God render yet more flourishing, having been
confirmed by miracles," &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

We travelled two years with the Great Mogul, who was in progress
through his dominions, moving only during the temperate months, between
October and April. On this occasion, I am confident that the _leskar_,
or camp, contained not less than 300,000 persons, including men, women,
and children, besides elephants, horses, and other beasts, that were fed
upon grain; yet we never experienced any scarcity of provisions, not
even in our nineteen days journey through a wilderness, between Mandoa
and _Amadavar_, [Ahmedabad.] On this occasion, a road was cut for us
through the forest. The tents of the leskar were of various colours,
being regularly arranged, and represented a large and splendid city. The
king's tents were red, and raised on poles to a great height, being
placed in the middle of the camp, and covering a great extent of ground;
the whole of the royal quarter being encircled by _canats_, or walls,
made of red calico, held up by canes at every breadth, and standing
upright about nine feet high, which was guarded all round by soldiers
every night.

The king removed ten or twelve miles every day, more or less according
to the convenience of procuring water. His wives and women of all sorts,
which are not less than a thousand, all lodged and provided for in his
tents, were carried along with the leskar, some in palanquins, others
upon elephants, or in cradles or panniers slung upon dromedaries, all
closely covered up that they might not be seen, and attended upon by
eunuchs. In the choice of his wives, the Great Mogul respects fancy more
than honour, not seeking affinity with neighbouring princes, but to
please his eye at home. _Noormahal_, the best beloved among his wives,
whose name signifies the _Light of the Court_, was of mean origin, but
has since advanced her friends to high rank and employments, and in a
manner commands the commander of the empire, by engrossing his whole
affections. The king and his great men continue to maintain their women,
but little affect them after thirty years old.

Notwithstanding the multitude of his women, the Great Mogul has only six
children, five sons and a daughter. All his sons are styled sultans, or
princes. The eldest is Sultan _Cursero_, the second, Sultan _Parrveis_,
the third, Sultan _Caroon_, the fourth, Sultan _Shahar_, and the
youngest, Sultan _Tauct_.[243] The name of this last signifies a
_Throne_; and he was so named by the king, because he was informed of
his birth at the time when he got quiet possession of the throne. The
eldest-born son of one of his legitimate wives has right to inherit the
throne, and has a title signifying the _Great Brother_. Although the
others are not put to death as with the Turks, yet it is observed that
they seldom long survive their fathers, being commonly employed on some
dangerous expedition.

[Footnote 243: These names seem to have been written by Terry from the
ear. By others, they are respectively named Cusero, Parvis, Churrum,
Shahar, and Taucht.--E.]

Akbar Shah, the father of the reigning Mogul, had threatened to
disinherit him, for some abuse to _Anar-Kalee_, his most beloved wife,
whose name signifies pomegranate kernel; but on his death-bed he
restored him to the succession. Akbar was wont, upon taking any
displeasure at one of his grandees, to give them pills to purge their
souls from their bodies, and is said to have come by his death in the
following manner. Intending to give one of these pills to a nobleman who
had incurred his displeasure, and meaning to take at the same time a
cordial pill himself, while he was cajoling the destined victim with
flattering speeches, he, by mistake, took the poisoned pill himself, and
gave the cordial to the nobleman. This carried him off in a few days, by
a mortal flux of blood.[244]

[Footnote 244: Neque enim lex justior ulla est, quam necis artifices
arte perire sua.--_Purch._]

The character of Jehanguire, the reigning Mogul, seems strangely
compounded of opposite extremes. He is at times excessively cruel, and
at other times extremely mild. He is himself much given to excess in
wine, yet severely punishes that fault in others. His subjects know not
what it is to disobey his commands, forgetting the natural bonds of
private life, even those between father and son, in the fulfilment of
their public duty. He daily relieves numbers of the poor; and often, as
a mark of his filial piety, is in use to carry the palanquin of his
mother on his own shoulders. He speaks with much reverence of our
Saviour, but is offended by his cross and poverty, deeming them
incompatible with his divine Majesty, though told that his humility was
on purpose to subdue the pride of the world.

All religions are tolerated, and even their priests are held in good
esteem. I used often to receive from the Mogul the appellation of
_Father_, with many other gracious words, and had a place assigned me
among his nobles. The jesuits are not only admitted into his presence,
but encouraged by many gifts, and are permitted to convert the subjects,
who do not on that event lose their favour at court. On one occasion,
the Mogul put the sincerity of a convert to a severe trial. Having used
many threatenings to induce him to abandon his new faith, and finding
him undaunted, he tried by flatteries and high promises to draw him
back; but these also being unavailing, he bade him continue a Christian,
and dismissed him with a reward; saying, if he had been able to terrify
or cajole him from his religion, he would have made him a terrible
example for all waverers.

When I was in this country, the chief jesuit residing at the court of
the Mogul, was Francisco Corsi, a Florentine by birth, who acted
likewise as agent for the Portuguese. I wish I could confirm the reports
they have made of conversions; but the real truth is, that they have
merely spilt the water of baptism on the faces of a few, working on the
necessities of some poor men, who from want of means to live, with which
the jesuits supplied them, have been persuaded to wear crucifixes, but
who, for want of instruction, are only Christians in name. Of these few
mendicants, or so called by Christians, I noticed that five of them
would beg in the name of Maria, for one who asked in the name of Jesus.
I also desired to have put my hands to the holy work, but found extreme
difficulty in the way, owing both to the Mahometan laxity in regard to
the use of women, and the debauched lives of some unchristian
Christians.--May he who hath the key of David open their eyes, and in
his good time send labourers into this vineyard. _Amen_.




SECTION VIII.

JOURNEY OF THOMAS CORYAT BY LAND, FROM JERUSALEM TO THE COURT OF THE
GREAT MOGUL.[245]

INTRODUCTION.


Without proposing to follow this singularly bold English traveller and
whimsical writer, in all his _crudities_, as he has quaintly termed his
own writings, it has seemed proper to give some abbreviated extracts of
his observations, which may serve in some measure to illustrate those of
Sir Tomas Roe and the Reverend Edward Terry.--E.

[Footnote 245: Purch. Pilgr. I. 607. In regard to this short article,
see introduction to the immediately preceding Section.--E.]

Sec.1. _Letter from Ajimeer, the Court of the Great Mogul, to Mr L.
Whitaker, dated in the Year 1615_.

My last letter to you was from _Zobah_, as it is called by the prophet
Samuel, B. II. ch. viii. v. 3. now named Aleppo, the principal emporium
of all Syria, or rather of the eastern world; which was, I think, about
fifteen months ago. I returned from Jerusalem to Aleppo, where I
remained three months afterwards, and then departed in a caravan bound
for Persia. Passing the river Euphrates, the chiefest of the rivers
which irrigated the terrestrial paradise, when about four days journey
from Aleppo, I entered into Mesopotamia, or Chaldea. Hence, in two days
journey, I reached _Ur_ of the Chaldees, where Abraham was born, a very
delicate and pleasant city.[246] I remained here four days; and in other
four days journey reached the Tigris, which I also passed, at a place
where it was so shallow that it only reached to the calf of my leg, so
that I waded over a-foot. I then entered into the greater Armenia; and
thence into lower Media, and resided six days in its metropolis,
formerly called _Ecbatana_, the summer residence of Cyrus the Great, now
called Tauris. More woeful ruins of a city I never beheld, excepting
those of Troy and of Cyzicum in Natolia.

[Footnote 246: Probably Orfa in Diarbekir is here meant.--E.]

From that place I went to _Cashbin_, called by Strabo, _Arsacia_, in
higher Media, once the residence of the Tartar prince; four days journey
from the Caspian Sea. From Cashbin, I went in twenty-three days to
_Ispahan_ in Parthia, the residence of the king of Persia; but while I
was there, he was in _Gurgistan_, [Georgia,] ransacking the poor
Christians of that country with fire and sword. I remained two months at
Ispahan, whence I travelled with a caravan to the eastern India, passing
four months and several days in travelling from that city, through part
of Persia proper, and a large extent of the noble and renowned India, to
the goodly city of _Lahore_. This is one of the largest cities in the
world, being, at the least, sixteen miles in circuit, and larger even
than Constantinople. Twelve days before coming to Lahore, I passed over
the famous river Indus, which is as broad again as our Thames at London,
having its original from the mountain of Caucassus, so ennobled by
ancient poets and historians, both Greek and Latin.

When about midway between Ispahan and Lahore, just about the frontiers
between Persia and India, I met Sir Robert Shirley and his lady,
travelling from the court of the Mogul to that of Persia. They were
gallantly furnished for their journey, and shewed me, to my great
satisfaction, both my books, very neatly kept, and promised to shew
them, especially my itinerary, to the king of Persia, and to interpret
some of the principal contents to him in Turkish, that I may have the
more gracious access to him at my return. Besides other rarities which
they carried with them, they had two elephants and eight antelopes,
being the first of either I had ever seen. But afterwards, when I came
to the Mogul's, court, I saw many. They intended to present these
animals to the king of Persia. Both Sir Robert and his lady used me with
much respect; especially his lady, who presented me with forty shillings
in Persian money; and they seemed joyful at meeting me, promising to
bring me into good grace with the king of Persia, as I mean, with God's
help, to return through Persia to Aleppo.

From Lahore, I travelled in twenty days to another goodly city named
Agra, through such a beautiful and level country as I had never seen
before. In this way, from the town's end of Lahore to the skirts of
Agra, we had a row of trees on both sides of the road, the most
incomparable avenue I ever beheld. Some ten days journey from Lahore
towards Agra, but about ten miles off the road on the left hand, there
is a mountain, the inhabitants of which have a singular custom, all the
brothers of one family having but one wife among them, so that one women
sometimes has six or seven husbands. The same is related by Strabo
concerning the inhabitants of Arabia Felix. Agra is a very great city,
but in every respect much inferior to Lahore. Here the Mogul used always
to keep his court, till within these two years.

From Agra I went in ten days to the Mogul's court, at a town called
Asmere, [Ajimeer,] where I found an English. Cape merchant with nine
more of our countrymen, residing there in the way of trade for our East
India Company. In. my journey from Jerusalem to the court of the Great
Mogul, I spent fifteen months and some days, travelling all the way
a-foot, having been so great a _propatetic_, or walker forwards on foot,
as I doubt if you ever heard of the like; for the whole way, from
Jerusalem to Ajimeer, contains 2700 English miles. My whole
perambulation of the greater Asia is likely to extend almost to 6000
miles, by the time I have returned back through Persia, by Babylon and
Nineveh to Cairo in Egypt, and thence down the Nile to Alexandria, when
I propose, with God's blessing, to embark for Christendom.

The reigning Great Mogul is named Selim.[247] He is fifty-three years of
age, his birth-day having been celebrated with wonderful magnificence
since my arrival. He was that day weighed in a pair of golden scales,
which by great chance I saw that same day, the opposite scale being
filled with as much gold as counterpoised his weight, and this is
afterwards distributed among the poor. This custom is observed every
year. His complexion is of an olive colour, something between white and
black; being of a seemly stature, but somewhat corpulent. His dominions
are very extensive, being about 4000 English miles in circumference,
nearly answerable to the compass of the Turkish territories; or, if the
Mogul kingdom be any way inferior in size to that empire, it is more
than equally endowed with a fertile soil beyond that of any other
country, and in having its territory connected together in one goodly
continent, within which no other prince possesses one single foot of
land. The yearly revenue of the Mogul extends to forty millions of
crowns, of six shillings each, while that of the Turk does not exceed
fifteen millions, as I was credibly informed in Constantinople, nor that
of the Sophy five millions, as I learnt at Ispahan. It is said that the
present Great Mogul is not circumcised, in which he differs from all
other Mahometan sovereigns.

[Footnote 247: He was Sultan Selim before his accession to the throne,
but was afterward known by the new name of Jehunguire.--E.]

The Great Mogul speaks with much revrence of our Saviour, naming him
_Hazaret Eesa_, that is to say, the Great Prophet Jesus.[248] He
likewise uses all Christians, and especially the English, with more
benevolence than does any other Mahometan prince. He keeps many wild
beasts, such as lions, elephants, leopards, bears, antelopes, and
unicorns, [rhinoceroses,] of which I saw two at his court, the strangest
beasts in the world. They were brought out of Bengal, a kingdom in his
dominions of most wonderful fertility, above four months journey from
this place, the mid-land parts of which are watered by various channels
and branches of the famous river Ganges. I have not yet seen that
country, but mean to visit it, God willing, before my departure, the
nearest part of it being only about twelve days journey from hence.

[Footnote 248: The Persian word _Hasaret_, here erroneously rendered
Great Prophet, seems to signify literally _face_ or _presence_, and is
metaphorically used as a term of highest dignity, of which an instance
occurs in the present section, used by Coryat himself in addressing the
Great Mogul--E.]

Twice every week elephants are made to fight before the Mogul, forming
the bravest spectacle that can be imagined, many of them being thirteen
feet and a half in height, and they jostle together as though they were
two little mountains; and were they not separated in the midst of their
fighting, by means of certain fire-works, they would exceedingly hurt
and gore each other, by their murderous tusks. The Mogul is said to keep
30,000 elephants, at a most enormous expence; and in feeding them,
together with his lions and other beasts, he expends an incredible sum
of money, being at the least 10,000 pounds sterling daily. I have myself
rode upon an elephant since I came to this court, meaning in my next
book to have my effigies represented in that form. This king keeps a
thousand women for his own use, the chiefest of whom, called Normal,
(Noormahal) is his queen.

In my ten months journey between Aleppo and this court, I spent just
three pounds sterling, yet fared reasonably every day; victuals being so
cheap in some of the countries through which I travelled, that I often
lived competently for one penny a-day. Of that three pounds, I was
actually cozened out of ten shillings, by certain evil Christians of the
Armenian nation; so that in reality I only expended fifty shillings in
all that time. I have been in a city of this country called
_Detee_,[249] where Alexander the Great joined battle with Porus king of
India, and defeated him; and where, in memory of his victory, he caused
erect a brazen pillar, which remains there to this day. At this time I
have many irons in the fire, as I am learning the Persian, Turkish, and
Arabic languages, having already acquired the Italian. I have been
already three months at the court of the Great Mogul, and propose, God
willing, to remain here five months longer, till I have got these three
languages; after which I propose to visit the river Ganges, and then to
return to the court of Persia.

[Footnote 249: This is obviously a misprint for Delee, meaning Delhi;
but it is more probable that Alexander never was beyond the Punjab.--E.]

In the course of my journey, I was robbed of my money, but not of all,
having some concealed in certain secret corners. This was done at the
city of Diarbekir in Mesopotatamia, by a Turkish horse soldier, whom
they call a _spahee_. Since my arrival here, there was sent to this king
the richest present I ever heard of. It consisted of various things, the
whole amounting to the value of ten of their lacks, a lack being L10,000
sterling. Part of this present consisted of thirty-one elephants, two of
which were more gorgeously adorned than any thing I ever saw, or shall
see in the course of my life. They had each four massy chains all of
beaten gold, around their bodies, with two chains of the same about
their legs, furniture for their buttocks of the same rich material, and
two golden lions on their heads.

Sec.2. _Letter from Agra, the Capital of the Great Mogul, to his Mother,
dated 31st October, 1616_.

Most dear and well-beloved Mother,

This city is the metropolis of the whole dominions of the Great Mogul,
and is at the distance of ten days journey from Ajimeer, whence I
departed on the 12th September this year, after having abode there
twelve months and sixty days. This my long stay in one place, was for
two principal causes; one being to learn the languages of these
countries through which I am to pass between this country and
Christendom, namely, Persian, Turkish, and Arabic, which I have
competently attained to by labour and industry, being as available to me
as money, and the chiefest, or rather the only means to get me money if
I should happen to be in want; and, secondly, that, by the help of the
Persian, I might get myself access to the Mogul, and be able to express
my mind unto him about what I proposed to lay before him. During all
this time, I abode in the house of the English merchants, my dear
countrymen, not expending any money at all for lodging, diet, washing,
or any other thing.

I attained to a reasonable skill in the Persian tongue, by earnest study
in a few months, so that I made an oration to the king in that
language, before many of his nobles; and afterwards discoursed with him
very readily. The copy of this speech I have sent you, as a novelty,
though the language may seem strange and uncouth to an Englishman; and I
have sent you herewith a translation, which you may shew along with the
Persian original to some of my learned friends of the clergy, and also
of the laity, who may take some pleasure in reading so rare and unusual
a tongue. The Persian is this that follows:

_Hazaret Aallum-pennah, Salamet: fooker Darceish, ce jehaun-gesht
hastam; ke mia emadam az wellageti door, yanne as muik Ingliz-stan, ke
kessanion pesheen mushacar cardand,_ _ke wellageti mazcoor der akeri
magrub bood, ke mader hamma jezzaereti dunia ast, &c._[250]--The English
of it is this:

"Lord protector of the world, all hail! I am a poor traveller and
world-seer, who am come here from a far country called England, which
ancient historians thought to have been situated in the farthest bounds
of the west, and which is the queen of all the islands in the world. The
causes of my coming hither are four. First, that I might behold the
blessed countenance of your majesty, whose great fame has resounded over
all Europe, and through all the Mahometan countries. When I heard of the
fame of your majesty, I made all possible haste hither, and cheerfully
endured the labour of travelling, that I might see your glorious court.
Secondly, I was desirous of seeing your majesty's elephants, which kind
of beasts I have not seen in any other country. Thirdly, that I might
see your famous river the Ganges, the captain of all the rivers in the
world. Fourthly, to entreat your majesty, that you would vouchsafe to
grant me your most gracious phirmaund, that I may travel into the
country of Tartaria to the city of Samarcand, to visit the blessed
sepulchre of the _Lord of the Corners_,[251] whose fame, by reason of
his wars and victories, is published over the whole world, so that
perhaps he is not altogether so famous in his own country of Tartary as
in England. I have a strong desire to see the sepulchre of the Lord of
the Corners for this cause, that, when in Constantinople, I saw a
notable old building in a pleasant garden near the said city, where the
Christian emperor, Emanuel, made a sumptuous banquet to the Lord of the
Corners, after he had taken Sultan Bajazet in a great battle near the
city of Brusa, when the Lord of the Corners bound Sultan Bajazet in
golden fetters, and put him into an iron cage. These causes have induced
me to travel thus far from my native country, having come a-foot through
Turkey and Persia into this country, my pilgrimage having extended so
three thousand miles, with much labour and toil, such as no mortal man
hath ever yet performed, to see the blessed countenance of your majesty,
since the first day of your being inaugurated in your imperial throne."

[Footnote 250: The whole discourse, of which the following paragraph in
the text is the translation, is contained in the Pilgrims: But doubting
its accuracy, as that book is most incorrectly printed throughout, the
editor requested the favour of the late learned professor of oriental
languages in the University of Edinburgh, Dr Alexander Murray, to revise
and correct this first sentence, which he most readily did, adding the
following literal translation: "Presence, [or face.] of the
world--protector, salutation to thee: A poor dervish and world-wanderer
I am; that I have come from a kingdom far, to-wit, from the kingdom of
Ingliz-stan, which historians ancient, relation have made, that kingdom
said, in the end of the west was, which the mother of every island of
the world is," &c.]

[Footnote 251: This is the title given to Tamerlane in this country, in
the Persian language, meaning that he was lord over the four corners of
the earth, that is, the highest and supreme monarch of the
world.--_Purch._]

When I had ended my speech, I conversed with him for a short space in
Persian, when, among other things, he told me that he could do me no
service in regard to my proposed journey to Samarcand, as there was no
intimacy between him and the princes of the Tartars, so that his
commendatory letters would avail me little. He also added, that the
Tartars bore so deadly a hate against all Christians, that they would
certainly kill any who might venture into their country, wherefore he
earnestly dissuaded me from this proposed journey, as I valued my life
and welfare. At last, he concluded his discourse by throwing down to me,
from a window in which he stood, that looked into the street, an hundred
pieces of silver, worth two shillings each or ten pounds in all, which
were thrown into a sheet hanging by the four corners.

I had conducted this affair so secretly, by the help of the Persian
which I had learnt, that neither our English ambassador, nor any other
of my countrymen, excepting one special and private friend, knew any
thing at all about the matter till I had thoroughly accomplished my
design. For I well knew, if the ambassador had got the smallest notice
of my purpose, that he would have counteracted me, as indeed he
signified to me after I had effected my purpose, alledging that this
might redound to the discredit of our nation, for one of our country to
present himself in that poor and beggarly manner before the king, to
crave money from him by flattery. But I answered our ambassador so
resolutely, that he was glad to let me alone. Indeed, I never had more
need of money in all my life than at this time, having only to the value
of twenty shillings remaining, owing to my having been stripped of
almost all my money by a miscreant Turk, in a city called _Imaret_, in
Mesopotamia.

After my interview with the Mogul, I went to visit a certain noble and
generous Christian of the Armenian nation, two days journey from court,
to observe certain remarkable matters at that place; and, by means of my
knowledge of the Persian language, he made me very welcome, entertaining
me with much civility and kindness; and, at my departure, gave me very
bountifully twenty pieces of the same coin as the king had done, worth
forty shillings of our money. About ten days after this, I departed from
Ajimeer, the court of the Great Mogul, to resume my pilgrimage, after my
long rest of fourteen months, proposing to go back into Persia. On this
occasion, our ambassador gave me a gold piece of this king's coin, worth
twenty-four shillings, which I shall save till my arrival in England, if
it be possible. I have thus received in benevolences, since I came into
this country, twenty marks sterling,[252] bating two shillings and
eight-pence, besides L1:13:4 sterling, in Persian money, from Lady
Shirley, upon the confines of Persia. At this present, being in Agra,
whence I write this letter, I have about twelve pounds, which, according
to my manner of living on the way, at two-pence a-day, will very
competently maintain me during three years travel, considering the
cheapness of all eatables in Asia. Drink costs me nothing, as I hardly
ever drink any thing beyond pure water during my pilgrimage.

[Footnote 252: Twenty marks are L15:6:8 sterling.--E.]

I mean to remain in Agra for six weeks longer, waiting an excellent
opportunity of going to the famous river Ganges, about five days journey
from hence, to see a memorable meeting of the idolatrous people of this
country, called Banians, of whom to the number of 400,000 go thither, on
purpose to bathe and shave themselves in the river, and to sacrifice a
world of gold to that same river, partly in stamped coin, and partly in
great massy lumps and wedges, thrown into the river as a sacrifice,
besides many other strange ceremonies, worthy of being observed. So
notable a spectacle is no where to be seen, neither in this the
_greater_ Asia, nor in the _lesser_, now called Natolia. This shew is
made once in every year, on which occasion people flock thither from
almost a thousand miles off, worshipping the river as a god and
saviour; a most abominable and impious superstition of these brutish
heathens, aliens from Christ. As soon as I have seen this ceremony, I
propose, by God's help, to repair to Lahore, twenty days journey from
hence, and so into Persia, &c.

   Your dutiful, loving, and obedient son,
   Now a desolate pilgrim in the world,
   THOMAS CORYAT.

Sec.3. _Some Observations concerning India, by Thomas Coryat_.[253]

Whereas in this country the beggars beg from a Christian in the name of
_Bibbee Maria_, and not of _Hazaret Eesa_, we may gather that the
Jesuits have preached our _Lady Mary_ more than the _Lord Jesus_.

[Footnote 253: Purchas informs us, that these were taken from certain
notes written by Coryat, given him by Sir Thomas Roe; "whence, omitting
such things as have been given before from the observations of Sir
Thomas Roe himself, I have inserted a few."--_Purch._]

A great rajah of the Hindoos, who was a notorious atheist, and a
contemner of all diety, and who boasted that he knew of no God except
the king, and neither believed nor feared any other, happened one day to
sit dallying among his women, when one of them plucked a hair from his
breast, which hair being fast-rooted, plucked off along with it a small
bit of skin, so that a small spot of blood appeared. This small scar
festered and gangrened incurably, so that in a few days his life was
despaired of, and being surrounded by all his friends, and several of
the courtiers, he broke out into these excellent words:--"Which of you
would have thought that I, a warrior, should not have died by the stroke
of a sword, a spear, or an arrow? But now am I enforced to confess the
power of the great God I have so long despised, who needs no other lance
to slay so blasphemous a wretch and contemner of his holy majesty, such
as I have been, than a small hair."

Akbar Shah, the former king, had learnt all manner of sorceries; and
being once in a strange humour to shew a spectacle to his nobles, he
brought forth his favourite Sultana before them, and cut off her head
with a sword in their presence. Seeing them struck with horror and
amazement at this action, by virtue of his exorcisms and sorceries, he
caused her head to fix on again, and no sign remained of any wound.

The same prince, who was very fortunate during his reign, shewed the
utmost attention and respect to his mother, of which he one day gave the
following striking instance:--Being on a journey between Lahore and
Agra, on which occasion his mother accompanied him, being carried in a
palanquin, and having to pass a river, he took one of the poles of the
palanquin on his own shoulder, commanding his greatest nobles to do the
same, and in this manner carried her across the river. He never denied
her any request that ever she made, except one, and this was, that our
Bible might be hung about the neck of an ass, and so beaten about the
town of Agra. The reason of this strange request was, that the
Portuguese had taken a ship of theirs, in which they found a copy of the
_Koran_, or bible of the Mahometans, which they tied about the neck of a
dog, and beat the dog about the streets of Ormus. But he denied her this
request, saying, That if it were evil in the Portuguese to have so done
with the Koran, it did not become a king to requite evil with evil, as
the contempt of any religion was contempt of God, and he would not be
revenged upon an innocent book. The moral of this is, that God would not
permit the sacred book of his law and truth to be contemned among the
infidels.

One day in every year, for the amusement of the king's women, all the
tradesmen's wives are admitted into the _Mahal_, having each somewhat to
sell, after the manner of a fair, and at which the king acts as broker
for his wives, no other man being present, and by means of his gains on
this occasion, provides his own supper. By this means he attains to a
sight of all the pretty women of the city; and at a fair of this kind he
got his beloved _Noor Mahal_.

After _Shaof Freed_ had won the battle of Lahore by a stratagem, all the
captains of the rebel army, to the number of two thousand, who had been
taken by the king, were hung up upon flesh-hooks, or set upon stakes,
forming an avenue for the king's entrance into Lahore. On this occasion,
his son _Curseroo_, [Cusero] who had been made prisoner, rode beside
him, bare-footed, on an elephant, and the king asked him how he liked
that spectacle? To this the prince answered, That he was sorry to see so
much cruelty and injustice in his father, in thus executing those who
had only done their duty, as they had lived on his bread and salt: but
that his father had done justly if he had pardoned these brave men, and
punished him, who was their master, and the author of this rebellion.

Sultan Cusero has only one wife, owing to the following circumstance:
During his confinement, the king proposed to make a hunting progress of
four months, and consulted how he might keep his son in safe custody
during his absence. He at length determined to build a tower in which to
immure him, having neither door nor window, and only a few small holes
to let in air, and these so high as to be beyond reach. Into this tower
were to be put along with the prince all sorts of provisions and
necessaries, with a few servants to attend him. While this was building,
the wife of Cusero fell at the king's feet, and would not leave him till
she obtained his consent to be shut up along with her husband. The king
endeavoured to persuade her to enjoy her liberty, but she utterly
refused any other comfort than to be the companion of her husband's
miseries. Among these, this was the greatest, that if any of those who
were to be shut up along with him, to the number of fifty in all, should
happen to die during the king's absence, there were no means either to
remove or bury the body, as no person was to be allowed to come near the
tower.

It is a frequent custom of the present Mogul, when he happens to be
awake in the night time, he calls for certain poor old men, making them
sit beside him, and passes his time in familiar discourse with them,
giving them clothes and bountiful alms when he dismisses them. At one
time, when residing at Ajimeer, he went a-foot on pilgrimage to the tomb
of a saint or prophet called Haji Mundin, and there kindled a fire with
his own hands, under an immense _Heidelbergian equipolent_ brass pot, in
which victuals were cooked for five thousand poor persons. When the
victuals were ready, he took out the first platter with his own hands,
and served the mess to a poor person. Noor Mahal took out and served the
second, and the rest was served by the other ladies of his
court.--_Crack me this nut, all ye papal charity-vaunters_.

One day an Armenian procured a nobleman to present him to the king, as
one who desired to become an Mahometan; on which the king asked him, if
he had been converted from hope of preferment; to which the Armenian
answered, that be had no such motive. Some months afterwards, the new
convert craved some courtesy from the king, which he denied, saying, "I
have already done you the greatest of all favours, in allowing you to
save your soul; but you must provide for your own body the best way you
can." The king likes not those who change their religion, being himself
of none but according to his own fancy, and freely allows therefore of
all religions in his dominions. Of which I may give the following
notable example:

He had an Armenian in his service, named Scander, whom he one day asked
if he thought any of the _padres_ had ever converted a single Mahometan
to be a true Christian, for conscience sake, and not for money. Scander
answered, with great confidence, that he had one as his servant, who was
a sincere Christian, and would not be of any other for any worldly
consideration. The king immediately caused this man to be sent for, and
bidding Scander depart, he examined the convert as to his reasons for
having become a Christian. In reply, he quoted certain feeble jesuitical
reasons, declaring his determination to be of no other religion, though
the king made him many fair speeches and large offers to return to
Mahometism, offering him pensions, and the command of horse. He said he
had now only four rupees a month, which was a poor recompense for
becoming a Christian, but if he would recant, he would give him high
dignities and large means. The fellow answered, that he had not become a
Christian for such small wages, as he was able to earn as much in the
service of a Mahometan; but was a Christian in his heart, and was
determined so to continue. Finding this method ineffectual, the king
turned his tune, and tried him with threats of severe punishment, unless
he returned to the faith of Mahomet. But the proselyte manfully declared
he would suffer any thing, being ready to endure whatever the king was
pleased to order. Upon this declaration, when all the by-standers
expected present and severe castigation, the king suddenly changed his
manner towards him, highly commending his constancy and resolution,
bidding him return to his master, and to serve him faithfully, and
ordered him an allowance of one rupee a-day for his integrity.

About two months afterwards, the king returned from hunting wild-hogs,
an animal which is held in abhorrence by all Mahometans, and which kind
of venison, therefore, the king was in use to distribute among the
Christians and Rajaputs. On this occasion, the king sent for the
converted catechumen above mentioned, and commanded him to take up a hog
for his master, which no Mahometan will touch. He did so, but on going
out of the court gate, he was so hooted at by the Mahometans, that he
threw down his burden in a ditch, and went home; concealing what had
passed from his master. Some four days afterwards, the Armenian being on
duty in presence of the king, he asked him if the hog he had sent him
was good meat. The Armenian replied, that he had not seen or heard of
any. The king therefore immediately ordered the convert to be sent for,
who confessed that he had not carried home the hog, as being mocked by
the Mahometans for touching so great an abomination, he had for shame
thrown it away. On this the king observed, "By your Christian law there
is no difference of meats. Are you ashamed of your law, or do you
outwardly forsake it to flatter the Mahometans? I now see that you are
neither a good Christian nor a good Mahometan, but a knave dissembling
with both. When I believed you sincere, I gave you a pension, which I
now take from you for your dissimulation, and I farther condemn you to
receive an hundred stripes." These were presently paid him, instead of
his money; and the king desired all to take warning by this example,
that, having given liberty of conscience to all religions, he would have
all to adhere to what they professed.




SECTION IX.

ACCOUNT OF THE WRONGS DONE TO THE ENGLISH AT BANDA BY THE DUTCH, IN 1617
AND 1618.[254]

INTRODUCTION.


This section contains a letter from Mr Thomas Spurway, merchant or
factor, addressed from Bantam, "To the Honourable and Right Worshipful
the East India Company of England, touching the wrongs done at Banda to
the English by the Hollanders; the former unkind disgusts and brabling
quarrels now breaking unexpectedly out into a furious and injurious
war." Such is the account given of this section by Purchas, who farther
informs his readers, "That the beginning of this letter was torn, and
therefore imperfect in his edition; but, what is here defective, was to
be afterwards supplied from the journals of Nathaniel Courthop, and
other continuations of these insolences of the Dutch at Banda, by Mr
Hayes, and others." These journals of Courthop and Hayes are so
intolerably and confusedly written, and so interlarded with numerous
letters _about_ the subject of these differences with the Dutch, that we
have been reluctantly under the necessity of omitting them, being so
monstrously inarticulate as to render it impossible to make them at all
palatable to our readers, without using freedoms that were altogether
inadmissible in a work like the present.

[Footnote 254: Purch. Pilgr. I. 608.]

From this letter, and other information of a similar nature, it appears
that the attempts to form establishments for trade at Banda and the
Molucca islands were found to be difficult or impracticable, owing to
the opposition of the Dutch, who were much stronger in that part of
India, and had not only conceived the plan of monopolizing the spice
trade, but even avowed their determination to exclude the English and
all other European nations from participating in any share of it. We do
not pretend, in our Collection, to write the history of the English East
India Company, but merely to give a series of the voyages which
contributed to the establishment of that princely association of
merchant adventurers. Yet it seems proper, occasionally at least, in the
introductions to leading voyages, like the present, to give some short
historical notices of the subject, for the materials of which we are
chiefly, if not solely, indebted to the Annals of the Company, a work of
meritorious and laborious research, already several times referred to.

Under the difficulties which had long attended the exertions of the
English to acquire a share in this peculiarly called _spice trade_, the
agent and commercial council of the English company at Bantam, gave
authority to the commanders of the Swan and Defence to endeavour to
obtain from the native chiefs of the islands of Puloroon and Puloway, a
surrender of these islands to the king of England, with the stipulation
of paying annually as a quit-rent, a fruit-bearing branch of the nutmeg
tree; yet stipulating that these islanders were to continue entirely
under the guidance of their own laws and customs, providing only that
they should engage to sell their spices exclusively to the agents of the
English company, who were, in return, to supply them with provisions and
Hindoostan manufactures at a fair price, in exchange for their peculiar
productions, nutmegs and mace. They were likewise authorised, if they
procured the consent of the natives, to establish fortified stations, or
factories, at Puloroon, Puloway. Pulo-Lantore, and Rosinging, or
Rosengin.[255] The views of the Bantam factory on this occasion seem to
have been generally judicious, as to the measure they now authorised,
but exceedingly ill judged in attempting to execute so very important a
purpose with a force entirely inadequate to that with which it had to
contend.

[Footnote 255: An. of E.I. Co. I. 187.]

The Dutch had expelled the Portuguese, at that time the subjects of
their tyrannical oppressors, the Spaniards, from a great portion of the
spice islands, in which warlike measure, and its consequences, they had
always to support a considerable force, both naval and military, in
these seas, and in various forts upon these islands; and besides, that
they felt their preponderance from these circumstances, and used it very
naturally for their own exclusive benefit, they alleged, and with no
small appearance of equity, that the English had no right to enjoy the
advantages of a trade, which they, the Dutch, had conquered from the
Portuguese and Spaniards. This opposition of interests proceeded in the
sequel to great extremities, in which the greatly superior power of the
Hollanders in these seas, enabled them effectually to oppress the
English, in what are peculiarly called the spice islands, and even to
expel them from all participation in that trade, as will appear in some
of the subsequent sections of this chapter.

It would be not only premature in this place, but incompatible with the
nature of our work, which is intended as a Collection of Voyages and
Travels, to attempt giving a connected history of these dissensions
between the Dutch and English in Eastern India, which will be found
detailed in the Annals of the English Company. It is hardly possible,
however, to refrain from one observation on the subject,--that the Dutch
company, and the government of Holland, appear to have mainly proceeded,
in their hostile opposition to the English East India trade, on their
knowledge of the pusillanimous character of King James, which he vainly
thought to veil under the pretensions of loving peace, but which the
Dutch, as will be seen in the present section, clearly understood, and
openly expressed, as _the childhood of St George_, the tutelary martial
saint of England. _Beati pacifici_, his favourite adage, is an excellent
Christian and moral sentiment, but is incompatible with the unavoidable
exigencies of government, at least as they were then situated.--E.

       *       *       *       *       *

_May it please your Worships_,

We arrived at Macassar on the 19th of November, 1616, from Bantam, with
the Swan and Defence, under the command of Captain Nicholas Courthop,
who sailed in the Swan, of which ship Mr Davis was master, the other
being commanded by Mr Hinchley. We remained there for the purpose of
taking in an hundred _quoines_[256] of rice. On the 4th December, we saw
a large Dutch ship in the offing, which came to anchor about five
leagues off, and on the 5th they sent their skiff ashore, which made
directly for the English house, having eight men on board. As soon as we
perceived this boat coming ashore, we ran to the sea side; but, before
we got there, two of her men were landed, whom we acquainted with the
danger they were in, as the king of Macassar, and all the other kings
thereabouts, were become their mortal enemies, because of the many
injuries done them by the Hollanders, who had forcibly carried away a
principal sabander, and other persons belonging to Macassar, for which
they were determined upon revenge; and, therefore, that they might all
expect to be put to death, unless the king could be prevailed upon to
spare them. The Dutchmen were so much alarmed at this intelligence, that
they wished to have gone back to their boat, but the Macassers had
already gathered about us, and laid hands upon them.

[Footnote 256: The amount or quantity of these _quoines_ are no where
stated, or even hinted at; but, from circumstances in the sequel, they
appear to have been considerable.--E.]

I, and other English, immediately went in all haste to the king,
acquainting him with what had happened, lest, if the Dutch had intended
any treachery, he might have suspected us as being accessary. The king
gave us thanks, and desired us to take the two Dutchmen who had landed
to our house, that we might learn from them their intentions in coming
here. This we did, and they informed us that they belonged to a fleet
lately fitted out from Holland, and had lost company of their consorts.
One of these called himself John Staunch, and reported himself to be an
under-factor. The other was an English sailor. Perceiving themselves to
be in great danger, they earnestly entreated us to stand their friends
and procure their liberty. We promised to do every thing we could for
them. Soon after this, the kings of Macassar and Talow, together with
about 2000 attendants, came to the sands near the sea side, where they
held a council upon these men. The king of Talow was clear for putting
them to death, but we used our interest so successfully for them, that
they were commanded to be gone instantly in their boat; The king of
Macassar observing, that these were too few for satisfying his revenge,
and that he should wait for one more ample. So they departed and went to
their ship.

Next day another boat was observed coming towards the shore from the
same ship; and, on the king being informed of this, he gave immediate
orders for twenty proas and corracorras to be manned and launched. This
was done immediately, and the whole made towards the Dutch boat, which
was rowing for the land directly towards our house. On observing the
native craft endeavouring to intercept them, the Dutch turned their
boat, and rowed back to regain their ship; but the Macassars soon got
up, boarded them on both sides, and slew every man of the Hollanders,
being sixteen in number. There were at this time near 5000 people at the
sea side, and we were commanded to keep the house.

The name of this Dutch ship was the Endraught, and imagining that we
were bound for Banda or the Moluccas, she remained at sea waiting for
us. We set sail from Macassar road on the 8th December, 1616, and when
the Dutchmen, saw us under sail, they also weighed and kept company with
us. We would gladly have gone from them, but could not, owing to the bad
sailing of the Defence. They sent their boat to us, requesting we would
spare them two quoines of rice, four tons of water, and some poultry,
all of which we gave them, only taking payment for the rice, being forty
dollars, giving the water and poultry freely. We asked why they had
attempted to land the second time; when they told us their first boat
had not then returned to the ship, so that they believed the Dutch
factory had still remained at Macassar. But I believe it proceeded from
obstinacy, believing their first boat had been denied access at our
instigation, and meaning to make a second trial, when they hoped to have
flattered the king to allow them to return, and reinstate their factory.
For both their boats passed within musket-shot of our ships on their way
to the land, yet did not go aboard to enquire what were the situation of
affairs on shore, which if they had done, we should have forewarned them
of their danger. They kept company with us till we came near Amboina,
for which place they stood in, while we continued our course. We have
since learnt that they gave out we had been the cause of their men being
slain at Macassar, which is most false: For I solemnly protest that we
used our best endeavours to save them, and if it had not been for us,
the eight men in their first boat had also been slain.

The Swan and Defence arrived in the road of Puloroon on the 13th
December. Next day the people of that island came on board, and
conferred with us about surrendering the island to us. We represented
that our nation had come often to their island, at great cost, and at
their particular request, to settle a factory, and trade with them in a
friendly manner, bringing them rice and other provisions, with cloth and
sundry commodities, in exchange for their spices; that we had no desire
to usurp over them, or to reduce them under bondage, as had been done
formerly by the Hollanders and other nations; and that, if they would
surrender their island of Puloroon to our sovereign the king of England,
by a formal writing, and by the delivery of some earth, with a tree and
fruits of the island, as true tokens of their fidelity, and thereafter a
nut-tree yearly as an acknowledgment, we should settle a factory, and
would furnish them with rice, cloth, and other commodities, both now and
yearly afterwards. We also assured them, if we were once settled on the
island, that sufficient supplies would come to them yearly, much better
than now; and that we would use our utmost efforts, both by means of our
men and ships, to defend them and ourselves from all enemies. We also
demanded, whether they had come under any contract with the Hollanders,
or had made them any surrender of their island. To this they unanimously
replied, that they had made no such engagement, and never would, but
held the Hollanders as their mortal enemies. This was earnestly declared
to us, both by the men of Puloroon and by divers chiefs from Puloway,
who had fled from that island on its forcible reduction by the
Hollanders. And they all declared that the island of Puloway had been
lawfully surrendered to Richard Hunt, for the king of England, before
the Hollanders came into the road, the English colours having been
hoisted in the castle, which the Hollanders shot down, using many
disgraceful words of his majesty. They farther declared, that they
defended their island for his majesty's use, as long as they possibly
could; and, being constrained by force, they had fled to Puloroon,
Lantor, and Serran.

After this conference had continued the whole day, the writings of
surrender were drawn up, and confirmed by all the chief men of Puloroon
and Puloway, and so delivered by their own hands to us, Nathaniel
Cowthorp, Thomas Spurway, and Sophonie Cozocke, for his majesty's use.
They also that same instant delivered to us a nutmeg-tree, with its
fruit growing thereon, having the earth about its root, together with
oilier fruits, and a live goat, in symbolical surrender of the
sovereignty of the island, desiring us to hoist the English colours, and
to fire a salute of ordnance. Accordingly, the colours were set up, and
we fired thirty pieces of ordnance, as a mark of taking possession; and
at night all the chiefs went ashore, parting from us on the most
friendly terms.

On Christmas-day we descried two large Dutch ships edging towards
Puloroon. On seeing our ships in the road, they bore away to leeward for
Nero, and next day another of their ships hove in sight, which went to
the same place. The 28th, a Dutch pinnace stood right over for Puloroon,
and came bravadoing within gun-shot of our fort, having the Dutch
colours flying at her poop; but presently tacked about, lowered her
colours, and hoisted a bloody ensign instead, as if in defiance, and
then stood over for Nero. By this bravado, we daily looked for their
coming against us, according to their old injurious custom. We landed
four pieces of ordnance on the 30th, besides two others formerly landed
on the 25th, and set to work to construct fortifications for our
defence. By the assistance of the Bandanese, we erected two forts, which
were named the Swan and Defence, after our two ships, each mounted with
three guns; the fort called the Swan being within caliver shot of the
ships, and entirely commanding the road on the eastern side, where is
the principal anchorage for the westerly monsoon.

The 3d of January, 1617, the three Dutch ships came from Nero into the
road of Puloroon, being the Horne, of 800 tons, the Star, of 500 tons,
and the Yaugar, of 160 tons. The Home anchored close by our ship the
Swan, the Star close beside the Defence, and the Yaugar a-head of all,
to cut off our intercourse with the shore. Our commission directed us,
on receiving the surrender of Puloroon, and forming a settlement there,
to give due notice thereof in writing to the Hollanders, warning them
not to come there to molest us under the pretence of ignorance, as they
had been formerly accustomed to do. We had accordingly a letter written
to that effect, but knew not how to have it sent, not daring to dispatch
it either by Englishmen or natives, for tear of being detained. On
coming into the road, however, we sent George Muschamp aboard their
admiral, the Star, to deliver the before-mentioned letter to Mynheer
Dedall, the Dutch commander; and with a message desiring them to depart
from the road of Puloroon before six glasses were run, as the islanders
would not allow them to remain in the roads, or to come near their
island, and would even have already fired upon them, if we had not
prevailed upon them to forbear.

Soon afterwards, the Dutch commander, Dedall, came on board the Swan,
attended by their chaplain, to enquire the reason of our message; when
we told him that we suspected they came to injure us, as they had
formerly done at Paloway, Cambella, and other places; and, as they had
formerly turned the glass to Mr Ball, when in their power, threatening
to hang him if he did not immediately cause the English to quit the
land, we had now in like manner appointed a time for them to quit the
roads. We also shewed him the instrument by which Puloroon was
surrendered to us, and our consequent right to keep possession for the
king of England, which we were determined upon doing to the utmost of
our power, wishing them to be well advised in their proceedings, as they
might expect to be shortly called to answer for their abusive words and
injurious conduct to the English. We also demanded the restoration of
Puloway, which had likewise been lawfully surrendered to the king of
England. After this, we enquired if they had received any previous
surrender at Puloroon, but they could not say they had any; and, when we
shewed the formal surrender made to our king, which their chaplain
perused, he acknowledged that it was a true surrender.

All this while the glass was running in the great cabin before their
eyes, putting them in mind to be gone. We also told them plainly, that
we believed their only purpose in coming here was to betray us, and to
drive us from the island by treachery or force, of which scandalous
conduct our nation had already had divers experience from theirs;
wherefore we neither could nor would trust them any more, and we must
insist upon their departure; as, when the glass was six times run out,
they must expect to be shot at from the shore; and, if they fired in
return against the islanders, or shewed any discourtesy or wrong to
them, we should consider it as hostility to us, and would defend them,
being now the subjects of our king. They desired to remain till next
day, which we would not agree to, doubting that more of their ships
might come to join them. They then desired to stay till midnight; which
we agreed to, on condition that we saw them preparing to weigh their
anchors, in which case we said that notice should be sent ashore to the
Bandanese, not to fire upon them.

I also demanded to know from Dedall, what was their purpose in thus
coming into the road of Puloroon, unless to molest us. He pretended that
it was their usual custom in passing that island. But I told them that
was not true, as the islanders had declared there never was any
christian ship in their roads till we came. So he remained silent. They
came to anchor in the roads this day about three in the afternoon, and
departed about eleven at night. We have been since certainly informed,
that their purpose was to have taken possession of our ships by
treachery, or to have driven us out of the roads, and only gave up their
intentions on seeing that we were fortified on shore. Had they then
assailed us, we had little doubt of being able to have defended
ourselves against them, as we had both forts in readiness, the cannon
charged, and the gunners prepared to give fire, on the first signal from
our ships.

A Dutch ship and pinnace came from Nero on the 10th January; the pinnace
edging near the small island or high sand, called _Nylacka_. This island
is uninhabited, but full of trees and bushes, being daily resorted to by
the men of Puloroon for fishing; and as belonging to Puloroon, belonged
now to the English. On coming near the island, the people in the pinnace
were observed continually sounding, wherefore we made four shots towards
her from Fort Defence; but, not intending to strike her, shot wide. At
every shot, the pinnace answered with a base, or some such piece, firing
into the small island among the trees and bushes, where were some
Englishmen and Bandanese of Puloroon, who were in no small danger from
the shot. Seeing they braved us in this manner, the gunner was desired
to do his best, and his next shot fell close over the stern of the
pinnace or frigate, which made her presently go away. Their purpose of
coming thus to sound about the small island, seemed to be to look out
for a landing-place; meaning to come there with their forces, and there
to fortify themselves, on purpose to compel us to quit the large island.

On the 13th, Mr Davey complained that he was in want of water, and
proposed to go over for that purpose to Wayre upon Lantore; but on the
people of Puloroon being informed of this, they would by no means
consent to his going out of the roads, and indeed neither would we,
fearing the Hollanders might do us some injury in his absence. The
people of Puloroon, said they would rather bring him water from Lantore,
in their proas. I went on board Mr Davey to acquaint him with this; but
he and his people would not consent, saying the Bandanese would bring
them rain water, or such other as was unwholesome, and that they would
only be six days absent, or eight at most.

At this time, the principal people of Wayre, a free town on the island
of Lantore, and of the separate island of Rosinging, came over to us, to
enter into a parley respecting the surrender of both to the sovereignty
of his majesty; and the formal deed of surrender being agreed upon and
drawn up, they desired that some Englishmen might go over to receive the
same in a public manner from all their hands, and to witness the
ceremonial. As Mr Davey still persisted to go over with his ship, it was
resolved upon, that Messrs Sophonie Cozocke, George Muschamp, Robert
Fuller, and Thomas Hodges, should go over in the Swan to Wayre and
Rosinging, to see that business accomplished, while the Swan was
procuring water; after which, it was appointed that Mr Cozocke was to
return in the Swan, while the other three were to remain upon the island
of Rosinging for possession, till farther orders. All business being
there concluded to our satisfaction, several persons in Wayre and
Rosinging desired to load nutmegs and mace in the Swan, and to have a
passage for Puloroon, there to sell us their spices for rice and cloths.
All this was agreed to, and twelve of these persons came on board, with
a great quantity of nutmegs and mace.

The Swan then set sail for Geulegola, which is only a little way from
Wayre, and there watered, after which she again set sail. When about
eight leagues from the land, a Holland ship or two gave them chace. The
people of the Swan now asked Mr Davey what he proposed to do. He
answered, "They see my colours and I see theirs: I know them to be
Dutch, and they know us to be English: I know of no injury I have done
them, and I will continue my course for Puloroon." In short time, the
Star, for such was the Dutch ship, got up within shot of the Swan, and
without hailing, or giving the smallest intimation of her intention,
let fly both with great guns and small arms in the most violent manner.
The Swan received two or three great shot through and through before she
replied, and even had some of her men slain. After this, as Mr Davey
writes, the fight continued an hour and a half, during which five men
were killed in the Swan, viz. Mr Sophonie Cozocke, merchant, who was
driven to pieces by a cannon-ball, Robert Morton, quartermaster and
drummer, Christopher Droope, Edward Murtkin, and a Bantianese passenger
from Wayre. Three others were maimed, having lost arms or legs, with
very little hopes of recovery; and eight others were wounded, most of
them mortally. During the engagement, a Dutchman stood upon the poop of
the Star with a drawn sword, calling out in the Dutch language, English
villains and rogues, we will kill you all.

The people of the Swan were much discouraged, on seeing so many of their
companions dead and wounded, insomuch that none of them would stand by
the sails to trim the ship to the best advantage so that the Hollander
lay upon her quarter pouring in great and small shot, and at last look
her by boarding, both with soldiers and others. They immediately broke
open and pillaged the cabins, plundered the men basely of their clothes
and every thing else worth taking, and throwing overboard whatever did
not please their fancies. Even the Spaniards never used more stern
cruelty in their professed wars, than did now the Dutch to us, with whom
they were in peace and amity. The Star had on board 160 men, mostly
soldiers taken from the castles of Nero and Puloway, while the Swan had
not above thirty able to stand to quarters, the rest being sick or lame,
and all much worn out in toilsome labour at Puloroon, in landing the
ordnance and constructing the two forts. Ten also of their complement
had been left in Puloroon to defend the two forts, two of whom, Herman
Hammond and John Day, were gunners. The Swan being thus taken and sore
battered in the action, was carried away under the guns of the castle at
Nero. The Dutch gloried much in their victory, boasting of their exploit
to the Bandanese, saying, That the king of England was not to be
compared with their great king of Holland: _That Saint George was now
turned a child_, and they cared not for the king of England; for one
Holland ship was able to take ten English ships. They landed all our men
at Nero, and kept them all strict prisoners, many of them in irons.

The Swan left us at Puloroon on the 16th of January, and we expected her
back in eight or ten days at farthest, but never heard of her till the
25th of February, when Robert Fuller came over to us from Rosinging and
Wayre; to acquaint us that be had heard of an English ship being under
the guns of Nero castle. We immediately sent away Robert Hayes, the
purser of the Defence, accompanied by some of the chief men of Puloroon,
with directions to land on that side of Lantore which was in friendship
with us, and to go as near as possible to the Dutch ships with a flag of
truce, to enquire into the matter. After staying almost two hours, there
came at last a boat to fetch him off, but made him wade to the middle
before they would take him in. Being taken on board one of the Dutch
ships, the president and assistants of Nero met him, when he demanded to
know why they had made prize of the Swan, what was become of her men,
and wherefore they detained our ship and goods. They answered, that
_time should bring all to light_. Still urging for an answer, they used
many opprobrious words against the English, threatening to come over to
Puloroon with their forces, and to drive us from there and other places.
To this Hayes replied, that they had already done much more than they
could answer for, and was obliged to come away without seeing any one
belonging to the Swan. He could however see our poor ship all rent and
torn, in view of the natives, as an ill-got and dishonourable trophy of
Dutch treachery and ingratitude. In a short time after, they sent over a
messenger to us with a letter, which we answered, as we did others
afterwards, their messengers frequently coming over with flags of truce,
all of which letters, together with the surrenders, I brought over with
me to Bantam, and delivered to Captain Ball.

The Dutch continually threatened us, by their letters and messengers,
that, as they had now taken tee Swan, they would soon come and take
possession of the Defence, and drive us from the island of Puloroon. We
always answered, that we expected them, and would defend ourselves to
the last. They made many bravados, daily shooting off forty, fifty, or
sixty pieces of ordnance at Nero and Puloway, thinking to frighten us.
Also the people of Lantore brought us word that they were fitting out
their ships, and shipping planks and earth, which we imagined was for
land service. They had then seven ships, four gallies and frigates, and
a great number of men, with all which force they threatened to come
against us. We were told likewise, that they had endeavoured to prevail
on their black slaves, by promise of freedom and great rewards, to come
over secretly to Puloroon and set fire to the Defence. The Hollanders
also, threatened that we should carry no spices from Puloroon or any
other of the Banda islands. Thereupon, considering our engagements with
the people of Puloroon, Wayre, and Rosinging, to all of whom we had
trusted our goods, and that we had ready at Puloroon a good quantity of
nutmegs and mace, and the threats of the Hollanders, we resolved to
maintain the honour of our king and country, and to defend the interest
of our employers, the honourable Company, to the utmost of our power.
For this purpose, we determined to land all the guns, provisions, and
stores, from the Defence, and to fortify the small island of Nylacka
adjoining to Puloroon; which the Hollanders proposed to have fortified
formerly; which, if they had done, would have commanded the road, and
done us much injury, as the people of Puloroon would have been prevented
from fishing, and English ships could not have come into the roads.

Having therefore landed all the ordnance of the Defence, except four
pieces of cannon, and being busied in erecting a fortification with the
assistance of the Bandanese, Mr Hinshley also, the master of the
Defence, being ashore, and every one hard at work landing the things,
except a few left on board to keep the ship, a conspiracy was entered
into by some of the men on the 20th March, 1617; and that same night
they cut the cables and so drove out to sea. Perceiving this from the
small island, we immediately sent a boat after them, advising them to
return with the ship: But the mutineers would neither listen to them,
nor suffer the boat to come near the ship, pointing their pieces at
them, and even fired one musket-shot to keep off the boat; which was
therefore compelled to return to the small island. There went away in
the Defence nine of our men, including John Christmas, the boatswain's
mate, and we could distinctly see them next day going into Nero roads
under sail, and come to anchor under the guns of the castle. As we
afterwards learnt, some of the runaways went immediately on shore to
inform the Dutch of their exploit, contending among themselves which of
them had piloted the ship. They even brought a can of wine ashore with
them, and drank to the Hollanders on landing.

The Dutch took immediate possession of the Defence, and brought all our
rascally deserters into their castle, where they examined them as to our
proceedings at Puloroon and Nylacka, in regard to our fortifications
and means of defence. By this scandalous affair, we were in great danger
of being all put to death by the Bandanese of Puloroon, as they
suspected the desertion of our ships to have been a concerted matter
between us and the Hollanders, on purpose to betray them. By this
likewise, as our weakness was made known to the Hollanders, they might
be encouraged to attack us. Indeed they made many violent threatenings
of so doing, and we daily looked for their appearance; which, if they
had so done, must have cost many lives, as we were greatly enraged
against them for the capture of the Swan, and the severe usage of her
people.

On the 23d of March, we sent a letter to the Hollanders at Nero, by
Robert Fuller, who landed upon Lantore; but, owing to some difference
between the people of that island and the Dutch, he could not be allowed
to pass, so that he had to return. The 25th there came a messenger to us
from Lawrence Ryall, the principal commander of the Hollanders, newly
come to Nero from the Moluccas, desiring Mr Courthop and I would come in
a proa to hold a conference with two of his principal merchants,
half-way between Puloroon and Puloway; but we refused this request,
being afraid of treachery. By this messenger we had a letter from Mr
Davies, then a prisoner at Nero, intimating his disapprobation of our
proceedings in keeping possession of Puloroon, alleging that our
commission did not warrant us in so doing, and recommending a parley
between us and the Dutch general, to prevent the loss of any more lives.
It appeared that he was instigated to give us this advice by the
Hollanders, who had made him believe that they had authority in writing
from our king, to make prize of any English ships they found to the east
of Celebes, as we afterwards learnt to our great surprise, since, if
they actually had such authority we must have obeyed.

We wrote to Lawrence Ryall, by his messenger, that, if he would send
over Henrick de Watterfoord and Peter de Yonge, two of his principal
merchants, to remain as pledges in Nylacka, Mr Courthop and another
should be sent to confer with him. We got back for answer, that the
merchants we demanded as pledges could not be sent, as the one was gone
to sea, and the other could not be spared, being their chief
book-keeper; but offering us two other principal merchants, whom we
agreed to accept. Accordingly, on the 6th April, the Dutch galley
brought over these two, whom we lodged in a tent near the landing-place
under a guard of twelve Englishmen to protect them from the Bandanese,
as we did not think it right to bring them into our fort, that they
might not have an opportunity of viewing our fortifications.

Mr Courthop went immediately over to Nero in their galley, and had a
long conference with the Dutch, in which they used many threats, and
complained of many injuries they pretended to have suffered from the
English, but of which I shall only briefly treat, as the letter from Mr
Courthop, which I brought over from Banda and delivered to Captain Ball,
will certify your worships at large on this matter. They complained,
that Sir Henry Middleton had used the Dutch colours, when in the Red
Sea, pretending to be Holland ships, to their injury and discredit. To
this Mr Courthop replied, that it was false, as he had sailed with Sir
Henry, and never knew him to wear Dutch colours; which, moreover, Sir
Henry was too much a gentleman to have done. They pretended to have our
king's letter, authorizing them to capture any English ship seen to the
eastwards of the Celebes. Mr Courthop urged them to produce this letter,
on seeing which he declared his readiness to obey the authority of his
sovereign, and to evacuate Puloroon; but they had none such to produce.
They alleged many other things, equally false, and used many arguments
to induce us to quit Puleroon. All this time, neither Mr Davies nor any
other of the English in their hands were permitted to come near Mr
Courthop.

Finding he could not prevail, Lawrence Ryall, the Dutch general, grew
much discontented, throwing his hat on the ground and pulling his beard
for sheer anger. At length Mr Courthop told him, that he could conclude
nothing of his own authority, being joined with a council, but should
relate every thing that had passed at Puloroon, which should be taken
into consideration and an answer sent. I had advised him to say this, to
get the easier away. Mr Courthop also urged them to restore our ship the
Defence, with her men and goods; but they would not, unless we agreed to
surrender Puloroon: offering, if we would deliver up Nylacka and our
fort, in which we had twelve pieces of ordnance, that they would then
restore both the Swan and Defence, with all our men and goods. Ryall
then desired Mr Courthop to sign a note which he had drawn,
acknowledging the proffers he had made, but this Mr Courthop refused.

They had so wrought upon Mr Davies, that they expected he might be able
to prevail upon Mr Courthop to come into their terms, and now therefore
brought him to Mr Courthop, with whom he had much discourse, and
particularly urged the truth of the letter they pretended to have from
the king of England, as before mentioned. When Mr Courthop told him what
he had offered, in case that letter were produced, Mr Davies distinctly
saw he had been imposed upon, and broke out into a rage against them,
for having told so many falsehoods;[257] adding, that they had promised
him and his men good treatment, but that his men complained of being in
great want of food and clothing, and of general hard usage. They had sat
in judgment upon him and his men, condemning them to remain as prisoners
till they had orders from Holland as to their ultimate destination. He
even said, that he was willing to continue in durance, provided we could
keep them out of Puloroon. The conference being ended, Mr Courthop came
back to Nylacka in the galley, and the pledges were restored.

[Footnote 257: Purchas, in a side note at this place, quaintly converts
the name of the Dutch general into Lawrence _Ly-all_.--E.]

The eastern monsoon being now come, we fitted out a proa to send with
dispatches to Bantam, giving an account of what had passed; and it was
agreed that Mr Hinchley and I were to go, accompanied by four Englishmen
and fourteen natives of Puloroon, of whom five were chiefs, or
_orancays_, one of them being son to the sabander, who is the principal
man of the island. We set sail from Puloroon on the 17th April, 1617,
and when in sight of Bottone on our way for Macassar, we descried a
large ship and a pinnace, which gave us chase under a press of sail, so
that we had no means of escape, except by standing in for Bottone. After
being chased half a day, we got near the town of Bottone by night,
thinking the ships could not have got so far up the river; but seeing
the ship and pinnace almost within musket-shot of us next morning, we
presently landed most of what we had in the proa, taking refuge in the
woods. Having so done, we went immediately to the king, to whom we gave
a present of such things as we had, to the value of about thirty
dollars, desiring his protection, which he promised in the kindest
manner, and faithfully performed. He sent his servants along with us,
to put all our things into a house, giving us also two houses for our
lodging, desiring us to remain within, that we might not be discovered
by our enemies.

Almost immediately afterwards, the Hollanders went to the king, giving
him a present three times the value of ours, and enquired who we were
that had landed. To which the king answered that he knew not who we
were. On being asked by the king how long they meant to stay, the Dutch
said they proposed remaining six days; of which the king sent us notice,
advising us to keep close for that time, that we might proceed in
greater security after they were gone. But at the end of these six days
the Dutch said they would stay six days longer, pretending they had to
repair one of their masts. Seeing their intention, and because our proa
lay in view of the Dutch, we bought another proa, into which the king
made all our things be carried by his slaves, causing them to navigate
that proa past the Hollanders, and to carry her to the back of the
island, whither he sent us over land under the protection of fifty men.
We went immediately aboard, but remained under the island till near
night, when we stood our course for Macassar, and saw no more of the
Hollanders.

We arrived at Macassar on the 7th May, where we found the Attendance
intending for Banda, but was unable to beat up, owing to the change of
the monsoon. Having shipped in the Attendance 180 _suckles_ of mace,
purchased at Macassar, we sent the proa to Banjarmassen and Succadanea
in Borneo, with advice that a supply of goods could not be sent there as
expected, owing to the non-arrival of the Solomon, which had been long
expected at Bantam. The 3d June we arrived at Bantam. As Captain George
Barkley was dead, to whom Mr Ball succeeded as chief of the factory, I
have delivered all the papers to him, and doubt not that your worships
may receive them by the first conveyance. Those are, two surrenders, the
letters from the Hollanders with our answers, and every thing relative
to our proceedings in Banda.

When I left Puloroon, it was agreed that another proa was to be
dispatched for Bantam in twenty days after our departure, lest we might
have been pursued and taken by the Hollanders. Accordingly a proa[258]
was sent, in which was laden 170 suckles of mace, containing 3366
cattees, each cattee being six English pounds and nearly two ounces,
costing at the rate of one dollar the cattee;[259] which, had it gone
safe, might have sold in England for L5000. In this proa there were
eight Englishmen and thirty Bandanese, under the charge of Walter
Stacie, who had been mate under Mr Hinchley in the Defence. His
knowledge and care, however, did not answer expectation, for he ran the
proa on the rocky shoals near the island of Bottone, where she bilged
and lost all the mace, the men getting ashore. Stacie is much blamed by
the rest, some of whom told him they saw land on the lee-bow, but he was
peevish and headstrong, calling them all fools, and would not listen to
them.

[Footnote 258: In a marginal note, this is called a junk.--E.]

[Footnote 259: From the statement in the text, the suckle appears to
have been about 122 English pounds, and the quantity of mace
accordingly, shipped on this occasion, about 185 cwt. or 9 1/4
tons.--E.]

May it please your worships to understand, that the Hollanders replied,
when told that their vile abuses to us would lie heavy on them when
known in Europe, "That they can make as good friends in the court of
England as your worships; that this which they have done will oblige
your worships and them to join, so that a gold chain will recompence
all, and they have dollars enough in Holland to pay for a ship or two,
providing they can hinder us from trading at Banda."

In regard to the trade of the Banda islands, Puloroon is reported to be
the worst island. It is about eight English miles in circuit, and the
small adjoining island of Nylacka is about a mile round. There is a
tolerable quantity of nutmegs and mace grown on Puloroon, and
considerably more might be got there if the island were well cultivated.
Rosengin is a fine island, producing the largest nutmegs and best mace
of all the Banda islands; and, if we hold possession of Puloroon,
abundance of nutmegs and mace could be had from Rosengin, Lantore, and
other places; as the natives would come over to us with their spices,
provided we supply them with rice, cloth, salt, pepper, molasses, and
other necessaries, and some Macassar gold, which passes as current in
Banda as Spanish rials of eight, and at the same rate, though only worth
at Bantam two shillings and fourpence or two and sixpence, for the piece
called mass. Our cargo was small, having only 100 _quoines_ of rice, and
our cloth was much decayed, having lain two or three years at Macassar.
If we had had three times as much, we could have sold it all at
Puloroon for mace and nutmegs, being entreated for cloth and rice by
people from Lantore, Rosengin and other places, but had it not, so that
some returned home again with part of their spices. They came over to
Puloroon in the night with proas and corracorras. The mace and nuts were
very good, but must be injured by lying so long, owing to the
molestations of the Hollanders, while we had no lime for preserving the
nuts. The trade will turn out very profitable, if we may quietly possess
the island of Puloroon; but we must buy rice at a lower rate than in
Macassar, and I understand it can be had in Japan for about half the
price.

In regard to our right to the Banda islands, especially Puloway, Captain
Castleton might have made that secure, as I have often been told; and at
all events, we have a much better right than the Hollanders, who by
force of arms have dispossessed us. Except Puloroon be supplied this
year, and the possession maintained, the English name will be utterly
disgraced, with little chance of our ever being received there again. If
we are able to hold it until your worships have determined what to do in
the matter, we shall soon be able to procure there as much mace and
nutmegs as the Hollanders; and it may also serve as an entrance into the
Moluccas for cloves. The Hollanders pretend an exclusive right to the
Bandas and Moluccas, in consequence of having the son of the king of
Ternate in their hands as a prisoner. But the Bandanese deny that the
king of Ternate has any right of dominion in their islands, every one of
their islands being free, and governed by sabanders and orancays of
their own appointment.

It is indispensible, that supplies of rice and other victuals, and
cloth, should be sent for the English and Bandanese, and to bring away
the nutmegs and mace we have there in godowns or warehouses. The
Hollanders give out that they will take all your ships that go to those
parts, so as to famish both the English and Bandanese; wherefore it
requires earnest and speedy attention, that we may quietly enjoy our
trade to these islands, which have been surrendered to us, and desire
our trade. These are Puloway, Puloroon, Rosengin, and Wayre, which last
is a town in Lantore. Puloway is reported to be a paradise, and the
Hollanders allege that it is as much worth to them as Scotland is to
his majesty. Even should your worships not be able to get Puloway
restored, yet, if you enjoy the other three, we shall be able to procure
enough of nutmegs and mace for the supply of England, and also for the
trade of Surat and other places in India. Now is the time or never,
considering the vile abuses and murders committed upon us by the
Hollanders. At this time, the Charles and the Hope are bound home from
Bantam, and I pray God to send them safe to London. I have sent your
worships a brief abstract of our cargo for Banda, and of the sales made
there. If I seem tedious, I humbly crave pardon; and, with my humble
duty, beseeching the Almighty to prosper and give good success to all
your designs, I humbly take leave,

being your worships most humble servant in all duty,

_Thomas Spurway_.




SECTION X.

FIFTH VOYAGE THE JOINT STOCK BY THE ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY, IN 1617,
UNDER THE COMMAND OF CAPTAIN MARTIN PRING.[260]

INTRODUCTION.


The fleet appointed for this voyage consisted of five ships; the James
Royal of 1000 tons, Rowland Coytmore master; the Ann Royal of 900 tons,
Andrew Shilling master; the Gift of 800 tons, Nathaniel Salmon master;
the Bull of 400 tons, Robert Adams master; and the Bee of 150 tons, John
Hatch master; the whole under the supreme command of Martin Pring,
general, who sailed in the James Royal.--_Purch._

[Footnote 260: Purch. Pilgr. I. 63.]

Sec.1. _Occurrences on the Voyage out, and at Surat, Bantam, and Jacatra_.

On Tuesday the 4th February, 1617, our fleet dropt down from Gravesend.
Thursday the 6th, Mr deputy Maurice Abbot, with several of the
commissioners, came aboard and mustered all our men, paying their
harbour wages. These gentlemen left us next day, when all our men were
entered upon whole pay. After much foul weather, we departed from the
Downs on the 5th March. The 22d of June we Lad sight of Saldanha point,
and anchored that same afternoon in the bay, whence we departed on the
13th July. The moon was totally eclipsed at night of the 6th August; it
began at eight o'clock and continued till past eleven, being totally
eclipsed for an hour and half. On the 25th August at night, between
seven and eight o'clock, being in latitude 4 deg. 20' S. the water of the
sea seemed almost as white as milk, and so continued till morning, when
it began to alter. Next night we found the water similar, but not
altogether so white. Before day on the 30th, the water was again white,
and likewise the next night; but on all these occasions we could find no
ground.

On the night of the 8th September at twelve o'clock, our ship sprung a
leak, which, when discovered, had raised the water in our hold six feet
and a half. In four hours, with both pumps, the ship was freed, but we
afterwards found that the water increased at the rate of a foot in the
half hour. In the morning of the 9th, I summoned the chief commanders of
the fleet on board, desiring them to send their carpenters to assist in
searching for the leak, and some of each of their companies to aid our
men in pumping. Some were set to rummage the hold in search of the leak,
and others to stick our sprit-sail full of oakum, with which we made
several trials under the ship's bilge, but could not find the leak. We
at length found, by divers trials within board, that the leak was before
the main-mast; and we, next morning, fitted the sprit-sail again,
letting it down at the stern, and brought it forwards by degrees, and at
length, by God's blessing, our leak was partly stopped, as the water
only rose about six inches in a glass, which had before risen twelve
inches. Bat within three glasses, the oakum being washed out, the leak
increased as before. This night we got an additional pump from the Bull,
to free the water from the fore part of our ship, where it stood
eighteen inches deeper than in our well. The 11th, we again fitted our
sprit-sail with oakum and let it down again, when it pleased God so to
favour us, that in an hour after our ship was tighter than ever.

On the morning of the 12th we espied a sail, which the Gift came up with
in the afternoon, being a Portuguese ship belonging to Don Pedro de
Almeyda, from Mozambique bound for Diu, laden principally with about
fifty quintals of elephants teeth. In the morning of the 20th the Bee
rejoined us from Swally roads, informing us that the rest of our fleet
was safe in that anchorage. They had brought in with them a junk and two
other ships, which they had chased on the 16th. The junk was a great
ship of Surat, belonging to the mother of the Great Mogul, burden about
1200 or 1400 tons, having in her above 1000 persons, and twenty-nine
tons of silver, though some said a great deal more. The other two were
English interlopers, called the Francis and the Lion: the former of 160
tons, belonging to-----, and commanded by Captain Neuce; and the latter
of 120 tons, fitted out by Philip Bernardy, an Italian merchant in
London, commanded by Thomas Jones, who had formerly been boatswain of
the Hector.

This evening we anchored in the road of Swally, where we found the rest
of our fleet, with the foresaid junk and the two English privateers. On
oar arrival, we heard of two Dutch ships having been cast away at
_Gowdever_;[261] the Rotterdam of 1000 tons, and a small pinnace. The
9th October, I sent up twenty-one chests of coral to Surat, which were
landed two days before from the Ann; and at night I sent up eight tons
and four hundredweight of elephants teeth, taken out of our Portuguese
prize. This afternoon twenty sail of frigates from Goa arrived at the
bar of Surat, commanded by the Captain-major Don Pedro de Asadedo,
[_Asovedo_?] From one of these, five of the country people came ashore
among our men, two of whom were taken by our guard, and confessed they
came from Goa a month before, having orders from the viceroy to range
the coast, to discover the English, when they were to return; but if the
English were not on the coast, they were to proceed for Cambay, to
capture the caffila, or convoy of country vessels.

[Footnote 261: This name is inexplicably corrupt.--E.]

In the morning of the 14th October, seventeen of the frigates departed
for Cambay, passing fairly by us. This day likewise I sent fourteen tons
of elephants teeth to Surat, under a guard of thirty-six men, who
likewise conveyed our treasure to Ahmedabad; and, on the 17th, I sent
other twelve tons four hundredweight of elephants teeth. This day the
Portuguese frigates returned again, and passed in our sight to the
southwards. Next day we sent off all the rest for our ivory; and on the
22d we landed sixteen chests of coral, and two of sea-horse teeth, out
of the Bull.

The 14th November, a month's pay was distributed to all the ships
companies, except the chief commanders and merchants, amounting to 3302
Spanish dollars. After this, the Bee was sent off for Jasques; and we
landed from the other ships cloth, tin, cases of wine and strong waters,
and all the rest of the presents that were in the cabin.

The 17th January, 1618, the Bee returned from Persia. This day seven
Malabar junks were seen in the offing, two of which were brought in by
the Francis, and two by the Bee. We departed from Swally roads on the
12th March, and anchored that same evening near the bar of Surat. The
17th, in the morning, the wind coming about northerly, the Ann departed
for the Red Sea, and on the 18th I dispatched the Bull. At noon of this
day, standing to the southward, we were in lat. 11 deg. 25' N. the wind, as
for four or five days before, being, at night, a slight breath from the
land, and, by day, in the afternoon, a fresh breeze from the sea. In the
forenoon of this day, we saw eight sail to the southward of us, and
three between us and the land, besides two sallies and ten frigates. In
the afternoon of the 28th, the Francis and the Bee being near the shore
abreast of Calicut, the Zamorin sent off a boat desiring to speak with
me, but I was too far shot to the southwards before the message reached
me.

The 2d April we got in the morning into the bay of _Brinjan_, where we
anchored in fourteen fathoms, within half a league of the town, a high
peaked hill, like a sugar-loaf; bearing N.E. by E. by the compass, which
is the best mark to know this place by, when the weather is clear. This
is a good place for refreshments, having hens, cocoa-nuts, and goats in
abundance, and plenty offish, together with excellent water springing
from the rock; but we had to pay seventy dollars, a cloth vest, a
fowling-piece, a mirror, and a sword, for leave to provide ourselves
with water, and all too little to satisfy the governor, who, after
receiving our money and giving us leave, came down with seven or eight
hundred men, demanding more money, and if we had not kept a strong guard
at the spring, would have put us from it after our money was paid. The
5th, the wind being fair off shore, we weighed anchor and departed, and
in the evening were abreast of a headland eight leagues S.E. by E. from
Brinjan, from which to Cape Comorin it is seven leagues E. two-thirds S.
At six in the evening of the 7th, we had Cape Comorin N.N.E. one-third
N. five leagues off, and had soundings in thirty fathoms. And on the
19th June we were in Bantam roads, when Captain Ball and Mr Pickham came
on board.

On the 24th I visited the pangran, to accommodate matters for Captain
Ball, who had arrested a Chinese junk for certain debts they owed our
factory, making offer to restore the junk, if the pangran would give us
justice, which he gave me his word to do. I went to him again on 6th
July, accompanied by Mr Ball, Mr Rich, Mr Pickham, and several other
merchants, when he was so inveterate against Mr Ball, that he refused to
see him. On which I sent him word, that Mr Ball had brought the bills of
our debt due by the Chinese, and was the only person among us who could
explain the transactions between our factory and the Chinese, of which I
was entirely ignorant. The messenger returned, saying that Mr Ball could
not be received, on which we all left the court.

The 1st September, having the wind off the land, we weighed in the
morning, and stood for point Ayre, keeping in seven fathoms till within
three miles of the point, where one cast we had a quarter less seven,
and the next cast only three fathoms. Some supposed we here touched, but
it was not perceived by me. Off this point there is a shoal almost even
with the surface of the water, but having seven fathoms within two
cables length of its edge. This afternoon, while standing towards three
Dutch ships that rode right in the fair-way, and when within a mile of
them, our ship grounded; but, God be praised, we got her off again
without any hurt, and so into the bay, where we again fell in with a
shoal, of which we came within two cables length, which lies one and a
half league from the Flemish islands. We got safely into the road of
Jacatra, [now Batavia road] in the afternoon of the 2d September, having
been providentially delivered from three several dangers the day before,
of which may we be ever thankful.

The 19th, the Angel, a Dutch ship of 500 tons, came in from Amboina,
laden with nutmegs and cloves, and departed again on the 25th. Early in
the morning of the 26th, I went to visit the king, and found him in a
good humour, and conferring with him upon some former business, we came
to a conclusion before I left him, to the following purpose: That he was
to give us a convenient piece of ground for building upon, for which we
were to pay 1500 dollars, and were to be free from all customs on
exports and imports on payment of 800 dollars yearly.

Sec.2. _Dutch Injustice, and Sea-fight between them and Sir Thomas Dale_.

The 27th of September, Mr Bishop arrived from Jappara in the roads in a
proa, in which was a _Cogee_, bringing a letter from the Matron to
Captain Ball, wherefore I sent him away to Bantam that night. He left
two English behind him at Jappara, one of whom had fled from the Dutch.
He likewise brought letters from several of our people who were
prisoners in the Moluccas, and one of these was directed to me, from Mr
Richard Tatten, in which he complained much of the gross usage of the
Dutch, who would hardly allow them a sufficiency of rice to subsist
upon, and who constantly clapped them in irons, on every idle rumour of
the coming of our ships.

On the evening of the 30th October, Cornelius Marthen, who commanded the
French ship taken by the Dutch, came into the roads, and came aboard my
ship that same night. After some discourse, he told me we had six ships
coming from England for these seas, commanded by Sir Thomas Dale, for
some special business at the Moluccas, whither he was bound with the
Stathouder, the Neptune, and this French prize, to wait the coming of
good friends. The 27th, in the evening, we had four feet and a half
water in our hold, which we freed in two hours with both our pumps, and
kept under afterwards with one pump, till next morning about ten
o'clock, when we let down a sail wadded with oakum, which fortunately
stopped our leak. The 31st, I found an excellent place for putting our
ship on the careen, on a small island within Taniam point, in the bay of
Bantam, on which we made all preparations to remove to that place.

The Rose arrived from Tecoo on the 15th of November, bringing news that
the Hollanders had established a Factory there soon after ours was
dissolved. The 19th, the Moon, Clove, Samson, and Peppercorn arrived
from England, and anchored between Vium point and Pulo Paniang.
Perceiving the Clove to be admiral, I went first on board her, taking
such fresh victuals as we could spare. I here found Sir Thomas Dale
admiral, and Mr Jordain president, and learnt that they had lost company
of the Globe to the westward of the Cape, and, what was far worse, they
had left the Sun, the flag ship, in great danger of being cast away on
the isle of Engano, the whole fleet having much difficulty to double
that island. They had afterwards waited two days for the Sun, but she
had been bilged on the rocks, as we afterwards learnt, to our great
regret. In the morning of the 22d, these ships sailed into Bantam roads,
and on passing the island where our ship lay, we saluted them with
fifteen guns we had planted on the shore, and struck my flag in
compliment to Sir Thomas Dale, who was admiral of that fleet.

Two boats arrived on the 28th from Engano, with sixty-eight men
belonging to the Sun, bringing the lamentable news of the loss of that
ship, with many of her company, on, that island. The 29th, the Globe
arrived in the morning, and this day our leak broke out afresh, but was
quickly stopped by removing the bonnet.[262] The 30th, our ship being
entirely cleared from stem to stem, the carpenters went below to search
for the leak; and as they passed forwards, removing the lining as they
went, they found an auger hole left open in the middle of the keel, in
the foremost room save one, which hole was four inches and three
quarters about, and, had it sprung upon us while at sea and alone, would
have tired out our whole company in twenty-four hours. In this the great
mercy of God was manifest, that it never broke out upon us but when we
had a fleet along with us for our aid.

[Footnote 262: Perhaps this means by shifting the wadded sail.--E.]

A fast being proclaimed to be held on board the fleet, and the exercise
to be in the James on Sunday the 3d December, Mr Wren, the chaplain of
the Sun, preached in the morning, and our own minister, Mr Copland, in
the afternoon. This day the Bee sailed for Engano, in hopes to recover
some money and goods belonging to the Swan, from the inhabitants of that
island. The 4th, a Dutch ship, called the Black Lion, arrived from
Patania, and rode to the westward of Pulo Paniang. As Mr Denton was well
acquainted among the Dutch, he was sent aboard in the barge to enquire
whence she came. On coming aboard, he met an old acquaintance, Hendrick
Janson, who had been a long time chief factor for the Dutch in Patania.
He, and another inferior factor, came aboard the Moon along with Mr
Denton, where they were well entertained till Sir Thomas Dale came on
board, and were soon after set ashore at Bantam. That same night we held
a council, when it was determined to proceed before day with four ships,
the Moon, Clove, Globe, and Samson, against the Black Lion, the better
to prevent her escape. At break of day on the 6th, we were close around
her, and after a short parley, they yielded their ship, on condition of
being allowed to land with all their private property; and we brought
her that same day near the island, among the rest of our fleet.

The Bee returned on the 14th, having been forced back by contrary wind,
and unable to get through the straits. On the 16th, twenty Portuguese
came on board the James Royal, who had fled from the Dutch at Jacatra,
and whom we received kindly. This evening we were ready to sail, having
eleven ships, great and small, and being in hopes to drive the Dutch
from Jacatra. Our fleet consisted of the following ships:--The Moon, in
which Sir Thomas Dale sailed as admiral; the Gift, in which I sailed as
vice-admiral; the Unicorn, Clove, Globe, Samson, Pepper-corn, Thomas,
Bee, Rose, and Black Lion. We left behind us the James Royal, the
Advice, and our prize, because the James was not ready, and the other
two had most of her provisions and stores on board.

We sailed in the morning of the 19th, and anchored that evening between
Pulo Paniang and Pulo Tunda. In the evening of the 20th, we anchored
with our whole fleet about a league to the northward of Hector island.
This night we sent a barge to the Flemish islands, where they found no
persons on the southern island: but there lay there a Dutch galley,
which they set on fire, and so returned on board. That same evening we
saw seven Dutch vessels in the bay of Jacatra. Early in the morning of
the 21st, they all stood out towards us till near the islands, when they
anchored all together, and we stood towards them in the afternoon,
coming to anchor about a mile to windward of their fleet. In the
evening, we held a consultation on board the Moon, when it was resolved
to assault the Butch fleet in the following manner:--The Globe and
Samson were appointed to assail the Sun, and the Thomas was to pass in
between them, filled with combustible matter as a fire-ship, to set the
Sun on fire. The Moon and Clove were to attempt the Golden Lion; the
Gift and Bee were to assail the Angel; the Unicorn and Rose were to
attack the Devil of Delft; and the Pepper-corn was ordered to surprise
the burger-boat come from Jambee, which rode about three leagues from
the rest, and whose boat, with thirteen men, had been intercepted by our
barge, while making for the Dutch fleet, about seven this evening. This
arrangement being written down, we departed, every man to his own
particular charge.

After we were gone, the admiral, Sir Thomas Dale, sent his boat to the
Thomas for three _sackers_, which kept them at work till next morning at
eight o'clock, so that the Hollanders were all away before these guns
were got on board the Moon. We were then all in a Burly-burly to weigh
and get out to sea, that we might have sea-room, and the advantage of
the turn of the tide, which we at length attained, getting without the
isles of Point Aire. In the mean time, the Dutch fleet passing between
these isles and the main of Java, anchored that night on the coast of
Java, and our fleet in the offing, without the islands. On the 23d, in
the morning, the Dutch fleet stood off to the westwards, close under
_Anti-Lackie_, in which course the Devil of Delft borrowed so near, that
she got aground, and remained fast for a quarter of an hour. On seeing
this, we made towards them, but she was got off before we could get any
thing near, when she and all the rest of their fleet stood to the
northwards. As our fleet had the weather-gage, we _paid room upon
them_[263] till we came within shot, and then the Moon, commanded by our
admiral, Sir Thomas Dale, began the fight with the headmost ship of the
enemy, called the San. The battle continued for the space of three
hours, during which time we spent upon them some 1200 cannon-shot, when
we left them for the night, they standing so for to the northwards, that
they got the _burger-boat_ again into their company, and then anchored
about half a league from us to the westwards, where they remained all
night.

[Footnote 263: This antiquated expression evidently means bearing down
upon them to leewards.--E.]

Both fleets weighed anchor on the 24th, ours plying to the westwards to
gain the wind, and the Hollanders ran in shore towards Point Aire. In
the mean time, we descried three sail coming before the wind from the
westwards, which at length we perceived to be the Little James, the
Hound, and the Francis. By and bye we joined altogether, and chased the
Dutch fleet through the bay of Jacatra, to its eastern point, where we
all came to anchor for the night. During the night, the Dutch from
Jacatra sent a junk filled with combustible matter, and on fire, which
came so near our fleet that we were fain to weigh our anchors and get
out of her way. The 25th, being Christmas-day, we again saw the Dutch
fleet standing to the eastwards, and we sent our barge to follow them
all night, to see what course they took, because we had left the James
Royal in the bay of Bantam, with the Advice and our prize, which they
might have surprised, if they got to Bantam before us, as there was no
ship of force but the James, and she was unprepared, being busied in
taking in her goods and stores, after being emptied to find her leak.

The 27th of December, after midnight, the Black Lion, our Dutch prize,
was set on fire by the carelessness of three wicked fellows, and burnt
to the water's edge. The president went ashore on the morning of the
30th, to wait upon the king of Jacatra, accompanied by Mr Henry Jackson,
when an unfortunate shot carried away his leg, of which wound he
died.[264]

[Footnote 264: It appears in the sequel that it was Jackson who lost his
leg and life though the text leaves it dubious whether he or the
president.--E.]

The 1st of January, 1619, the James Royal, the Advice, and the prize,
joined us from Bantam. The 2d, Sir Thomas Dale went ashore to Jacatra to
visit the king, and to learn what were his intentions respecting the
Dutch fort. The king gave to both him and the president much
satisfaction, in words at least, promising to grant the English any
reasonable conditions, if they would assist him to surprise the Dutch
castle. This morning, before day, the Francis departed for Puloroon,
with provisions for the relief of Mr Nathaniel Courthop and his
companions. The 6th we held a council of war aboard the Moon, when it
was determined that we should land from our greater ships six pieces of
large cannon, three culverines, and three demi-culverines, with a
proportional store of powder and shot, to assist the king of Jacatra
against the Dutch; that Sir Thomas Dale was to remain in that road with
eight sail, to cover this business, while five ships, under my command,
were to ply up for the straits of Sunda, to lie in wait for the Dutch
ships.

The 25th, we got into the road of Becee, and anchored in fifteen
fathoms, about two miles from the shore; the S. point of Becee bearing
S.W. 1/4 W. and the N. point _Sabaicas_, which shut in the western isle
of Pirio Tigs, bearing N. by W. three leagues off. We watered our ships
on the 27th and 28th, and cut wood. I and Mr Coytmore, with several
other masters, went twice ashore to view the harbour, which we found to
be an excellent place of refuge for a small fleet against a superior
enemy. The 31st, by order of the president, we repaired with our fleet
into Bantam roads.

The 1st February, Captain John Jourdan the president came on board, who
acquainted me with all that had taken place between them and the Dutch,
in regard to the castle of Jacatra, during my absence, the Dutch having
agreed to deliver up that fort to the English, on condition of being
allowed to depart with bag and baggage, and a ship, _for two thousand
rials of eight_, to carry them to the coast of Coromandel.[265] Sir
Thomas Dale arrived in Bantam roads on the 4th, with the Moon, Clove,
James, Pepper-corn, Hound, and Advice. As the pangran of Bantam had
practised underhandedly with the Dutch to have the castle of Jacatra
delivered into his hands, by which we had been unjustly deprived of that
acquisition, we agreed, in a general consultation, that the president,
and all the rest of the principal persons of our factory at Bantam,
should repair on board, and get all our goods and provisions put aboard
the ships. Accordingly, we were occupied from the 10th to 16th, both
inclusive, in getting all the money and goods belonging to the
honourable Company on board. During this time, the pangran sent several
obscure persons to the president, as of their own accord, to enquire the
reason of his departure, pretending that the pangran had given no just
cause for leaving the country. Upon this the president drew up a
memorial, enumerating the several grievances and wrongs which the
English had suffered from him, meaning to have it translated into the
Javan language, and then to be transmitted to the pangran.

[Footnote 265: This agreement was crossed by the Pangran of Bantam, who
gave us leave to beat the bush, and thought to have caught the birds
himself, but was deceived in the end.--_Purch._]

The 17th, advice was received from Mr Ufflet, at Jacatra, that the Dutch
were daily occupied in repairing and strengthening their fortifications;
and that, when the messengers of the pangran demanded the surrender of
their fort, with part of their money, goods, and ordnance, they gave for
answer, That all these things were the property of their masters, which
therefore they could not give away. We this day received news of two
Dutch ships in the road of Jacatra, and that same night Sir Thomas Dale
set sail with eight ships in quest of them, while I remained with four
to attend upon the president. The 26th, having certain intelligence that
four Holland ships were at anchor in the mouth of the Straits of Sunda,
I went out that same evening to look for them, with the James, Gift,
Unicorn, and the Little James. Next morning we anchored near Pulo
Paniang, to take in water, and to put our ships into order, by taking
aboard some planks that were alongside.

We weighed again in the morning of the 1st March, making sail towards
the mouth of the Straits, where we observed the two Dutch ships at
anchor near the island of Tamporan, about three leagues to the westwards
of Viun, or Palambangan point. We immediately made all sail towards
them, while they, as in a careless manner, plied to and fro, having
their topsails half mast down. At length, as we drew nigh, the Dutch
admiral and all the rest of his ships bore up with my ship, which was
most to windward, and gave us two shots, one of which went through the
ship's side under the half-deck, and the other through the steerage.
They had no sooner begun than they were as quickly answered from my
ship, and in such measure, that, in the space of two hours, they became
as quiet as lambs; their admiral, who gave the onset with so much
arrogance, being the first to run away, followed by all the rest. We
chased them till night, and then finding them too swift of foot, we gave
over the chase, standing over towards Pulo Tunda. We came to anchor
again on the 2d of March in the road of Bantam, on which day we had
intelligence that one of the two ships lately come to Jacatra had got
aground near the castle, and had been set on fire by themselves on
seeing Sir Thomas Dale. The other ship, which had taken in a valuable
loading from the castle, was also cast away on some rocks, ten leagues
east of Jacatra.

On the 4th, we had a letter from John Powell, residing at Jacatra,
stating that Sir Thomas Dale had sailed on the 1st, with the Moon,
Hound, Rose, and Bee, in search of the stranded Dutch ship. The 14th we
heard from Sir Thomas that he had got almost within shot of the four
Dutch ships we met with, but had been taken by a dead calm for twelve
hours, succeeded in the night by a tempest, which scattered them so far
asunder by next morning, that they lost all hopes of the chase, and had
therefore returned to Point Ayre, whence he proposed bringing the Moon
immediately to Bantam, leaving the rest of his ships to take in
provisions at Jacatra. In a consultation as to the best course to be
taken with the fleet, it was resolved to go to the coast of Coromandel,
which we were informed was a good country for recovering the health of
our men, and abounding in rice, wheat, butter, and other, provisions,
which could not be procured here for any money.


Sec.3. _Departure for Coromandel, with Occurrences there, and the Death of
Sir Thomas Dale,--Capture of English Ships by the Dutch; and Occurrences
at Tecoo_.

On Monday the 19th of April, 1619, all our ships being together in
Bantam roads, with three Chinese junks riding among us, it was resolved
in council to execute the commission given us by the Honourable Company,
by appropriating to them the goods in these junks, in payment of former
debts due by the Chinese. Next day _Kewee_ came aboard to the president,
accompanied by the three _nockhadas_, or captains of the junks, to know
his intentions. He gave him the following answer:--If the young king of
Bantam would displace the pangran, who had treated us with so much
injustice, he would then return on shore and _bichar_[266] with him, and
restore the junks. The 28th, being ready to sail, intending to go for
Morrogh to take in water and unload the junks, we descried a sail coming
from the westwards round Palinbangan point, which turned out to be a
Portuguese frigate, captured at Jasques, manned by twenty Englishmen,
and sent by Captain Bonnar with advice to the president at Bantam. We
learnt from these men that Sir Thomas Roe, the lord ambassador to the
Mogul, was gone for England in the Ann Royal, having left the country
with great honour and reputation to himself, and much advantage of the
Honourable Company. Bodman, who was the cause of setting the Black Lion
on fire, was hanged on the 22d of May, and that same night we set sail.

[Footnote 266: This unexplained term probably means to make peace.--E.]

The 30th May, Sir Thomas Roe stood in with his fleet under the island,
while we held on our course for Masulipatam, having the Unicorn, Gift,
and Bee in our company. The 30th June we anchored in nine fathoms, about
two leagues from the coast of Coromandel, where we rode four days,
being hardly able to visit each other in all that time, owing to W.S.W.
winds, and a continual current setting to E.N.E. The surf also broke so
lofty on the beach, that we durst not attempt landing with any of our
boats. We were at length able to communicate together, when Mr Roberts,
the master of the Unicorn, gave us notice of a bay on this coast in the
latitude of 17 deg. N. about five leagues to the eastwards of Nassapore,
[Narsipore] where there was good riding during the westerly monsoon.
This was exactly what I wanted, having no hope to recover Masulipatam
against wind and current. We accordingly set sail on the 4th, in the
morning, and stood to the eastwards, the coast trending W.S.W. and
E.N.E. And having run about nine leagues by estimation, with the wind
and current, we found the land to turn away N. and N. by W.[267] giving
me hopes of a good road. At this point of land there cometh put a great
river,[268] by the stream of which there has been raised a reef or
shoal, extending half a mile into the sea from the point, and
occasioning a smoother road. Bringing that sand to bear S.S.W. there is
good and safe anchorage in six and a half fathoms, two miles from the
land. Two leagues north from this point, which, for distinction, I name
Cape Comfort, there issues forth another branch of the same river, by
which the headland is made an island, and off the mouth of this river
there is likewise a long spit of sand, which is dry at low water.

[Footnote 267: Obviously rounding Cape Godawery, in lat. 16 deg. 83' N.]

[Footnote 268: One of the two main branches forming the Delta of the
Godawery.--E.]

The 4th of July I sent the boat belonging to the Unicorn into the second
branch of the river, which we called Mullet Sound, to see if they could
discover any town where a guide might be procured, to conduct Robert
Pickering and William Clarke to Masulipatam, by whom we proposed sending
a letter to Mr Methwould. Our boat returned on the morning of the 6th,
reporting that a guide had been procured at a little village three
leagues up the river. They likewise brought aboard twenty hens, which
they had bought for two shillings. The 8th, the barge returned from
Captain Ball with seventy-one sheep and goats, and thirty-nine hens,
having left Captain Ball and others at a town called _Narsapela_, six
leagues up in the country. The 12th, Mr Methwould came from Masulipatam
in one of the country boats, and brought with him twenty hogs, two large
jars of arrack, six goats, and two baskets of bread. He also brought us
news of a Dutch ship richly laden, then in the port of Masulipatam, and
ready to depart for Holland.

In the evening of the 26th, I went in the barge to seek out some bar or
creek by which we might reach Coringa, the principal town in these parts
near the sea side. That same night, I got over the bar of Coringa, which
place I came to about two miles up the river, and was well received by
the principal persons of the place, who were very ready to trade with
us, and sent notice that same night of my arrival to the governor of
Vingeron. Next morning, having rowed about three miles up the main
river, and two miles up a little creek, we had sight of Vingeron, about
twelve miles off.[269] I now landed, and walked towards Vingeron; but,
before I reached it, the governor sent his horse for me, with all the
music the place afforded; and among these instruments there were two
great brass horns instead of trumpets. The governor received me very
kindly, but more kindly my present, which consisted of two pieces of
China velvet, and six pieces of China taffeta. Our compliments ended. I
took leave of him, when he caused me to be conveyed in his own palanquin
to a house near at hand, which he had appointed for my lodging.

[Footnote 269: The town of Rajahmundry exactly answers to these
circumstances, in reference to Coringa, and is in fact the head town of
the province in which Coringa is situated.--E.]

I returned on board the James on the 1st of August, when I learnt, to my
sorrow, that the shallop belonging to the Unicorn had been cast away
three days before, near Ponara, on which occasion Mr Harris was drowned,
together with two of the coxwain's crew, and a black; Captain Spaulding,
Mr Yard, and others, escaping with much difficulty. In the morning of
the 2d, the governor of Vingeron came aboard to see our ship, expecting
some great present; on which occasion I gave him a piece of China
damask, and four pieces of taffeta, which gave him more delight than the
sight of a thousand ships, and he departed when he found he got nothing
more by begging. The 23d I caused all the men to come on board,
intending to proceed for Masulipatam, and this evening we got on board
150 goats, to serve us for fresh provisions at sea. The 24th there
arrived a ballegat from Narsepore, bringing twenty-six candees of
garavances, a candee of butter, and an hundred gallons of arrack.[270] I
also, had letters from Masulipatam, announcing the melancholy news that
Sir Thomas Dale had died at that place on the 9th of August.

[Footnote 270: Though not so expressed, these seem to have been intended
for the use of the English ships.--E.]

In the morning of the 6th September, having rode most part of the
preceding night in nineteen fathoms, about three leagues S.S.E. from the
bar of Narispore, and having the wind at N.W. we again set sail toward
Masulipatam,[271] and anchored at night four leagues to the eastward of
that place. Off the river of Narsipore we found the current to set by
day to the S.S.E. and N.N.E. in the night, at the rate of half a league
an hour. In the morning of the 7th we could see the English ships in the
road of Masulipatam, in which road we came to anchor in the evening,
finding here the Moon, Clove, Globe, and Advice, which last being found
unserviceable, was here cast off, and her stores and provisions put on
board the Moon and Clove. Next day, Mr Spaulding, Mr Ball, and Mr
Methwould came aboard the James, giving me a report of all matters that
had passed in my absence, as also a state of the Company's business. I
accompanied them ashore in the afternoon, that we might the better
consult together how to proceed in the important concerns committed to
our charge. The first thing proposed was the union of both fleets, which
was thought adviseable, and I was made choice of as admiral and chief
commander of the whole ships and men thus united, according to the
direction of the Honourable Company.

[Footnote 271: The true name of this place is Mutchelipatnam; in Purchas
it is called Messulapitan and Masulpatam.--E.]

The 18th of October, a ship belonging to Masulipatam arrived from Mokha,
by which we had news of the Lion being at Mokha, having a small frigate
or bark in her company. The same day the Bee arrived from
Narsipore-pete, with provisions for the fleet. The 19th, the Dragon's
Claw came from Narsipore-pete[272] almost laden with rice and
paddy.[273] On Thursday the 9th December, Mr Ball, Mr Methwould, and the
other merchants who were to remain in the country, went ashore in the
afternoon. In the morning of Friday the 10th, we left the road of
Masulipatam, and anchored in the afternoon off the headland, to wait for
the Pepper-corn, which came to us in the evening. By my estimation, the
difference of longitude between the island of Engano and Masulipatam is
19 deg. 30' of a great circle; and, although this does not give the true
longitude in these parts near the equator, as custom has so called it, I
do, that I may not savour of innovation.

[Footnote 272: This may designate the road of Narsipore; but petah
usually signifies in India the suburb or town connected with a
fortress.--E.]

[Footnote 273: Paddy is rice in its natural state as it comes from the
plant on which it grows; rice is paddy deprived by art of its coarse
husk.--E.]

Next morning, very early, we descried the land of Sumatra, the hill of
Passaman bearing E.N.E 1/2 N. twelve leagues distant,[274] and the high
land of Priaman E. 1/2 S. fourteen leagues off. We here met with two
shoals, within a mile of each other, E. and W. The Gift came over the
eastermost, and had not less than four and a half fathoms. I sent the
Claw over the other, on which were four fathoms where she first crossed,
but only two fathoms in returning, a little more to the northward. About
nine this morning the wind came to the S.E. and so continued till three
in the afternoon, by which time we had got to the southward of all the
shoals; and so, with little wind, we spent the night between these
shoals and the island of Battoo, [Batoa.] In this situation, a sagging
current bore us to the northwards near the shoals, which, if it had set
S.E. as formerly experienced, it ought to have carried us near to Tecoo.

[Footnote 274: Purchas must here have omitted a part of the text,
particularly the series of dates between Masulipatam and Passaman in
Sumatra. As the text now stands, it would seem as if they had gone from
Masulipatam to the coast of Sumatra, a run of about 1600 miles, in one
night, an utter impossibility. But from the context, instead of the 11th
December, 1619, the day after leaving Masulipatam, it would appear they
reached the coast of Sumatra on the 23d January, 1620, giving forty-four
days for the run across the bay of Bengal.--E.]

The 24th, in the evening, we had sight of the isles of Tecoo, and came
to anchor about eight o'clock, in forty-four fathoms, these isles
bearing E. by N. seven leagues off. The 25th, with the first of the
tide, we again weighed and steered for Tecoo; and, as we drew near, we
espied three sail standing to the northwards, which came to anchor near
the coast that night, while we anchored with our whole fleet about a
league without them. Next morning they weighed anchor and joined us,
when we found them to be the Palsgrave, Elizabeth, and Hope. From them
we had the doleful news of the Dragon, Bear, Expedition, and Rose,
having been taken by six Dutch ships, while at anchor, within the isles
of Tecoo; as also that the Star had been taken by the Dutch in the
straits of Sunda. They also said that the Hollanders had sent four great
ships, doubly manned, in quest of the Samson and Hound, and that they
were exceedingly doubtful as to the safety of these ships. Thus the
English ships now taken by the Hollanders were almost equal in number to
our three fleets now joined in one under my command.

On Monday the 31st January, 1620, we held a consultation aboard the
James Royal as to our future proceedings, when it was unanimously agreed
to go to Acheen, in hopes to meet our ships from Surat, that we might
keep our force together, according to the instructions of the Honourable
Company. Our chief reasons for this proceeding were the want of rice and
other provisions, which could not at this time be had at Bantam;
secondly, the strong naval force of the Hollanders, as we did not think
it prudent to risk the entire property now belonging to the Company in
India upon such desperate terms, as the Dutch had four ships for every
one of ours; and, lastly, which was an imperious necessity, that we
might careen three of our ships, the James, the Gift, and the Unicorn,
which could not be much longer deferred without imminent hazard. For all
these reasons, we resolved to proceed for Japan, where, as we were given
to understand, all things necessary for careening our ships, and
abundance of provisions for our relief, were to be had.

The 11th, Mr Mills arrived in the Bee from Priaman, with 300 sacks of
very good rice, and eleven hogsheads of oil, giving us great
encouragement to send there again. The 12th, the Claw was sent off for
Pedang and Cuttatinga, to procure rice and other provisions; and, on the
15th, the Bee was sent back to Priaman for more rice and oil. The 19th
the Claw returned with thirty-four bags of rice, 16,000 cocoa-nuts, and
ten goats; and the same night the Bee came back with 980 sacks of rice,
procured with much difficulty by Mr Mills, merchant of the Elizabeth.

The 3d March we departed from the road of Tecoo, intending first to
touch at _Mintaon_, on purpose to dispatch the Bee for England, and
thence to go for Acheen, in hopes of meeting the Charles and the Ruby
from Surat. The 30th March we all anchored in the bay of Samanca, about
a mile from shore, where we took in wood, water, and other necessaries.
Next day we sent to recall the Bee from Balembeen. The 1st April we sent
the shallop belonging to the Unicorn for Anniar, to enquire concerning
the Dutch force, and how the pangran stood affected towards us.[275] At
eleven this night, twenty-two of our men ran away with our barge. Next
morning the shallop returned from Anniar, and brought news that there
were fifteen sail of Dutch ships at Bantam and Jacatra, upon which we
resolved to proceed to Bantam, to treat with the pangram, hoping that
the Dutch _might not venture to attack us_. The Bee arrived in the
afternoon from Ballambeen, [Palimbangan.] The 6th we set sail for
Bantam, and on the 7th, between Crackastaw and Becee, we met a proa with
some of our people coming from Anniar.

[Footnote 275: The intended voyage to Acheen seems to hate been laid
aside; perhaps the monsoon had become adverse, and forced them to the
S.E. towards Bantam.--E.]


Sec.4. _News of Peace between the English and Dutch_.

At four in the morning of Saturday the 8th April, 1620, we met the Bull,
newly come from England, bringing the joyful news of peace having been
concluded between us and the Dutch. She was accompanied by a small ship,
called the Flying Hart, with letters of advice for us, or any other of
the English ships, giving notice of the agreement and union that had
taken place between the two Honourable East India Companies of England
and Holland. We came to anchor with all our fleet in the afternoon, near
the point of Palimbangan. In the morning of the 11th, we descried the
Dutch fleet coming from Jacatra to meet us, and to congratulate with us
on the joyful intelligence of peace. General Coen was there in person,
and as soon as he came to anchor, the Holland fleet and ours began to
salute each other with peals of ordnance, to communicate the
intelligence to the natives, and to express our own joy of the happy
news of peace.

The 12th, we came altogether into Bantam roads, the Dutch fleet
consisting of fifteen sail, besides two others of their nation which we
found already in the roads, and ours of twelve sail. This day, Mr
Janson, commander of the Dutch fleet, accompanied by their fiscal, and
divers others, came to visit me, and invited Mr Brockendon, Mr Spalding,
and myself on board the Dutch admiral's ship, where we conferred with
General Coen concerning our future conjunct arrangements. After we had
compared the articles and letters, the Dutch general agreed that we
should jointly proceed in conformity with the instructions we had
received from our Honourable Company; but he declined publishing the
articles till the arrival of some ship from Holland, with the articles
and instructions from their Company. On the 14th, in the morning, by
mutual concert between us and the Hollanders, we sent Mr Beaumont and
Philip Baduge on, shore, with one Dutch merchant, to communicate the
news of our peace and agreement to the pangran, and to inform him, as we
were now united, we only desired to have a reasonable composition with
him, through which we might remain quietly in his country, enjoying a
free trade on just and equitable conditions, as in other parts of India.
But the pangran was so much dissatisfied with the news, that he would
give no answer to their message, often times asking them why we had
become friends with the Hollanders, so that they had to return without
any answer. We sent the same message to him next day, but our messengers
were not allowed to land.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The differences and maritime warfare which took place between the Dutch
and English East India Companies, of which some notice has been taken;
and the peace and union which are announced, as having been communicated
to their respective commanders at this time, would lead to historical
discussions and deductions, which do not properly belong to the object
of a Collection of Voyages and Travels; but which, if altogether passed
over, would leave much of the foregoing circumstances, and some that
have to be noticed in the sequel, abrupt, isolated, and almost
unintelligible. It has therefore been deemed proper to give a brief
account of these differences, and of the singular so called _union_,
which took place in consequence, extracted from the Annals of the East
India Company, vol. I. p. 201, _et seq._[276]

[Footnote 276: This addition to Sec.4. of the present voyage, is made by
the Editor; but almost entirely derived from the historiographer of the
East India Company.--E.]

"When the differences and aggressions which had occurred in the spice
islands were reported in Europe, the English and Dutch Companies
presented memorials and remonstrances to their respective governments,
each complaining against the servants of the other, as guilty of
unwarrantable aggressions. In Holland, calculating on the pacific
character of King James, it was expected that the opposition to the
projects of the English for participating in the trade of the spice
islands, although of at least a tendency towards warlike aggression,
would not lead to national hostilities, but might be discussed by means
of remonstrances and negociation.

"After long conferences between English and Dutch commissioners, for
settling the disputes between the two Companies, a treaty was concluded
at London on the 17th July, 1619; by which, after specifying an amnesty
for all past excesses, and a mutual restitution of ships and property,
the trade of the two nations in the East was declared to be free;--That
the pepper trade at Java should be equally divided;--That the English
should have a free trade at Pullicat, on paying half the expences of the
garrison;--That the English were to enjoy one third of the export and
import trade, at the Molucca and Banda islands, commonly called the
spice islands; commissioners to be appointed for regulating the trade,
and the charges of the garrisons, under their inspection, to be defrayed
in that proportion by the two Companies;--That each Company should
furnish ten ships of war for the common defence; which ships were not to
be employed to bring cargoes to Europe, but only in the carrying trade,
between one port and another in the East Indies.--The whole proceedings
arising out of this treaty, were to be under the regulation of a
_Council of Defence_, composed of four members appointed by each
Company, who were to reside in India; and this treaty was to subsist in
force for twenty years.

"It would lead far beyond any due bounds that could be afforded in this
work, to follow out this compact, singularly weak on the part of King
James, and assuredly either contrived by his boasted _king craft_, or
devised by some wily Dutch politician, who was acquainted with his
majesty's wonderful sagacity. This union and the council of defence,
turned out a most fruitful source of advantage to the Dutch, who had
completely duped the king and government of England, and totally
expelled the English Company from any share whatever in the trade of the
spice islands; after contriving to make them pay more than two thirds of
the expence of fortifications and garrisons, instead of one third, all
of which were effectually converted to their injury and exclusion. In
the sequel of these voyages, several instances will be found, completely
illustrative of these positions; and from the year 1625, or thereabout,
the Dutch enjoyed the entire profits of the spice trade, including the
whole island of Java, till within these very few years; when, as
subjects of Buonaparte, they have been driven from every foreign
possession, and entirely excluded from all participation in the trade of
the East."--E.

Sec.5. _Voyage of Captain Pring from Bantam, to Patania and Japan, and
return to Jacatra_.[277]

The 26th of April, 1620, we sailed from Bantam roads, with the James
Royal and Unicorn in company, intending, by the grace of God, to go for
Japan, there to careen and trim our ships. Mr Brockendon departed at the
same time for Jacatra with six ships; proposing, about a month after our
departure, to send five good English ships after us to Japan, that we
might have the fittest season of the year to go from thence to the
Manillas. The 27th, we took leave of this fleet, and steered towards the
north, borrowing within half a league of the eastern point of
Pulo-Tunda; and came to anchor in the evening about a league off the
N.E. point of that island, in twenty-three fathoms upon ooze, waiting
till the western stream of the tide began to return to the eastwards
which was about ten at night, when we proceeded on our course.

[Footnote 277: Purchas gives two relations of this voyage, one brief,
"lest the longer one might interrupt the more delicate muses of some
readers with sea-sickness, the other for those that are more studious of
nautical knowledge." On the present occasion, we have preferred the more
extended narrative, and have therefore united both accounts as given by
Purchas, being the remainder of Sec.4. joined to the whole of Sec.5. giving
one instance of minute nautical remarks of our earlier navigators.--E.]

The 28th at night, we anchored in 18 f. on ooze, Pulo Antekero bearing
N.E. three leagues off. Pulo Antekero bears N.N.E. 1/2 E. from Pulo
Tunda, about eight leagues distant. The depth of water between the two
islands, runs-from 16 f. to 26, and so to 22, 20, 18, 16, 14, and 12 f.
all ooze. Pulo Antekero is westernmost of the islands which extend in a
row from the bay of Jacatra, [or Batavia,] to the westward. Continuing
our course, we anchored, in the evening of the 29th, in 15 f, Pulo Kero
bearing N. by E. 1/2 E. 2-1/2 leagues off. Pulo Kero bears N.N.E. nearly
from Antekero, six leagues off. After passing halfway between these
islands we had 20, 18, 16, 14, 12 f. on ooze. At noon on the 30th we
had Pulo Kero six leagues off, S. 1/2 E. our depth continuing 13,12,11
f. all ooze.

At noon on the 1st May, Pulo Kero bore S. 1/2 W nine leagues, and the
depth 12 f. being just able to see that island from our top-mast head.
By observation of the sun, we were then in lat. 4 deg. 45' S. From noon till
five p.m. our course was N.N.E. four leagues. We then anchored in 11 f.
on ooze, having Pulo Kero by estimation thirteen league S by W. This
night at nine, being still at anchor in the same place, I made the ship,
by observation of the Crozies, in lat. 4 deg. 40' S. allowing 29 deg. for the
complement of declination. We set sail at four a.m. of the 2d, and by
noon had run about six leagues N.N.E. the depths continuing as before,
13, 12, 11 f. By noon of the 3d our course was S. by E. five leagues,
the soundings as before, all the ground from Bantam roads hitherto being
ooze. From Bantam for the first two days, we had land and sea breezes;
afterwards, till the afternoon of the 2d, the wind was constant between
E. and S.E. when the wind came northerly, and so continued till the 3d
at noon. From Pulo Paniang to Pulo Antekero, the current set to the
westwards, somewhat strong; but from thence we found the currents more
gentle, and changing into every direction in the course of the
twenty-four hours.

Our course from noon of the 3d till noon of the 4th was N.N.E. eleven
leagues, the depths from 12 to 10-1/2 f. From noon this day till seven
at night, we made 5-1/2 leagues N. and then anchored in 9-1/2 f. We
weighed in the morning of the 5th. having but little wind and that
variable, till half an hour after six, when it sprung up fresh at S.W.
From four to nine a.m. we made three leagues N.E. 1/2 E. and from nine
till noon only half a league N.W. by N. This day at noon we were in lat.
3 deg. 30' S. when we descried a small island N.N.E. 1/2 E. four leagues
off, which appeared at first like a great tree rising out of the see.
From noon till six p.m. our course was five leagues N.W. We here saw two
or three hummocks like islands, N. by W. seven leagues off. From thence
till three a.m. of the 6th, we sailed W. six leagues. At six in the
evening of the 5th we had 9 f. which increased as we stood westwards in
the night, to 10, 11, and l2 f. and afterwards decreased to 8 f. where
we came to anchor. The stream by night set S.E. and by day N.W. We
weighed again at six a.m. of the 6th, and steered W.N.W. 1-1/2 league,
when we had sight of many hummocks rising like so many islands, but
which at length we perceived to be all one land. Coming now into 6-1/2
f. we altered our course to the N.E. making our course N.N.E. till noon,
about 2-1/2 leagues; at which time, by an observation of the sun, we
were in lat. 3 deg. 20' S. We were now in 8 f. and found the current to set
N.W. by W. About noon of this day, a junk belonging to Johor came up
with us, which had been at Cheribon in Java, and was returning to Johor.
The afternoon, we steered in with the eastern part of the hummocky land
of Banka, making our course N.N.E. 1/2 N. in which we came again to 8 f.
afterwards increasing regularly to 24 f. and then decreasing again to a
quarter less 7 f. when we came to anchor against the E. point of that
land, which bore from us N.N.E. 1/3 N. four leagues off.

We weighed in the morning of the 7th, and stood in nearer the point, in
hopes of being able to pass through between that island and one which
lay three leagues to the E. But in our way, we found the soundings,
after increasing from 7 to 17 f. to decrease again to 6 and to one-half
less 4 f. and about two miles off the point in the fair way we had only
six feet water in the fair way, or mid-channel. To the eastwards, there
appeared many islands, and by the report of the people in the junk, the
sea is full of islands between the S.E. end of Banka and the island of
Borneo. The S.E. end of Banka now bore N.N.E. 1/2 N. about two leagues
off; and the land from this point to the entrance of the straits of
Banka, lay W. by S. the straits being thirteen leagues from us. Where we
lay at anchor, the before-mentioned point bearing N. by E. 1/2 E. 2-1/2
leagues off, we had an observation of the sun, giving the latitude of
the ship 3 deg. 8' S. Having little hope of finding a passage between Banka
and Borneo among these islands, by reason of the fearful shoalings we
had already met with, we resolved on the 8th to go through the straits
between the island of Banka and Sumatra, called the Straits of Banka;
wherefore we set sail, retracing as nearly as we could the course by
which we came into the present shoal water; in which course we found
still more dangerous shoalings than in our in-coming. After we had got
about eight leagues off, S.S.W. from the before-mentioned point of
Banka, we steered S.W. by W. the current setting N.W. which made our
course nearest W. by S. In this course we proceeded five leagues, and
anchored in 8 f. on ooze, about nine at night.

In the morning of the 9th, we descried Lucepara, N.N.W. seven leagues
off, and steered towards it, till we had it N. two leagues. In this
course we passed over a spit, where we had only 4-1/2 f. and 4-3/4. But
on nearing Lucepara, we had 5-1/4 f. all ooze. We then steered N.W. by
N. till Lucepara was N.E. of us, having 5 f. and the same ground. We
then, went W.N.W. having always ooze, till we were within two leagues of
the Sumatra shore in 6 f. The isle of Lucepara bore then E.S.E. 3-1/2
leagues off; and a hill on Banka with a deep swamp, N. by W. being about
a sail's breadth open of the point of Sumatra, which bore N. by W. 1/2
W. from us, about three leagues off. We steered thence away with the
said point N. by W. Having 6-1/2 and 7 f. soft ground, till we came
within a league of the point, where edging too near we had but 5-1/2,
and only 4-1/2 in the boat hard by us: But, if we had kept a little
farther from the point, we might have gone in 7, 8, 9, and 10 f. all
through the strait, borrowing carefully with the lead upon the Sumatra
shore; whereas by keeping nearer to Banka than Sumatra, the soundings
are very variable, sometimes deep, and sometimes shallow, and mostly
foul ground. On the Sumatra shore, even if coming into shoal water, the
ground is mostly soft ooze, and the soundings far more regular and
certain.

In the evening of the 12th May, having brought the N.W. point of Banka
to bear N.E. we opened two smooth hills with a little hummock between
them; one of these hills being the northermost land of Banka, and
bearing N.E. nine leagues, from the N.W. point of that island. This
night we steered N.N.E. to get through the channel between Lingan and
the N. end of Banka, having 23, 22, 20, 18, and 16 f. all ooze, till we
came near the entrance, and afterwards 15, 14, 13 f. in going through
the passage. Lingan rises at first in three islands, the northermost
being larger than both the other two, being near two leagues long and
full of hummocks. Among these three islands there are certain fragments
of isles intermixed, like so many hay-cocks, which is a good mark
whereby to know these islands. From the smooth hill which is the north
end of Banka, to the south-westermost isle of Lingan, it is N. by W. ten
leagues. From the middle of the largest isle of Lingan, which is the
north-eastermost, there is another smooth island nine leagues off,
E.N.E. 1/2 N. From that there is another flat island, and off the north
point of the round smooth island, there is a little fragment like a
rock. In the fair way between this island and Lingan, there are 14 and
13 f. the course being midway between, and to the N. to pass along by
the E. side of Bintang. This day at noon, being the 12th May, our
latitude was 1 deg. S.[278] the greatest isle of the Lingan group being S.W.
from us five leagues, whence we estimated its latitude to be 1 deg. 10'
nearly.

[Footnote 278: This is an evident error, as the northern side of the
largest island of the Lingan group is exactly on the equator, and
Bintam, or Bintang, is in lat. 1 deg. N.--E.]

At noon of the 14th, having made way twenty-four leagues to the
northward, by aid of the wind and a current setting to the north, we had
sight of the high land of Bintang, rising with two hills and a deep
swamp or hollow between, and, as we judged, twelve leagues from us. At
this time, likewise, we had sight of three or four hummocks, S.W. by W.
eight leagues off, which seemed separate islands. We had here 20 f. our
soundings from Lingan being 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, and 20 f. From noon of
the 14th till noon of the 15th, we made twenty-seven leagues N. 1/3 W.
our soundings in these twenty-four hours being 21, 22, 23, and 24 f.
From noon till three p.m. of the 15th we made 3 1/2 leagues, and then
had sight of Pulo Laor, N.W. 1/2 N. about twelve leagues off, having
then 27 f. the ground resembling fuller's earth. At night, Pulo Laor
being N.W. by W. eight leagues off, we had 39 f. on ooze. From noon of
the 15th till eight a.m. of the 16th, we made our course N.N.W. 1/2 W.
fifteen leagues. At night of the 16th, Pulo Laor bore S.W. by S. five
leagues; the body of the island of Hermano de Layo W.S.W. 1/2 W. seven
leagues; and the S. end of Pulo Timon W. 1/2 N. ten leagues, its N.E.
end being W.N.W. 1/2 W. ten leagues. We anchored this evening within
four leagues of the N. point of Pulo Timon, in 24 f. _streamy_ ground,
that point bearing W. by S. 1/2 S. In the evening I sent my boat round
the point, where they observed a town, with a junk riding close by the
shore, and several proas fishing. One of these came to enquire what
nation our people were of, and told them there was good fresh water at
the town, with plenty of buffaloes, goats, and poultry.

In the morning of the 17th, we sent the Unicorn's longboat along with
ours to the town, whence they came back in the evening with four butts
of water each, not willing to fill more, as it was brackish. They found
at the watering-place a junk belonging to Johor, fitted out for war,
having twenty men armed with fire-arms, besides lances and javelins.
They reported that they had taken a Chinese junk, which they had sold on
the coast of Johor; the nokhada sending me word, that he would assist me
against the Portuguese at the hazard of his life. In the bay next to the
southwards of Pulo Timon, we found excellent fresh water, but could not
conveniently take it in by means of our long-boat, which drew five feet
water when loaded. Having thus spent the day to little purpose, we set
sail at the beginning of the night, directing our course for Patane,
and steering N. all night with little wind.

At noon of the 18th, we were in the latitude of 3 deg. 40' N. At four p.m.
we had sight of Pulo Tingoran, N.N.W. fifteen leagues off. At night we
passed by Tingoran, about six leagues to the eastwards, having 28, 30,
and 32 f. on soft ground. At six a.m. of the 19th, Tigoran bore W.S.W.
seven leagues from us, when we had thirty-six f. soft ground. At noon of
this day we were in lat. 5 deg. 30' N. Tingoran bearing S. 1/3 E. fourteen
leagues off, by which we estimated the latitude of that island to be 4 deg.
50 N. We had likewise, at noon, the south isle of Pulo Rowdon, [Ridang,]
N.W. by W. seven leagues off. The same night at eight, I observed the
croziers, making the latitude of the ship 5 deg. 48' N. At this time, the
largest of the Ridang isles, which is the eastermost, bore from us due
W. four leagues distant. From eight this night, till noon of the 20th,
our course was nearly N.W. by W. nine leagues, our sounding being from
28 to 17 f. The northermost of the Pulo Ridang isles was then S. 1/3 E.
four leagues off, being a round hummock, much like Pomo in the gulf of
Venice, but somewhat higher and more complete. These isles consist of
good high land, having fair depth all along their eastern side to
seawards, and I am told have a free and safe channel between them and
the main land. There are thirteen or fourteen islands in this group,
great and small.

From noon of the 20th till eight in the morning of the 21st, our course
was W.N.W. nine leagues. We saw two hills by the water-side, bearing W.
and five leagues off, resembling two great tortoises. From Pulo Tingoran
all the way to Patani, the land up the country is very high, while that
just within the coast is low, with a sandy beach. This is the case for
at least twenty leagues south of Patani, but how much farther I know
not. In the afternoon of the 20th, while standing towards the two hills
just mentioned as resembling tortoises, we came from 17 into 14 and 13
f. with hard ground; and as we drew nearer these hills, the depth again
increased to 19 f. on ooze, and then shoaled again to 18 and 17 f. on
ooze.

The 21st of May, being Sunday, from eight a.m. to seven p.m. our course
was N.W. 3/4 W. thirteen leagues, keeping mostly within four leagues of
the low sandy shore, the depth all the way being 15, 14, and 13 f. We
then anchored in 13-3/4 f. streamy ground, the northermost point in
sight, falling down from a reasonably high land at the far end of the
low land, bore from us W.N.W. 1/2 N. near 3-1/2 leagues off. S.E. by S.
from this point, six leagues off, there is a rock, as high above water
as the hull of a small ship, which we passed about 1-1/2 league on its
E. side, finding no alteration in the soundings. This point I named the
Gurnet's Head. From this point, the land trends W.N.W. and W. by N. all
the way to the entrance into Patani roads, being all low land from the
Gurnet's Head to the point of the road, this point being the lowest of
all. The distance from the Gurnet's Head to that low point is six
leagues, all the way of fair depth till coming near the low point of the
road, to which a good birth must be given, as there lies a shoal from it
half-way over to the western shore, wherefore it must not be approached
too near, till you find in the first place the shoaling of the western
shore, which is the softest ground. From the low point, in going across
the bay to the western shore there are only from 5 f. to 4 1/2 when in
the road; and then the low point bears from the anchorage, E.N.E. 1/3 E.
the highest mountains in the western side of the bay bearing S.S.W. 1/3
W.

We anchored in the road of Patani on Thursday the 25th of May, when we
found the Sampson and a Dutch pinnace there at anchor. I went ashore the
day before to the English factory, where I found Mr Adam Denton and Mr
Richard Welding, lately come from Jambee in Sumatra in a proa, with
several of the Sampson's people, who were all rejoiced to see our ships
coming into the port. On getting to the English house, I told Mr Denton
that my chief purpose for coming here was for arrack and fresh victuals,
of which we were in great need, upon which he gave immediate orders to
procure every thing we needed, so that in six days we were supplied with
sixteen butts of arrack and arrack-apee; three butts of which last we
had from the Dutch, for which courtesy we were chiefly obliged by their
anxiety to have us away. We had also beeves, goats, and poultry, in
abundance. We also bought here _dammar_ and oil, for the purpose of
repairing our ships, as I understood these things were dear at Japan. I
here found a small frigate or country bark, which had been bought by the
English; and as she was of no great use there, it was agreed that she,
with most of the English sailors, should attend upon us to Japan.

We departed from Patani on the 31st May; and at seven a.m. of the 1st
June, we saw a small rock, just above water, being very dangerous for
ships bound from Patani for the point of Camboja. When this rock bore
N.N.E. 1/2 E. at the distance of a league, the high land over Gurnet
Head was S.S.W. 1/4 W. eighteen leagues off; and by computation, the low
point of Patani road was then eighteen leagues off, W.S.W. 1/2 S. After
getting out of Patani road into 7 f. the depth increased regularly to 9,
10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, and 24 f. till we got sight of the rock; and
two leagues from it we had 25 f. on ooze, as was the ground all the way
over from Patani. This day at noon, we found the latitude of the ship to
be 7 deg. 20' N. the rock bearing W. about four leagues off.

From that time till the 3d, at noon, our course was E. 1/2 N. forty-five
leagues, when we had sight of Pulo Hube, bearing E.N.E. 1/2 N. eight
leagues off, having 14 f. on ooze, as we constantly had for the last
forty-eight hours, the sounding being from 27 to 36 f. and thence
decreasing again to 14 f. Pulo Hube rises at first as one round hill,
and on coming nearer some high land is seen rising in hummocks, but not
above two-thirds so high as the round hill, being all one land with it.
Then another and smaller island is seen to rise, nearly of the same
height with the hummocks, and close to the larger island. At the east
end of this lesser round island, there are two little isles very near,
and a mile east of them there is a long rock like the hull of a galley.
This night we anchored in 13 1/2 f. on ooze, about three leagues from
the largest and highest isle. In the morning of the 4th we weighed, and
stood E. by S. with little wind. At six p.m. we had the body of Pulo
Hube W. by N. four leagues off. From thence we steered E. by S. and E.
till six next morning, but were so opposed by the current, that we made
our course to the northward of east. From six a.m. of the 5th till six
p.m. we ran fifteen leagues in the before-mentioned course, when we saw
a very small round isle about four leagues to the southward, having a
long flat rock S. from it about a mile, a good height above water. From
Pulo Hube till three leagues from this island, our soundings were 13,
14, 15 f. and then 15, 14, 13 f. again, all ooze. When within two
leagues of this small island, we had 13 f. on sand.

Here we descried Pulo Condor, its N. end bearing E. by N. from this
small island about seven leagues off. This day at noon, we made our
latitude 8 deg. 42' N. the highest land on Pulo Condor bearing from us E.
six leagues off. From Patani till we were in sight of Pulo Condor, the
wind was mostly S.S.W. This day at noon, we steered away N.E. then N.E.
by N. and in the night N.N.E. so that we made our course on the whole,
till next day at noon, N.E. by N. about twenty-four leagues, the depths
being 13 and 14 f. on ooze. At noon of the 6th, we had sight of two
hummocks on the coast of Camboja, bearing N. by E. nine leagues off,
with low land to the westwards. From Pulo Condor till we had sight of
this coast, the current set E. by N. At this time we had 12 f. on
streamy ground. The 7th at noon, we were in lat. 10 deg. 42' N. having run
from the former noon twenty-five leagues N.E. 1/2 N. and found that the
current had carried us ten leagues to the N. of our computation. Our
depths were in these twenty-four hours, from 12, to 16, 20, and 24 f.
and then back to 20, 18, 16, 14, on sandy ground.

From the before-mentioned two hummocks, as we coasted along, about eight
leagues from the land, sometimes more, and sometimes less, we saw high
land all the way in the inland country, and a smooth land in most places
by the sea side, about the height of the Lizard, with many plots upon it
resembling white sand, as well as the sea side. The first of these white
spots was on a point ten leagues W. of Cape Cessier, which we at first
thought had been a town with fair white houses and white walls. This
day, at noon, being the 7th, when in the lat. of 10 deg. 48' N. that Cape
bore from us about six leagues W.N.W. 1/2 W. At noon of the 8th, we were
in lat. 11 deg. 30' N. having gone twenty leagues N.E. 1/2 N. from noon of
the 7th. From the 8th, till noon of the 9th, we steered along shore
N.N.E. sixteen leagues, N. by E. six leagues, N. six leagues, and N. by
W. nine leagues, making our course in all N. by E. 1/3 E. thirty-six
leagues. We now had Cape Varella[279] W.S.W. eight leagues off, and were
in the lat. of 13 deg. 13' N. This cape is called Jentam by the Chinese,
signifying a chimney in their language, because it has a sharp hummock
on the top of the hill, much like a chimney on the top of a house. From
noon of the 9th, till noon of the 10th, our course was N. two-thirds W.
twenty-six leagues; our latitude on the 10th being 14 deg. 30' N. when we
were about ten leagues from the land.

[Footnote 279: Cape Verelly is in lat. 12 deg. 40' N. on the coast of Cochin
China--E.]

The 11th, at noon, we were in lat. 16 deg. 10' N. having run, from the
foregoing noon, thirty-three one-third leagues due N. Next noon, the
12th, we had made other twenty-six leagues, N.N.E. 1/2 N. and were in
latitude 17 deg. 40' N. the current having set us six leagues to the N. of
our computation. This evening, at six, we descried the island of Aynam,
[Hainan] its high land bearing N.W. by N. twelve leagues, and we had run
from noon seven leagues N.E. From hence, till noon of the 13th, our
course was N.E. by E. twenty-two leagues, and we were then in lat. 18 deg.
30' N. We this morning chased a Portuguese frigate, but she was so light
that we could not get near her. The 14th, at noon, we were in 19 deg. 35' N.
our course having been these twenty-four hours N.E. twenty-six leagues,
the current having carried us four leagues to the N. of our reckoning;
and yet this day at noon, in seventy-three f. on ooze, our boats found
no current at all. We here saw many ripplings, like the overfalls of
some rapid tide, yet found none. At six this evening, we again anchored
our boat in sixty-eight f. on oozy sand, and found a slight current to
the southwards. By the 15th, at noon, we had ran seventeen leagues N.E.
by N. and our latitude was 28 deg. 30' N. the current having carried us
seven leagues to the north of our reckoning. We had here forty-five f.
sandy ooze. The 16th, at noon, in 21 deg. 20' N. we had sight of three
islands, the eastermost N.N.W. the westermost N.W. and the nearest land
nine leagues off. We had here twenty-two f. on oosy sand, the wind being
E.S.E. and very fresh; but, from Cape Verelly till now, the wind had
always blown from S.S.E. to S.W. Next morning, at eight, we had
twenty-eight f. on ooze, having run, from noon of the 16th, eleven
leagues S.W. Finding the wind to increase, we thought it better to come
here to anchor than to run back again.

In the morning of the 18th June, the weather being somewhat fair, we
endeavoured to weigh our anchor; but when it was right apeak, the cable
gave way, though a new one, never before wetted, by which we lost our
anchor. Just at this time the Unicorn fired a gun, on which I sent
immediately to know what was amiss, and was informed she had sprung a
great leak, by which all her men were tired out with bailing. I then
sent thirty men to her aid, to ease her crew, till it might please God
they should find the leak. This day we had the wind at S.E. and stood E.
making our course N.E. till six p.m. when we again saw the former high
island ten leagues from us, bearing N.N.E. one-third E. This evening our
men returned from the Unicorn with the joyful news that the great leak
was firmly stopped. From six p.m. till midnight, we made fourteen
leagues N.E. when we had twenty f. in ooze. From that time, till five
next morning, we stood to the southwards, making a S.W. course three and
a half leagues.

From five in the morning of the 19th, we cast about towards the land,
with the wind at S.E. making a course N.E. and at six o'clock were
within eight leagues of the before-mentioned high island, bearing from
as N. by E. At eight this morning, Mr Roberts, the master of the
Unicorn, came on board the James, to inform me that another great leak
had broke out in that ship, and that it was necessary to seek out for
some smooth place to ride in at anchor, to enable them to search out the
leak, and fit their foremast better into the step. Upon this
intelligence, I resolved to bear up under the lee of the great island,
which bore now from us N. by E. in hope to find there a smooth anchorage
for the purposes of the Unicorn. There were many more islands in sight,
both to the eastwards and westwards of us, but that being the nearest,
and the likeliest for our purpose, and only three leagues from us, we
steered for it. The night approaching, and the wind becoming dull, we
plied off and on till morning of the 20th, when the wind had come round
so much to the northwards, that we could not fetch our intended place of
anchorage. I went aboard the Unicorn this day to enquire into their
intentions and situation, when I found them all willing to stand on our
original course, as the wind was fair, and they were hopeful of being
able to overcome their leak. I therefore sent all my Lascars on board
the Unicorn, in aid of her crew, after which we stood on our course all
that day till midnight, with a fair wind and favourable weather.

Towards midnight of the 20th June, the wind increased so much, that we
had to lay our ship a-try all night under her main-course. In the
morning of the 21st, we saw the Unicorn a league and a half astern of
us, having a foresail and spritsail out, which I afterwards perceived
was for the purpose of floating her about towards the shore. I
immediately caused our fore-courses to be made ready to float our ship
about after the Unicorn, though we had little hope of being able to
assist her in any thing, as the sea was become very rough. While our men
were throwing loose the forecourse, there came so violent a gust, that
they were obliged to furl it again, otherwise it had been blown away.
After the gust was over, we set our foresail, and, to make her wear
better round, we brailed up our main-course, part of it being blown out
of the bolt rope before the men could furl it. After that was up, we put
our helm hard a-weather, thinking the ship would come round, but all in
vain, for our ship would not wear beyond two or three points, and then
came to again. The sea was now so much grown that we durst not let fall
our spritsail, and the wind so violent that we could not loosen our
fore-topsail; and by this time the Unicorn had gone out of sight.[280]
Finding we could not wear ship, we steered away as near as we could lie
S. by E. till noon, having by that time made a course S. by E. thirteen
leagues from the southermost island we had seen over night, which I
called the Morocco Saddle, or Saddle island, because of a high hill
having a deep swamp or hollow between two peaked tops. This Saddle
island is in lat. 21 deg. 45' N.[281] There are four or five small islands
close to its western side, and three on its eastern side. Besides which,
there are many other islands in different directions, some N.W. others
W.N.W. and W. by N. the southermost of all the islands in sight bearing
from Saddle island to the W. about fifteen leagues off.

[Footnote 280: It will be seen in the sequel that she was lost on the
coast of China, probably run on shore to save the men's lives from the
effects of the increasing leak.--E.]

[Footnote 281: The indicated latitude leads to one of the numerous
islands on the coast of China, at the month of the bay of Canton, about
the longitude of 113 deg. E. from Greenwich.--E.]

This afternoon our ship became very leaky, having suddenly four and a
half feet water in the hold, which kept both pumps going a long while
before we could free her. Towards evening, it pleased God that we
discovered three or four great leaks between wind and water; and after
our carpenters had stopped them, we had great comfort, as we could then
let the pumps stop half an hour, and afterwards free the ship in a
quarter of an hour. From this day, the 21st, at noon, till noon of the
22d, we made five leagues S.S.W. with a pair of courses, and nine
leagues S.W. by W. a-hull, having twenty-seven and a half f. in ooze. In
the afternoon of the 22d, the violence of the wind and waves began to
abate, and our ship became tighter, which plainly shewed that most of
our leaks were between wind and water, wherefore, on the first fair
weather, I caused our carpenters to search the ship's sides, where they
found and stopped many bad places, some a yard long, where the oakum was
all rotten in the seams.

The 24th, we had sight of a great island to the N. about seven leagues
off; having a high hill on its southern end, being the island formerly
mentioned as about fifteen leagues W. from Saddle island. From thence,
till the evening of the 26th, our course was S. by W. twenty-four
leagues, the depths increasing from nineteen to thirty-six f. on ooze.
We had here a small round island S.W. by N. two leagues off, nearly in
latitude 20 deg. 20' N.[282] This island has four small islands on its S.W.
side, but all of them considerably lower, for we saw this from the
distance of at least ten leagues, rising in the shape of a Chinese hat.
From hence, till noon of the 27th, our course was E. by N. two-thirds N.
twelve leagues. This morning at two o'clock the wind veered round to
S.S.E. and at noon was due S. From noon of the 27th, to noon of the
28th, we stood E.N.E. eighteen leagues, and had then almost forty-one f.
on ooze. Till noon of the 29th, we made other eighteen leagues E.N.E.
when we were in 21 deg. 10' N. To the 30th, at noon, other eighteen leagues
E.N.E. To noon of 1st July, our course was E.N.E. 1/2 N. twenty-two
leagues, our latitude being then 22 deg. 10' N. Here, from the topmast-head
we saw land N.N.W. 1/2 N. From noon this day, till seven p.m. we sailed
N.E. by N. six leagues. At six this evening we saw three Chinese
fishing-boats.

[Footnote 282: There must be a material error here, as the latitude in
the text would carry us back to the peninsula to the north of Hainan,
more than two degrees of longitude backwards. Indeed, the text seems
corrupted in many respects, even the bearings being extremely
suspicious.--E.]

This evening the wind came up at E.S.E. with which we stood to the
southwards; and having sprung our main topmast only a little before, we
could only bear a course and bonnet, and therefore made our way no
better than S.W. From noon of the 2d, till eight p.m. our way was S.
four leagues. Till noon of the 3d, we sailed N.N.W. 1/4 W. seven
leagues. We here saw land twelve leagues off, from N. to N.E. rising in
certain hummocks, which land I estimated to be nearly in 22 deg. 45' N. On
the 8th, I had an observation of the Scorpion's Heart, by which I made
our latitude 22 deg. 35' N. Next day, at noon, on observation of the sun
gave the latitude 23 deg. 6' N. At this time we had sight of the high land
of Logosse, eleven leagues off, N.W. by N.[283] This morning we saw
eight or more fishing boats, and came within hail of one, but could not
persuade the people to come on board.

[Footnote 283: The latitude of the text points to the coast of China in
about the longitude of 117 deg.E. but no such name as Logosse occurs in
these parts.--E.]

On the 10th we had sight of some small islands, one of which, rising in
form of a sugar-loaf, bore from us W.N.N. about eight leagues off.[284]
We this day hoisted out a small boat, built by our carpenters upon the
forecastle, by which we made trial of the current, and found it to set
E.N.E. At eight this evening, we anchored in 28 f. having made no way at
all this afternoon but with the current, which went at the rate of about
a mile an hour N.E. The 11th we weighed, and drove away with the current
to the N.E. having no wind. This day at noon we had sight of the high
land of Formosa above the clouds, the highest part bearing S.E. by E.
about eighteen leagues off, the nearest island on the coast of China
bearing seven leagues from us N.W. We here saw great numbers of fishing
boats all round about us, which sent little boats to us with fish, for
which we gave them double the value to encourage them to come back. At
six this evening, the wind sprung up at N.N.E. by which, and some help
of the current setting N.E. by E. we made our way nine leagues E. to the
12th at noon. Our latitude was then 25 deg. 20' N. The high land of Formosa
being S.E. and the nearest port eight leagues off; the northern point
ten leagues E. by N. and the depth 46 fathoms on ooze. The 13th the
northern point of Formosa bore E.S.E. ten leagues off, being then in
lat. 25 deg. 40' N.

[Footnote 284: These appear to have been the Poughoy, or Pescadores
islands, off the western coast of Tai-ouan, or Formosa.--E.]

The 22d of July at noon, we were in lat. 32 deg. 40' N. the great sound of
Langasaque, [Nangasaki,] being E. nine leagues off, and the S.E. of the
Gotto isles W. by N. ten leagues off. The 23d, we arrived in a port of
the island of Firando named Cochee, [Coetch,] which is about 4 1/2
English miles to the southwards of Firando haven.[285] On the 25th,
Captain Cox sent a great number of funnies, or _toe_ boats, to our
assistance, by the help of which we got safe in the afternoon into the
harbour of Firando, where we found the Swan and Expedition, sent hither,
as I suppose, by the Dutch, for the disgrace of our nation in this
remote part of the world. This day, before we got in, the Elizabeth
brought in with her into Coetch, a frigate, containing silks and hides,
and some sugar, her mariners being Japanese with some Portuguese, a part
of whom were friars. Captain Adams, the admiral of the united fleet,
arrived in the same place about three hours after me in the Moon, as
likewise William Johnson in the Trow.

[Footnote 285: Coetch, about 17 miles W. by N. from Firando, the former
on the western, and the latter on the eastern side of the island.--E.]

The 26th, a general council was held of all the English and Dutch, in
the English house at Firando, when it was resolved to call in the ships
that lay nearest the coast of _Sashma_, because we were certainly
informed that the Portuguese frigates were just arrived from Macao at
Nangasaki. The 30th, the king of _Crats_ came aboard the James,
appearing much delighted to see such a ship, demanding of the jurabassa
if this were one of the English frigates; whence we concluded the Dutch
had reported we had only small ships like frigates. The 1st of August we
held another council at the English factory, to make choice of two men,
an Englishman and a Hollander, to carry a present to the emperor. As I
could not be spared so long from the James, nor Captain Adams from his
fleet, we made choice of Mr Charles Cleavengar, commander of the
Palsgrave, and Mr Joseph Cockram, Cape merchant of the fleet, to go on
the part of the English, and Jasques le Febre of the Harlaem, and
Mathias de Brooke, were chosen on the part of the Dutch.

On the 6th the Palsgrave arrived in Coetch roads. The Bull arrived there
on the 7th, having cut away all her masts by the board, as they said to
save the ship and goods. This day Captain Adams and I paid a visit to
the king of Firando, carrying a small present, which was well received,
and we were courteously entertained. On the 9th the king invited the
English and Dutch to dine with him, shewing respect to our nation by
placing us on his right hand, while the Dutch sat on his left, and the
first dish of every course was offered to us.

The 4th September we had a great tuffoon from the north, which forced
the Moon on shore, and overset the Expedition, which instantly went
down. The Trow had likewise been overset, had not her master veered out
the cable, and allowed her to go on shore, stern foremost. The 5th I
sent all my men aboard the Moon to help her off when we all strove a
long time to no purpose; but she was again got off on the 13th, having
fortunately received no damage by lying so long ashore. Having every
thing taken out of the James Royal, except some bars of lead to help in
trimming her over, she was hove down on the 19th almost halfway to the
keel. The 21st we brought her down so low as to see part of her keel,
and then began to sheath her with all expedition, and in four days the
carpenters sheathed the whole of one side, from the keel up to her lower
bends. The 27th I sent a cooper, two quarter-masters, and a butcher, to
Nangasaki, to kill and salt such meat as was provided for us.

On the 12th October, we got the James hove down on the other side to the
keel, and on this side we found four very dangerous places, where the
main plank was eaten quite through by the worms. Into each of these we
graved a piece of plank, and in one of them we drove a trunnel where
none had been before. We also nailed a piece of lead on the end of the
bolt, which had been formerly driven through the keel to stop our great
leak. Our ship was then righted, both sides being finished up to the
lower bends. The Moon was likewise finished on the 21st on both sides.
The 24th we had news that Nangasaki was greatly injured by a fire which
began in the Portuguese street, and consumed four or five of the richest
streets in the city.

The 7th of December we departed from Firando, and anchored the same
evening in the bay of Coetch. The 16th, Captain Cleavengar and Captain
Le Febre returned to Firando from the court of the emperor, bringing the
joyful news of having succeeded in their business. I took my leave of
them on the 17th; and the wind being fair, with favourable weather, I
set sail from the road of Coetch.

Sec.6. _Voyage from Japan to Bantam, and thence Home to England_.[286]

The 18th December at noon, the islands of Mexuma bore from us N.W. four
leagues off, our course from Pomo being S.S.W. twenty-five leagues. At
noon on the 19th, our latitude was 31 deg. 32'N. the isles of Mexuma bearing
N.E. by N. nine leagues off. The 12th January, 1621, we stood in for the
coast of Sumatra, and anchored at midnight in the river of Palembangan
in twelve fathoms. We weighed again in the morning of the 13th,
steering along the Sumatra shore through the straits of Banka; and past
midnight of the 14th we got to anchor near Pulo Paniang. The 16th,
seeing four ships in Bantam roads, we weighed and stood a little way
within Pulo Paniang, when the Pepper-corn's boat came to us with the
master, Mr Morton, who told me there were two Dutch ships in the road
and one French ship, the pangran having consented to grant trade, and
that it had been agreed to share the pepper in thirds among them. I also
learnt from him, that most part of our loading was already prepared for
us at Jacatra. I set sail, therefore, in the morning of the 17th, and
arrived that evening near Antilaky; and in the evening of the 18th we
arrived in the bay of Jacatra, [now Batavia bay,] where we found the
Charles, the Gift, and the Clove, as also two Dutch ships, the Leyden
and the Sun. The Globe and the Bee were at Hector island.

[Footnote 286: In the former subdivision of this voyage a sufficient
sample has been given of dry nautical detail of courses, bearings,
winds, and soundings, and it does not seem necessary to insert the
minute uninteresting detail of the return voyage to Bantam, which was
along the coast of China, Cochinchina and Camboja, nearly retracing the
former course.--E.]

I here found the master of the Unicorn with several of his ship's
company, having come over in a junk, after losing his ship on the coast
of China.[287] The James here discharged her lading, and was ready to
reload for England, there being here at this time, in the Charles,
Clove, and Gift, about 600 tons of pepper and other goods, and the Bear
daily expected from Jambee with 200 more, so that we had good hope of
soon making up our loading with pepper, benzoin, cloves, and silk.
Having taken in our whole loading of pepper, except fifty-five pekuls,
and a few sapetas of silk and some cloves, I departed in the morning of
the 26th February from the road of Jacatra, and set sail for England.

[Footnote 287: Purchas, II. 1700, informs us, that the Unicorn being
wrecked on the coast of China, the company saved themselves and part of
their goods on shore. At first the rude Chinese would have assaulted and
rifled them; but they stood on their defence, till a magistrate came and
rescued them from the hands of the vulgar, after which they had kind
usage and just dealing. They were allowed to purchase two vessels, with
all necessary provisions, for their departure, and in these, part of the
company went to Japan, and the other to Malacca.--_Purch._]

In the afternoon of the 20th May, we arrived in the road of Saldanha,
[Table-bay,] at the Cape of Good Hope. We here found the Ann Royal and
the Fortune, two ships belonging to the honourable Company, and three
Dutch ships, the Gowda, Black Bear, and the Herring, all bound for
Bantam and Jacatra. We trimmed our ship on the 21st, and on the 22d we
sent some water-casks on shore, and set up a tent for our sick men and
coopers, landing twenty-five men as a guard for their protection. This
night I sent out sixty men, along with sixty Dutchmen, in quest of
cattle, but they returned without procuring any.

We left Saldanha bay in the morning of the 6th June, with the wind at
S.S.E. The 21st, at six in the morning, we got sight of St Helena, and
about ten in the forenoon of the 22d, we anchored in Chappel Bay, half a
mile from the shore, in twenty-six fathoms. The 25th, we changed to the
valley leading to the lemon-trees, being the best in all the island for
refreshments. Having remained seven days at this island, where we filled
our water-casks, and got at least fifty goats and hogs, and above 4000
lemons, we weighed anchor on the 29th, at nine a.m. The 16th of August
we saw the high land of Pico, E.N.E. about 15 leagues off. The 15th
September we got sight of the land's end of England; and on Tuesday the
18th of that month we arrived in the Downs, having been absent on this
voyage, four years, seven months, and fourteen days.


SECTION XI.

VOYAGE OF THE ANN ROYAL, FROM SURAT TO MOKHA, IN 1618.[288]


The Ann Royal belonged to the fleet commanded by Martin Pring, of which
an ample relation has been given in the foregoing section. The present
section gives an account of a subordinate voyage, arising out of the
former, and intended for settling a trade in the Red Sea. The Ann Royal
was commanded by Captain Andrew Shilling, and this narrative is said by
Purchas, to have been extracted from the journal of Edward Heynes, who
appears to have been second merchant in the Ann.--E.

[Footnote 288: Purch. Pilgr. I. 622.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Thomas Roe, lord ambassador from his majesty to the Great Mogul,
having given certain articles of instruction to Captain Andrew Shilling,
commander of the Ann Royal, and Joseph Salbank, Edward Heynes, and
Richard Barber, merchants in that ship, for establishing and conducting
trade at Dabul or other places in the Red Sea, as they might see
convenient, it was thought meet by Captain Martin Pring the general,
Thomas Kerridge, and Thomas Rastell, on the 12th March, in a
consultation on board the James Royal, that we should sail direct for
the Red Sea, as the season was already too far gone for going to Dabul.

Sailing therefore from the road of Swally, we got sight of Aden on the
10th of April. The 13th, about seven in the morning, we passed the Bab,
or straits of Bab-al-Mandub, so named from an island at the entrance, or
mouth, of the Red Sea, and forming one side of the straits. About five
in the evening we came in sight of Mokha; and as night was coming on, we
cast anchor. Shortly after, a canoe came on board, sent by the governor
to enquire who we were, and what were our intentions; and having given
them an answer, they departed, having first begged a few biscuits. Next
morning we weighed, and came again to anchor a league and half from the
shore, when we saluted the town with nine guns. The water-bailey, or
shahbander, brought off, as a present from the governor, a young
bullock, two goats, with mangoes, limes, cucumbers, and water-melons. He
welcomed us in the name of the governor, and desired us to send some
persons on shore to inform the governor of the purpose of our arrival.
About three in the afternoon, there came aboard a Jew born in Lisbon,
together with an old renegado Venetian, who was in great favour with the
governor, and in his name assured us of meeting with good usage to our
content.

The 15th, Ali Asgee, the chief scrivano, sent a present of goats and
fruits, with a message of welcome, by two old men of good condition, who
were sent by the governor to remain aboard in pledge for such of us as
were to go on shore, with many protestations of good usage. Accordingly,
Mr Salbank and I went ashore, accompanied by two linguists and an
attendant, carrying as a present for the governor, six yards of stammel
broad cloth, six yards of green, a fowling-piece and a looking-glass.
Above a thousand people were on the shore expecting our arrival, and
several officers were in waiting to conduct us to the governor. His
house was large and handsome, built of brick and stone, having a fair
gate of entrance with a porter's lodge, and several servants in waiting.
From the gate, we went into a great court, whence a winding stair of
thirty steps led to a square terrace, from which we were conducted into
a large room, at one end of which was a great bow-window looking towards
the sea. The governor sat in this window, and there were others on the
sides of the room, which looked to the wharf or landing-place. The floor
of this room was all covered with fine mats, and towards where the
governor sat, with fine Turkey carpets and Persian felts. Where he sat,
there lay a party-coloured sattin quilt, with several rich cushions of
damask and others of velvet. He was dressed in a violet-coloured vest of
sattin, under which were garments of fine India muslin or calico, having
on his head a sattin cap, wreathed round by a white sash. He was
attended by the chief scrivano, the principal officers of the customs,
some Turks of importance, many Indian merchants, and about an hundred
servants. He seemed about fifty years of age, and his name was Mahomet
Aga.

On our approach, and doing reverence, he bowed to us, and desired us to
sit down, demanding who we were, and what was our business. We answered
that we were Englishmen and merchants from London, who, by command of
the ambassador of the king of England to the Great Mogul, with whom we
had a league of peace and amity, had come to this place to treat for
liberty of trade. That we were in friendship with the Grand Signior, and
had free trade at Constantinople, Aleppo, and other places in the
Turkish dominions, and hoped to enjoy the same here; for which purpose
we were come to desire his and the pacha's phirmauns, giving us such
privileges as we already had in other parts of the dominions of the
Grand Signior, both for the present time and in future, as we meant to
visit his port yearly with plenty of English and Indian commodities. We
said likewise that we were commanded to say by the lord ambassador, that
hearing there were sundry pirates, English, Dutch, French, Portuguese,
Malabars and others, who infested the trade of this port, and
principally that carried on by the Guzerats, who were our friends, we
had his orders to free the seas of all such incumbrances, protecting all
honest merchant ships and junks from injury. These, we said, were the
true causes of our coming here.

The governor then rose up and bid us welcome, applauding our declared
purposes, but asked why we were so fearful as not to come on shore
without pledges. We answered, that about six years before, some of our
countrymen being here, were enticed on shore by fair promises of good
usage, who were betrayed and imprisoned by the then governor, and
several of them murdered. For these reasons, we were under the necessity
of being careful of our safety. We said moreover, that he would shortly
be certified we were exactly what we professed, by means of two junks of
Guzerat, one of which had not come this year, but for the pass and
promise of the ambassador that they were to be protected in the voyage
home by our ship, against the enterprizes of any pirates who might be in
these seas, as one had been last year by some of our ships, which came
opportunely to their rescue, and conducted her safely to their port, and
had sent the chief commanders to England, to be tried and punished for
their wrongs against the friends of our sovereign.

The governor acknowledged the friendly conduct of our nation in that
affair, promising that we should live as safely on shore, and conduct
our business with as much freedom and security, as in our own country,
for which we should have his phirmauns, which he would procure to be
confirmed by the pacha to our entire contentment. He said likewise that
the former governor was a bad man, long since deposed, and now living at
Constantinople in disgrace; and swore by his beard, and by Mahomet, that
not a hair of our heads should be diminished, nor any wrong offered to
us, as he should make proclamation of our liberties, that no one might
pretend ignorance and do us harm or discourtesy. He desired us,
therefore, to look out for a house for ourselves and our goods,
commanding two of his chiauses to attend upon us, and recommended us to
lodge with the Jew merchant till we could fit ourselves better, desiring
him to assist us in all things.

After giving many thanks for his kindness, and delivering the present as
from our captain, we went, by the advice of the Jew, to visit the
scrivano, who is likewise chief customer or shahbander; and as he was
not at home, his servant received and entertained us with much civility.
They conducted us into an handsome room, not much inferior in building
and furniture to that of the governor, where we had left their master,
who soon came home and welcomed us with much politeness, assuring us
that all the governor had promised should be faithfully performed, as he
himself should see all executed, and had also power to see us righted.
We were informed that this man's power was as great in Mokha as that of
the governor, who was directed by him in all matters of importance. This
officer seemed a hearty old man. After making us drink coffee and
sherbet, we took our leaves, and remained all night with the Jew.

Next morning we spent an hour in viewing the town, and observing the
countenances of the people towards us, whom we found gentle and
courteous, especially the Banians and Guzerats, many of whom reside here
as merchants, shopkeepers, and mechanics, having neatly-built shops and
warehouses. Their market or bazar seemed well furnished with all manner
of necessaries, among which were plenty of fruits, which are brought
daily from the country. Most of the town is built of brick and stone,
neatly plastered over with Paris plaster, some of the houses being two
stories high, and all flat-roofed, with terraces on the top, on which in
summer they construct lodges of canes and mats, in which they sleep and
spend the first quarter of the day, having at that time a fresh breeze
from the sea. All the rest of the day at that season is so hot that they
can hardly endure even a shirt. Mokha lies quite level along the
sea-shore, being about two miles from north to south, and contains many
good-looking houses, with three principal mosques. The streets are kept
clean, every person having to sweep and water before his door every
morning and evening, so that they resemble sandy alleys for bowling,
more than streets. No filth is allowed to be thrown into the streets,
but must all be carried to an appointed place, where it is scoured out
by the sea. In fine, I have never seen a sweeter, cleaner, or better
ordered town any where.

The wharf is situated between the governor's house and that of the
scrivano, and is about twelve score square.[289] Near this, and
adjoining the governor's house, there is a platform or fort, built of
hewn stones, having battlements towards the sea, being about forty paces
square, in which there are thirteen or fourteen pieces of ordnance of
little value. Over against the landing-place two fair brass cannons are
planted, above five feet long. At the other end, is the Alfandica, where
there is a brass gun six feet long, carrying a large ball. Besides these
defences, there is a stone house at the north end of the town, built
like a sconce or redoubt, with a few pieces of ordnance; but they trust
little in their ordnance, relying mostly on their soldiers, of whom they
have always 200 in the town, and about 300 more in the country, within a
day or two days march, who are all constantly in readiness for service.


[Footnote 289: This is obscure, as it is not said whether it be 240
feet, yards, or paces.--E.]

The son of Cojah Nassan, the principal India merchant of the town, whom
we waited upon at his house, promised us all kindness, and regaled us
with tobacco and coffee, as is usual among these people. We went
afterwards to wait upon the governor before we returned on board. He
rose up at our entry to meet us, causing us to sit down by him, and
repeated all the fair promises of free trade he had given the day
before, declaring that he would deny us nothing that was reasonable. He
then told us there was another governor shortly to succeed him, who was
as his brother, and honester even than himself, who would faithfully
perform every thing he had promised. At our request, the governor
ordered the water-bailiff to furnish us at all times with boats, either
for our conveyance, or to carry water to the ship. From the governor, we
again went to visit the scrivano, who received us with much civility,
promising to come aboard to visit our ship, and compliment our captain.
After treating us with coffee, we took leave, and returned to the ship,
when the pledges were dismissed, acknowledging the good treatment they
had received, and were saluted on going ashore with five guns.

On the 17th, the scrivano, with our two pledges, our Jew friend, and
twenty other persons, came aboard, bringing a bullock, with bread,
quinces, and other fruits, a great round cake or pasty, like puff-paste,
in which were several fowls and chickens, well seasoned and baked, and
most excellent eating. We also, with a large quince pye, and many crabs,
together with sack and cordials, added our best welcome. The scrivano
was so well pleased with his reception, that he insisted upon becoming
the sworn brother of our captain, which was accordingly celebrated with
a cup of sack; and, after much mirth, and having taken a view of our
ship, he departed highly gratified.

We were well supplied with water by several poor people of Mokha, who
brought it off to the ship at a reasonable rate. Also, with the
concurrence of the governor and scrivano, we made every junk that
arrived anchor under our guns, and to ride in that situation till they
discharged their cargo; which indeed the governor wished us to do,
because some junks passed by that port to trade at others, to the injury
of Mokha At six in the evening of the 21st of April, we had a violent
storm of wind off the land, accompanied by much thunder and lightning,
but no rain, which continued for half an hour, all the rest of the night
being extremely hot. Although we rode above a league from the shore,
this tempest brought great quantities of dust, and even sand on board.
The 25th, we had a message from the scrivano, saying that the governor
and he had received letters from the pacha at Sinan, commanding them to
entertain us with all manner of kindness, and to give us free trade,
with liberty to reside among them in all quietness and security.

On the 27th the new governor arrived, when the ordnance of the town, and
of our ship and the several junks in the road, all fired to welcome his
arrival. He sent the former pledges on board to return thanks for our
salute, accompanied by a present of plantains, limes, mangoes, melons,
and bread, with one bullock, promising, in the name of the pacha, as
free trade as our nation had in Constantinople. The pledges remained all
night aboard, and went ashore with us next day, when we found the new
and the old governors sitting together at the end of a large room, much
in the same way as we had found the old one at our first arrival. The
new governor was named Regib Aga, and was accompanied by several
principal Turks, and by all the principal merchants from Surat, Diu,
Dabul, Scindy, Calicut, and Cananore. On our approach, he and the other
Turks only moved their bodies, but all the merchants rose up to salute
us. He made us sit down beside him, and told us that the pacha had
commanded him to give us satisfaction in all things; and that he knew
besides, we were of a nation in friendship with the Grand Signior, and
had free trade in Constantinople, Aleppo, and other parts of the Turkish
empire, being a nation of a friendly and honest disposition, and we
should therefore always find him disposed to give us free trade, and
every other courtesy In reply, we told him we proposed, at our next
coming to Mokha, if our reasonable requests of a free trade were
granted, to settle a permanent factory at this place, and to come yearly
to the port, with plenty of English and India goods, and should defend
the trade against pirates. We even distantly hinted, that it was
needless to deny us a free trade, being in a condition to force it if
refused, and to hinder all others from coming hither, the fear of which
had already caused some junks to pass by Mokha to Jidda, the port of
Mecca, a town of great trade, 150 leagues farther up the Red Sea, and to
other places.

The new governor replied, that we should be made as welcome as in any
place of our own country; and swore by God, and Mahomet, and by his own
beard, that we should live as free from all injury as in our own land.
We asked what security he would give us besides his word, when he said
we should have his phirmaun under his _chop_, or seal, and would procure
us the same from the pacha. With this we seemed satisfied, and gave him
many thanks; and indeed they all seemed perfectly willing to give us
every satisfaction, yet, in my opinion, not from good-will or justice,
but from fear, as they knew we were able to intercept their whole trade.
After some conversation about our ambassador, who now resided at
Constantinople, and about the Portuguese and Spaniards, whom Rajib said
were proud and faithless nations, we spoke of Sir Henry Middleton,
asking the cause of their treacherous conduct to him and his people. He
answered, that the then Vizier was a bloody, cruel, and ill-minded man,
and made worse by the instigation of the Turks and Arabs of Mokha, who
were enraged by the uncivil behaviour of our people, who made water at
the gates of their mosques, forced their way into the houses after the
citizens wives, and being daily drunk in the streets, would fight and
quarrel with the people,[290] things hateful in their eyes. These were
only in part the cause, for the covetousness of the governor, hoping to
have got their ship and goods, was the main cause of that scandalous
conduct, for which he was soon afterwards sent to Constantinople to
answer for his crimes.

[Footnote 290: Let English Christians read, blush, and amend--_Purch._]

We dined that day with the scrivano, and hired a house of Hassan Aga,
one of our pledges, at seventy dollars the monsoon, or yearly rent, it
being all the same. The scrivano insisted to swear himself our friend on
his Koran, yet denied the present governor to be the person who captured
Sir Henry Middleton, which we afterwards found to be Turkish faith, or
absolute falsehood. We now agreed to pay at the rate of three in the
hundred, _ad valorem_, both inwards and outwards, though the scrivano
swore that all others paid five; all money, with silver and gold in
bullion, to pass free of duty. We remained this night with the scrivano
to supper, and gave him a present.

On the 29th of April we expected to have had our phirmaun publicly read
before all the merchants, and proclaimed to the people; but most part of
the day was spent in ceremony by the governor and other chiefs at the
mosque, on account of the death of Sultan Achmet, the Grand signior,
and the accession of his brother to the throne. They came riding past
our house while we were sitting at a window which opened to the street,
whence we made our obeisance to them, and they bowed in return. They
were all in grand gala, having their horses richly caparisoned. At four
in the afternoon we were sent for, but our linguist had got to a Jew
house and was drunk with arrack, so we sent an apology, under pretence
that Mr Salbank was indisposed, and promised attendance next day. On the
31st, the governor sent for us, and made our welcome known to all the
merchants, causing his scrivano draw up a phirmaun as full as we could
have wished, which he signed with his chop or seal in the afternoon at
the house of the principal scrivano, entirely according to what was
before agreed upon, by which we were to pay three per cent. for all we
landed, excepting money, and the same for all we took on board, except
victuals. We got afterwards a similar phirmaun from Mahomet, the pacha
of Sinan: and Rejib Aga gave us a particular safe conduct for Mr Salbank
and the rest.[291]

[Footnote 291: Copies, or translations rather, from the Arabic, are
given in the Pilgrims of all these three phirmauns, which it was not
thought necessary to insert.--E]

It was now agreed among ourselves that Mr Salbank and I were to remain
ashore to conduct the business of sales and purchases, while Mr Barber
staid on board to prepare and send such goods as we required. The 5th of
May we went to the scrivano to get leave to make arrack for the use of
our sick men; because, since our linguist and several of our people had
got drunk in the house of a Jew, we had complained, and procured an
order prohibiting the Jews from selling them any, and the governor had
even strictly enjoined the Jews and Turks not to sell any more arrack or
wine in the town. At our request through the scrivano, the governor
granted leave for a Jew, nominated for the purpose to brew arrack at our
house, but forbid any to be made elsewhere.

In the afternoon of the 8th, learning that the governor and principal
men were sitting in form at the Alfandica, to receive the Surat captain
who was then coming on shore, we went also to see the ceremonial of his
reception. We found the governor at the upper end of a long room,
sitting on a stone bench spread with carpets, having on the same bench
with him various merchants and Turks of quality, to the number of about
twenty. Opposite to him sat about as many in chairs, forming a lane down
the room to a square platform raised three steps from the floor, railed
in and matted, in which the scrivano and other officers of the customs
sat on carpets. The governor bid us welcome, saying he had given orders
to the chief broker to examine our goods and promote their sale. He then
desired us to sit down, two merchants offering us their places, and
called for coffee and tobacco to regale us.

About half an hour after, the nokhada, or captain of the Surat ship,
came ashore. His boat was curiously painted, having a tilt of red silk,
with many streamers, and sails of fine white calico. He was rowed by
twenty of his servants, all dressed in fine white calico, and he was
accompanied by a wretched band of music, consisting of drums, waits, and
bad trumpets, the noise from which was augmented by the discharge of
guns from his own great junk and those belonging to the town. Attended
by a few slaves, decked out in silks and coarse sattins, he entered the
lone room where we were, when the governor rose and saluted him, and
placed him next himself on the stone bench. Many compliments of welcome
passed between the nokhada and the other merchants; but in the height of
his pride he overlooked us, and we him accordingly. Yet we thought he
might have shewn us more respect, considering that Captain Shilling had
sent his long-boat and men to free his junk of 400 or 500 tons, when
aground, and had entertained him with much civility aboard our ship.

After some time spent in compliments, coffee was again brought in for
all the company; after which six vests were produced, two of which were
given to the Surat captain, and one each to his four principal
merchants. When these were put on, and mutual _salams_ or reverences
given, they again sat down, like so many painted images, dressed up in
coats of coarse gold and silver velvet. We here observed one usual
custom of this town, at the arrival of any junk, and the landing of her
nokhada or captain, that free liberty is given to all the mariners and
passengers to bring ashore as much goods as each man can carry on his
back, without payment of any duty; accordingly, at this time, about 300
persons belonging to this junk passed with their luggage to the
captain's residence, unmolested.

On the 9th, our landlord and the scrivano told us that three junks from
Diu, and four Malabar vessels, were at Aden, whence they were afraid to
proceed without our pass or licence. Accordingly we sent them a free
pass, signed by our captain and three merchants. In this, after reciting
that we had found good usage from the governor and merchants at Mokha,
we engaged to give them all freedom to pass quietly, assuring them of
kind usage, provided they were not enemies to our sovereign or his
subjects. A more general pass was afterwards granted by us for the quiet
and free departure of all junks and other vessels, with their cargoes,
mariners, and passengers.

On the 10th, the captain of the Dabul junk invited us to a banquet at
his house, where we found the governor with about fifty principal
persons, besides attendants, all of whom rose up to bid us welcome.
Coffee, sherbet, and tobacco, were served round, with various fruits, as
plums, apricots, and mangoes, and thinking these had been the feast, we
were about to depart; but the governor and the Dabul captain desired us
to remain, that we might _eat bread and salt with them_, which we did.
The feast at last made its appearance, though late, being about sixty
dishes of meats, baked, roasted, broiled, stewed, and boiled, but all
mingled with rice and various kinds of sallads, in the fashion of India.

Our cargo consisted mostly of bad wares, which had lain in India till
they were nearly spoiled, and so hung long upon our hands; wherefore we
importuned the governor to dispeed our sales, which he charged the
broker to do with all expedition. We also had leave granted to come and
go between the ship and the shore at our pleasure, without demanding
leave, contrary to the usual custom of the port, the water bailiff being
ordered to give us no molestation. On the 20th, it was noticed that the
monsoon had changed. The 24th, the scrivano observed to us that our
sailors, on coming ashore, were in the custom of selling _baftas_ and
sword-blades in the bazar. He said the governor had promised liberty for
the goods of these poor fellows to pass free of custom, and therefore
they might freely bring them ashore for sale, but must sell them at our
house, and not in the public bazar, which was a disgrace to us and our
nation.

On the 31st, our ship was in great danger of being burnt. Some one
happened to be smoking on the spritsail yardarm, when the burning
tobacco fell out unobserved into a fold of the sail, where it burnt
through two or three breadths, and was long smelt before it could be
found. After this, smoking was strictly prohibited, except in the
cook-room or the captain's cabin. At this time, for the recovery of our
sick men, the exploration of the coast, and procuring ballast instead
of lead taken out of the ship for sale, it was concluded to send the
ship over to Assab; on the African coast, on which occasion Mr Baffen,
the master's mate, was sent before to sound and discover the passage.

On the 10th of June we had a conference with the governor, and, among
other discourse, he told us that he was governor of Aden when the
Ascension was there, when he imprisoned the captain and Mr Joseph
Salbank for two days, suspecting them to be freebooters, and not
merchants, as he alleged. He said also that he was governor here at
Mokha when Sir Henry Middleton was apprehended, but laid the whole blame
of that transaction on the then pacha, whose servant he was, and who had
given orders for that and much more, which he called God to witness was
much contrary to his inclination, and declared that these things were
past, and we had now nothing to fear. By this avowal, we had a clear
evidence how far he and the scrivano were to be trusted. The governor
sent for us again on the 13th, saying that he had acquainted the pacha
with our purpose of sending to him for his phirmaun, and that he had
promised a hearty welcome and full contentment, whether we went
personally or sent a messenger; but the governor advised that one of us
should go up to Sinan, for which purpose he would provide us with
horses, camels, and attendants, and should write in our behalf to the
pacha.

The 19th a junk arrived from Jiddah, with many passengers from Mecca,
bringing camblets, bad coral, amber beads, and much silver, to invest in
spices and India cotton goods. She brought news of a ship, laden last
year from Mokha for Grand Cairo, which had lost her monsoon, and was
forced to wait till next year, at a place only a little way beyond
Jiddah. By this ship, the governor had letters informing him that the
Grand Signior had sent various state ornaments to the pacha of Sinan,
whom he had confirmed in his government for seven years longer, and
appointing himself to continue governor of Mokha for the like time, of
which he seemed not a little proud.

As I was constantly indisposed, it was thought fit that Mr Salbank
should go up to Sinan to wait upon the pacha with a present, and to
carry up some goods also with him for sale at that place. On this
occasion, the scrivano offered him his own mule to ride upon, which he
thankfully accepted. He was furnished with two camels, a cook, a
horsekeeper, and three servants belonging to the governor, all of whose
wages he agreed to pay at certain fixed rates, and was also accompanied
by a linguist named Alberto. Taking leave of the governor, who gave him
letters for the pacha, he departed from Mokha about six in the evening
of the 23d June, the nights being the accustomed time of travelling.

In the morning of the 23d, we had a letter from our captain; then at
Assab, informing of his safe arrival there, and the good health of the
people, and that he had procured ballast and provisions to his
satisfaction. On the 26th, the governor sent me a horse by one of his
servants, inviting me to accompany him to his banqueting house, about
half a mile out of town, there to spend the day in mirth along with
other merchants. About half an hour after, the chief scrivano came to
accompany me, with whom I went, joining the governor by the way, and
rode with him to the place. It was a fair house, in the middle of a
grove of date trees, beside a large tank or pond, having several rooms
handsomely fitted; up for sitting. After a little while, the governor
and several others went into the tank to bathe, where they sported
themselves for half an hour. Coffee was then handed round to the
company, after which grapes, peaches, and both musk and water; melons,
were brought in, together with blanched almonds and great quantities of
raisins, as there were between fifty and sixty guests, besides,
attendants; and always between whiles coffee, sherbet, and tobacco were
handed round. Thus, and with indifferent music, we spent the forenoon.
After prayers, the governor, went again into the tank, where he spent an
hour sporting with his company. In the sequel, the time was spent in
cards and chess, and in looking at various; jiggling tricks, till four
in the evening. At this time above an hundred dishes were served up, all
of good meat, but; cold, and ill dressed, each dish being sufficient to
have satisfied four hungry men. He treated me with much kindness, and
was earnest to have me go with him into the tank, but I excused myself;
on account of my late indisposition. He then said, if at any time I was
inclined to bathe, I might come to this place when I pleased, and he
would give orders to the keeper to admit me and use me well.

The 12th July, the Surat captain made a fine display of many artificial
fire-works before the governor, it being then new moon. The governor
sent for me to see them, and placed me in a chair beside himself,
telling me he had letters that day from Sinan, informing him that the
Pacha had granted a phirmaun for us before the arrival of Mr Salbank,
but hearing of his coming, had delayed sending it, and had since granted
another, according to his instructions, and had delivered it to Mr
Salbank with his own hand.

On the 13th there passed by the roads a junk of four or five hundred
tons from Jiddah, bound for _Kitchine_, a day's sail within the entrance
of the Red Sea, which I suppose is not far from Cape Guardafui, on the
coast of Africa.[292] She is said to contain great sums in gold and
silver, with much valuable merchandize. This ship comes yearly to Mokha
at the beginning of the western monsoon, bringing myrrh, and boxes for
_coho_ seeds, [coffee] and goes from hence to Jiddah or _Aliambo_, [Al
Yambo] where she sells her coffee and the India goods procured at
Kitchine; which last are brought thither by Portuguese barks from Diu
and other places. Her outward lading consists of indigo, all manner of
India cotton goods, gum-lac; and myrrh.[293] She is freighted by the
Portuguese, and the governor of Mokha wished much we had met with her,
which we had probably done, had not our ship been absent, which returned
into the road of Mokha on the 21st. I went aboard, and was told that the
king of Assab and his brother had been aboard, and were kindly
entertained, in return for which he promised to supply them with
abundance of beeves and goats; but that same evening, in consequence of
a signal of fire, he and all his people fled into the mountains,
pretending they were threatened by an attack from their enemies, and
never even gave thanks for their entertainment.

[Footnote 292: The only place resembling this name is Kissem, on the
oceanic coast of Yemen, or Arabia Felix, nearly due N. from Cape
Guardafui.--E.]

[Footnote 293: This must refer to her homeward lading, called outward in
the text in respect to India.--E.]

Before day of the 27th July, Mr Salbank returned from Sinan in perfect
health, and much satisfied with his phirmauns. He gave me an account of
his whole journey, having been respectfully treated every where; always
before entering any town, being met both by horse and foot to conduct
him to the different governors, by whom he was kindly received. All his
provisions were provided by their officers, but at his own expence; and
the servant of the governor of Mokha caused him every where to be well
used. He was met a mile from Sinan by forty or fifty Turks, well
mounted, sent by the Pacha to escort him to a well-furnished house
prepared for his reception. He was there kindly received and entertained
by the xeriffe and the pacha's chief treasurer, who were both deputed to
give him welcome in the name of the pacha. Two days afterwards, he had
audience of the pacha, from whom he received courteous entertainment,
receiving two phirmauns of the same tenor, one of which was much more
ornamentally written than the other, and intended for being shown to the
Grand Signior, if necessary.

According to his report, the city of Sinan and its neighbourhood will
give vent yearly for a good quantity of English cloth, as the weather
there is cold for three quarters of the year; and even while he was
there, though the height of summer, a person might well endure a furred
gown. Besides, there is a court at that place to which belongs _forty_
or _fifty_ thousand gallant Turks,[294] most of whom wore garments of
high-priced Venetian cloth. Not far from thence there is a leskar, or
camp, of 30,000 soldiers,[295] continually in the field against an Arab
king in the adjoining mountains, not yet conquered; all of which
soldiers are said to wear coats of quilted India chintzes, which are
dear, and of little service to defend them from the cold of that region,
which is there excessive. To this I may add the city or Teyes, near
which there is a _leskar_ of thirty or forty thousand soldiers,
commanded by a German renegado under the pacha of Sinan. That place,
though only about five days journey from Mokha, is very cold, and much
cloth is worn by the people about that place.

[Footnote 294: This is probably a vast exaggeration, though in words at
length in the Pilgrims; and we ought more likely to read _four_ or
_five_ thousand Turks.--E.]

[Footnote 295: A similar reduction to 3000 is probably needful for this
army.--E.]

On the 2d of August the governor sent a rich vest to our captain by the
chief shabander, attended by drums and trumpets, his boat being decked
out with flags and streamers. This was delivered with great ceremony,
and reverently received. The Dabul nokhada, Melic Marvet, and Roswan,
the nokhada of the Chaul ship, sent us letters of recommendation to
their kings, on the 11th August, according to our desire, certifying the
friendly usage they had experienced from us at Mokha, and our kind
offer to protect them on the homeward voyage, from pirates, and
entreating therefore for us freedom of trade and friendly usage in their
dominions. The 14th, as we had formerly done to others, we gave our
passes to two Malabar captains, Amet ben Mahomet of Cananore, under
Sultan Ala Rajah, and Aba Beker of Calicut, under the Zamorin.

This day there came a galley into the road from Cairo, having many Turks
and Jews as passengers, bringing great store of dollars, chekins, coral,
damask, sattin, camblet, opium, velvets, and taffetas. She had come down
the whole length of the Red Sea in thirty days. I had a conference with
the Jews, one of whom I had formerly known in Barbary. They reported
that the brother of the former Grand Signior, on being made emperor, had
imprisoned his two nephews, and put to death several of the grandees,
and had otherwise given great offence to the great men at
Constantinople, whereupon he was deposed and imprisoned, and his eldest
nephew made emperor in his stead. They said likewise that an army of
200,000 men was sent against the Persians, for the conquest of
Gurgistan, adding various other particulars, some of which turned out
true, and others false, like merchants news in general. Some Turks and
Jews desired to have passage for themselves and goods in our ship to
Surat; and it is likely, when they know us better, much profit may be
made in this way, as their junks are usually pestered with rude people.

Having sold and bartered our goods as well as we could have expected,
considering our cargo, and dispatched all our business, we visited the
governor, and desired to have his testimonials to the lord ambassador,
which he gave us. We took leave of him on the 19th of August, and of the
scrivano and other chief men of the town, from whom we received
protestations of continued kindness on all future occasions. We went
aboard that same day, proposing to sail the next day for India, taking
the Surat junk under our convoy, according to our instructions.



SECTION XII.

JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE TO SURAT AND JASQUES, IN 1620.[296]


"According to the title of this journal in the Pilgrims, the fleet which
sailed on this voyage consisted of the London, of 800 tons, William
Baffin master, on board of which was Captain Andrew Shilling, chief in
command, or general; the Hart, of 500 tons, Richard Blithe master; the
Roebuck, of 300 tons, Richard Swan master; and the Eagle, of 280 tons,
Christopher Brown master. The account of the voyage in Purchas is said
to consist of extracts from the journal written by Richard Swan, the
master or captain of the Roebuck."--E.

[Footnote 296: Purch. Pilgr. 1. 723.]

Sec.1. _Voyage from England to Surat._

We sailed from Tilbury-hope on the 26th of February, 1620, and anchored
in Saldanha road [Table Bay, at the Cape of Good Hope] on 24th of June,
where we found the Lion homewards-bound, and nine Dutch ships bound for
Bantam, commanded by a gentleman named Nicolas van Baccum, who Was said
to have studied seven years at Oxford. Next morning the Lion and the
Dutch fleet departed, each their several way; and in the evening arrived
the Schidam belonging to Deft, outward-bound, which being suspected by
both admirals, the master was sent for, and producing Us commission,
gave satisfaction. On the 3d of July we made a solemn proclamation of
the right and title of his majesty King James to Saldania, and on the
7th King James's mount was erected.[297]

[Footnote 297: It thus appears that the first fortified station at the
Cape of Good Hope was erected by the English, to whom that colony now
belongs. It would surely be a better appellation for this important
colony, which may be called the key of India, to restore its old name-of
_Saldania_, than to continue its present awkward denomination, The
Colony of the Cape of Good Hope.--E.]

We sailed from the Cape of Good Hope on the 25th of July, and 26th of
October we put into Dabul roads, where we remained till the 2d of
November to refresh our men, and to provide the two ships bound for
Persia. The 6th November, the Hart and Eagle took leave of us and the
9th we anchored in Swally roads, where we found the Wappen van Zeland,
of 1000 tons, which at our arrival took in her colours, and saluted the
London with three guns, and the Roebuck with two. I was sent on shore,
and brought off Mr Thomas Kerridge, the president of the factory at
Surat, with Mr James, and Mr Hopkinson. Next day, in a consultation, it
was determined to dispatch us speedily after the Hart and Eagle, as we
had intelligence that four Portuguese galleons were waiting at Ormus, or
in Jasques roads, to intercept them.

Sec.2. _Voyage from Surat towards Jasques_.

The 19th November, having dispatched our business at Swally with all
expedition, we set sail towards Jasques. The 21st we chased a ship,
which surrendered without resistance, being the Nostra Sennora de
Merces, of 200 tons, bound from Muscat for Chaul, having on board
forty-two Arabian horses, her principal loading, and for which trade she
was built. The residue of her cargo consisted of dates and raisins. The
name of her captain was Francisco de Mirando.

The 5th December, when in latitude 24 deg. 55' N. we met the Hart and Eagle
coming from Jasques for Surat, because not of sufficient strength to
encounter the Portuguese force which was waiting for them with the
intention of ruining our Persian trade. Thus happily rejoined to our
former consorts, we shaped our course for Jasques to accomplish our
purpose. The 8th, at the earnest desire of the Portuguese and Moors
taken in the prize, we set them on shore, except some Moor seamen whom
we detained in our service, and the Portuguese pilot, who entreated to
stay, as he feared some hard usage from his own people. On the 12th,
certain volunteers who had engaged to set fire to our prize, and run her
aboard the Portuguese admiral, were put on board of her, and she was
fitted as a fire-ship. The 15th we had sight of the east point of
Jasques roads, having upon it a tomb or old square flat-roofed house,
which bore W.N.W. by compass, twelve miles off. From Diu head to this
point, I make the longitude, by the ordinary plain chart, 9 deg. 55' 36" W.
but by Mercator's projection, 10 deg. 51'. From where we were, we could see
the Portuguese men of war sent from Lisbon to oppose our trade with
Persia, consisting of two Portuguese galleons, one of which was larger
than the London, and two Dutch ships, one as large as the Hart, while
the other was less than the Eagle. Their general was Don Ruy Frere de
Andrado; the vice-admiral, Joam Boralio; and the two Dutch ships were
commanded by Antonio Musquet and Baltazar de Chaves.[298]

[Footnote 298: According to a special account of this and the
succeeding sea-fight, appended to the present relation in Purchas, the
Portuguese fleet on the present occasion, besides the four galleons,
consisted of two gallions and ten frigates or armed barks, none of which
are here mentioned except the four galleons.--E.]

Sec.3. _Account of the first Fight with the Portuguese_.

In the morning of the 16th December, our admiral and all the masters of
our squadron went on board the prize, carrying two barrels of powder,
some tar, and other combustible materials, to fit her up as a fire-ship,
intending to lay her on board the Portuguese admiral athwart his hawse,
that both might burn together. After she was fitted, we bore up for the
Portuguese squadron, but it fell calm, and the current set us so near
them, that they reached us with their shot. We kept under sail all
night, and in the morning of the 17th, being to leeward of them in
consequence of the land breeze, they weighed and made toward us, when we
waited their approach, although they preserved the advantage of the
weather-gage. The fight began about nine in the morning, and continued
without intermission for nine hours. In the afternoon, a fine gentle
sea-breeze sprung up from the westwards, which gave us the weather-gage;
and the Portuguese admiral anchored, either of necessity to repair some
defect about his rudder, or of policy to gain some expected advantage.
His vice-admiral and the large Dutch ship anchored to the eastwards, and
the lesser Dutch ship to leeward of them all, stopping his leaks. We
were now in great hopes of putting our fire-ship to a good purpose; but
being too soon fired and forsaken by those who had her in charge, she
drove clear of them all, to their joy and our disgrace. Seeing them
remain at anchor, and keeping to windward of them, we turned to and
again close a-head of them as they rode at anchor, raking them as we
passed, through and through, fore and aft, especially the admiral,
receiving only in return their prow and bow-chases. By these, as I
passed to the north, two unfortunate shots cut asunder the weather leech
ropes of the Roebuck's foresail and fore-topsail, in the middle depth of
both sails; owing to which we could not bring her into stays, and were
forced, for repairing these sails, to bear down to leeward, between the
enemy and the shore; in which course, the three great ships plied their
whole broadsides against us, but with less hurt than I could have
imagined, God be praised. Having compassed the three large ships, I
luffed up to rejoin our squadron, which still held the advantage of the
wind, and plied their great guns on the Portuguese like so many muskets.
When I had got to windward of the smaller Dutch ship, which stood off as
I did till he had our fire-ship directly between him and me, he turned
tail, and steered right before the wind along shore to the eastwards,
with all the sail he could carry. The other three now set sail to his
rescue, and were now so tame, that as the Hart passed along their
broadsides, she received only a few shots great and small from any of
them, and from some none at all. The night now coming on, and our people
being all wearied by the long continuance of the fight, we all desisted
from any farther chase, and came to anchor in our usual road.

In this fight, the London and Hart had very little harm in their hulls
and tackling, and less, or rather none, in their men. The main-mast of
the Eagle was hurt in five places, four of which were quite through, and
one of her men lost his right arm. In the Roebuck, I had one man slain
by a cannon ball striking his head. A piece of his skull and some
splinters of the ball wounded one of my mates in the forehead, and
destroyed his left eye; and two others of my men lost the use of their
right hands. God be praised for our good fortune; for I never heard of
so small loss in so long a fight as we now sustained. I cannot truly
state the loss of the enemy: but, by the report of our merchants, their
vice-admiral and another captain were slain, and thirty or forty men in
the admiral's ship alone, the rest as yet unknown. As to their Moors,
they do not count them among the num her of their men.

In the morning of the 18th, the day after the action, we could see the
Portuguese at anchor ten miles to the east of us, having the wind fair
to have come down, but they did not. We then held a consultation,
whether it were better for us to take the first of the sea breeze, which
usually begins about noon, to stand towards them and try it out for the
mastery, before they could receive supplies from Ormus, Muskat, or Goa,
or else to make sail for Jasques roads, on purpose to land our goods and
money, in case of the worst, these being the prize they sought to obtain
and we to defend. Accordingly, the London got that night into Jasques
road, but the rest could not get in before the 20th, by reason of
contrary winds. On the 21st and 22d most of our goods were landed.


Sec.4. _Second Sea Fight with the Portuguese_.

On the 22d, seeing the Portuguese galleons open the road of Jasques, and
supposing they might intend to come in with the sea breeze, we set sail
and stood off for them. At first, they made a shew of giving us battle,
but soon afterwards made off upon a tack; and till the 28th, they were
either to windward, or so favourably placed at anchor, that we could not
attempt to attack them without manifest disadvantage. During this time,
they were joined by two or three frigates, or barks, from Ormus,
bringing them a supply of men and ammunition. We made one attempt on
Christmas day, but were forced back by a sudden flaw of wind; on which
occasion, some blacks aboard of us, said the Portuguese had brought a
witch from Ormus, to supply them with favourable winds.

On Innocents day, 28th December, perceiving the drift of our Portuguese
_Fabius cunclator_, to protract and avoid fighting, that by delays and
the advantage of his frigates, he might hinder us from prosecuting your
business in Persia, we determined to attempt closing with him. About one
o'clock there sprung up a favourable east wind for our purpose, on which
we immediately weighed and put every thing in order for battle. The
London and Hart came to anchor within a cable's length and half of their
broadsides, and so endured the main brunt of this second fight; for, no
sooner were they at anchor, but it fell calm and so continued all day,
insomuch that the Roebuck and Eagle, which had steered nearer to the
shore, with the intention of coming to anchor, one on the bow of their
admiral, and the other on the bow of their vice-admiral, got astern, and
could not with all our diligence be of any service for a full half hour
after the action began. At length we got within point-blank shot of
them, and then were forced either to anchor or drive farther off with
the current, as there was not a breath of wind.

We now brought our broadsides to bear, and our whole squadron plied
their ordnance upon them so fast, that had the knowledge of our men
equalled their resolution, not one of them had escaped from us. Not
willing to endure such hot entertainment, they cut their cables about
three o'clock, and drove from us with the tide to the westwards, till
out of our reach. Then came their frigates, which the day before had
made a bravado along shore with drums, trumpets, flags, and streamers,
and, now employed in a fitter task, towed them away all mangled and
torn. Their admiral, in the very hottest of the fight, was under the
necesity of giving his ship a heel to stop his leaks, his main-top-mast
and the head of his main-mast having fallen overboard. The great Dutch
ship had both his top-masts and part of his boltsprit shot away, and the
smaller lost all his shrouds and top-masts. Their vice-admiral escaped
best this day, having commonly one or other of their own ships between
him and us.

We kept them company all night, in hope of being able next morning to
give them their passports; but having taken a survey of our shot, which
we found scanty, and considering the importance of the voyage we still
had to perform, we thought it best to give over the chase and return to
Jasques; leaving them glad of our absence, their two great ships towing
the two smaller. We have had no account of their loss in this action.
All your worships ships remain serviceable, God be praised, and only
five men slain outright in these two long and severe engagements. Our
worthy admiral and kind commander, Captain Andrew Shilling, received a
great and grievous wound by a cannon ball through his left shoulder,
which he bore with such wonderful courage and patience, that we were in
great hopes of his much-wished-for recovery: But he had likewise two of
his uppermost ribs broken on the left side, and died on the 6th January,
1621, shewing himself a resolute commander in the action, and an assured
Christian in his death. We intended to have carried his body to Surat,
to have there performed his funeral rites according to his great merit,
and oar surgeons undertook to preserve his body by means of embalming
and cere-cloth, but it became so noisome that we were forced to bury him
at Jasques, which was done on the 7th, with all the solemnity and
respect in our power.

In this engagement, the London expended 1382 great shot of several
sorts, the Hart 1024, the Roebuck 815, and the Eagle 800, in all 4021.
In consequence of the death of our worthy admiral, the white box, No. I.
was opened; and according to your worships appointment, Captain Richard
Blithe succeeded to the supreme command of the London, I was removed
into the Hart, Christopher Brown into the Roebuck, and Thomas Taylor was
made master of the Eagle.[299]

[Footnote 299: This account does not agree with an accompanying official
letter, dated 13th January, 1621, giving a similar account of the two
engagements, often in the very identical words used by Swan, in which
the name of Thomas Taylor is omitted, instead of whom William Baffin is
the last in the list of signatures; and the Christian name of Swan is
made Robert instead of Richard.--E.]


Sec.5. _Sequel of the Voyage_.

The 14th January, 1621, having had forty-eight hours continual and
excessive rain, which, or much wind, is usual at Jasques for three or
four days at the full and change of the moon, and having finished our
business at Jasques, we set sail on our return to Surat, where we
arrived on the 1st February. Nothing material occurred on the passage,
except that, on the 27th January, between Diu and the _sand-heads_, we
surprised a small ship of war, called Nostra Senaora de Remedio, of 100
tons, commanded by Francisco de Sylva, manned by thirty-five Portuguese
and twenty-five Moors, sent out by the governor of Diu to protect their
small merchant ships against the Malabar rovers. We dismissed the men
and kept the ship for our use, calling her the Andrew, after our late
excellent general. She had in her neither meat, money, nor commodities,
and scarcely as many poor suits of clothes as there were backs.

The 27th of February we began to take in our loading. The 5th of March,
the, Eagle was sent down to keep guard over the junk belonging to the
prince, and to hinder her from any farther loading, till they granted
free passage for our carts with goods and provisions, which had been
restrained for six or seven days by the vexatious procedure of the
governor of Olpar, a town near Surat. By this means, no cotton wool was
allowed to come down till our ships were fully laden. On the 16th of
March, having notice that the Camla, from Agra, had been robbed by the
Deccan army, we resolved to seek restitution upon the ships of the
Deccan prince and his confederates in this transaction, as we intended
wintering in the Red Sea. The 19th, the governor of Surat having given
us satisfaction in regard to the carts, and a supply of powder and shot
for our money, and promise under his hand for redress of other injuries,
we dismissed the junk belonging to the prince from duress.

From the 25th of March to the 6th of April, 1621, the winds have been
S. and S.S.W. or W. and blowing so hard from noon till midnight, raising
so great a surf on the shore, that no business could be done except on
the last quarter of the ebb and first of the flood tide. We sailed on
the 7th April. The 9th, the Eagle and a Dutch pinnace, called the
Fortune, parted company, being consigned to Acheen and Bantam. The
London, Hart, Roebuck, and Andrew, were intended for the Red Sea, if not
too late.

The 1st May, the Andrew and our boats surprised a Portuguese ship of 200
tons called the St Antonio, which we named the May-flower. Her principal
lading consisted of rice taken in at Barcelor, whence she had gone to
Goa, and sailed from thence for Ormus and Muskat on the 8th of April. We
learnt from this prize, that Ruy Frere de Andrada was busy in repairing
his ships at Ormus, and that Don Emanuel de Azeredo had departed from
Gor fifty days before for Ormus, to reinforce Andrada with two galleons,
one of these being the same in which the viceroy was personally, when he
engaged our fleet under Captain Downton. During a calm on the 7th, we
captured a small frigate-built ship called the Jacinth, which we named
the Primrose, which had come from Mozambique and was bound for Goa.
Thence to the 13th, we had variable winds, with calms and much rain.
Finding the May-flower delayed us much, and that our pilots were either
ignorant or malicious, we resolved to trust to our own endeavours for
finding an anchoring place, for our safe riding till the strength of the
adverse monsoon was over, for which purpose we determined upon going to
Macera.[300]

[Footnote 300: From the latitude of this place, mentioned afterwards in
the text, this seems to refer to Mazica, an island about sixty miles
long and fifteen or twenty in breadth, a few miles from the oceanic
coast of Arabia, in lat. 20 deg. 48' N. and long. 57 deg. 3O' E. from
Greenwich.--E.]

We descried land on the 2d June, and anchored in seventeen fathoms three
miles offshore, in lat. 20 deg. 20' N. variation 17 deg. W. We found plenty of
water in four or five pits, three quarters of a mile from the shore. I
had forty tons from one well, which we rolled in hogsheads to the beach.
The people were tractable, but we got little else besides water. A tuft
of date trees by the watering place bore N.W. by W. from our anchorage,
and the other end of the island N.E. 1/2 E. five leagues off. The 12th
we sailed for the N.E. end of the island, and in the afternoon came to
anchor in a fair bay, having seven fathoms on clean ground, a black oozy
sand, the N.E. point bearing S. 1/2 a league off, the landing place
W.S.W. two miles off, and the north part of the bay N. by W. four miles
off. The latitude of this bay is 20 deg. 30' N. and the variation 17 deg.
W.[301] In this bay you may ride safely in any depth between five and
twelve fathoms. It is an excellently healthy place, cold and hungry,
affording no refreshments except water, enough of which is to be had by
digging pits; but it is ill to boat except at the usual landing place.
This place afforded us no better supplies than the former, except that
we got a few goats and lambs in exchange for canikens. Though good
anchorage, this bay was much troubled by a tumbling rolling sea, yet we
resolved to remain here with the Hart and Roebuck till the fury of the
monsoon were past.

[Footnote 301: The north end of Mazica is in lat. 21 deg. 12", and its south
end in 20 deg. 15', both N.--E.]

Having separated some time before from the London, our admiral, we sent
on the 19th of June, one Abdelavie, an inhabitant of this island, as far
as Zoar with letters in quest of the London. He returned on the 6th July
with letters in answer, informing us that the London was at Zoar, seven
leagues within Cape Rasalgat, having watered with difficulty at Teve,
where their surgeon, Mr Simons, and the chaplain's servant, were
surprised on shore by the Portuguese and Arabs. The Hart and Roebuck
sailed from Macera, [Mazica,] on the 6th of August, and anchored in the
evening of the 8th beside the admiral in the port of Zoar. This road
differs from that in which we were in, being cairn, but the air was so
hot as to take away our appetites.

We sailed from Zoar on the 15th of August and returned to Swally roads.
The 21st September, our whole fleet sailed from Swally, and on the 27th
we took leave of the fleet bound for Jasques, consisting of the London,
Jonas, Whale, Dolphin, Lion, Rose, Shilling, Richard, and Robert. The
1st January, 1622, we were between Johanna and Mayotta, two of the
Comoro islands. The 29th we anchored in Saldanha roads, [Table Bay,]
having come thither from Surat in nine weeks and three days, blessed be
God for our safe and speedy passage. We here watered, bathed in the
river, caught fish, and buried our letters; purchasing three cows, one
calf, and four sheep, all unsavoury meat.

We sailed again on the 3d February, and anchored on the 19th at St
Helena, where we found the Wappen and the Hollandia, two Dutch ships,
the latter of which caught fire on the 22d, owing to her cloves, which
had been taken in too green at Amboina. There was likewise a third small
Dutch ship. They arrived eleven days before us, and it will take them at
least ten days more to discharge and reload their damaged cloves. We
sailed from St Helena on the 28th February, and anchored in the Downs on
the 7th June, 1622.



SECTION XIII.

RELATION OF THE WAR OF ORMUS, AND THE TAKING OF THAT PLACE BY THE
ENGLISH AND PERSIANS, IN 1622.[302]


"In the Pilgrims of Purchas, vol. II. pp. 1785-1805, there is a long
confused account of this business, contained in four several sections;
to which many letters and certificates on the subject are subjoined.
The _first_ is a brief historical memoir of the foundation of Ormus, from
a chronicle in the Arabic, said to have been composed by _Pacha
Turunxa_, perhaps Pacha Turun Shah, one of the kings of that petty
sovereignty. The _second_ is a relation of the Ormus war, by Mr W.
Pinder, who appears to have served under Andrew Shilling, during the
preceding voyage, and sailed as master of the Andrew on this occasion.
The _third_ is an account of the earlier part of this war of Ormus,
written by T. Wilson, a surgeon serving in the expedition. The fourth is
a more particular relation of the whole events of this expedition,
extracted by Purchas from the journal of Mr Edward Monoxe, agent for the
East Indian merchants trading in Persia. This last has been chosen, as
best adapted to give a distinct view of the expedition, but some
freedoms have been assumed with it, by assisting the narrative from the
other documents in Purchas, already specified."--E.

[Footnote 302: Purch. Pilgr. II. 179s.]


       *       *       *       *       *

At a consultation held in Swally roads on the 14th November, 1621, a
commission was given by Mr Thomas Rastell, president, and the rest of
the council, of our factory at Surat, to Captains Richard Blithe and
John Weddell, who were bound for Jasques, with five good ships and four
pinnaces. The ships were the London, Jonas, Whale, Dolphin, and Lion,
and the pinnaces the Shilling, Rose, Robert, and Richard. They were
directed to sail with the earliest opportunity for Jasques, keeping
together for their mutual defence against the enemy; and, as the
Portuguese had disturbed the trade, and made sundry assaults on our
ships, killing, maiming, and imprisoning our men, they were authorized
to chase and capture any vessels belonging to the ports or subjects
under the viceroy of Goa; as likewise, if they met any ships belonging
to Dabul, Chaul, or other ports of the Deccan, or to the subjects of the
Zamorin of Calicut, to arrest them, in replacement of goods robbed and
spoiled by these powers, without embezzling any part of their cargoes,
that restitution might be made, after due satisfaction rendered on their
parts. A sixth part of the goods taken from the Portuguese were to be
distributed as prize, the ship and the rest of the goods to remain to
the company; and all the prisoners to be retained, that they might be
exchanged for our countrymen, held by them in miserable bondage. They
were directed to hasten their business and dispatch at Jasques, if
possible within thirty days. And as our enemy under Ruy Frere de
Andrada, was reinforced to six galleons, with other small vessels,
waiting on the coast of Persia in all likelihood to attack our fleet,
they were authorized, both defensively and offensively also, to use all
opportunities or advantages against the Portuguese fleet, even in their
own ports, if approved by a general council of war.

We arrived in Costack roads on the 23d December, about twenty-seven
leagues from Jasques, Ormus being in sight about ten leagues W.N.W. by a
meridional compass. Our factors here informed us, that after our
sea-fight in the former year, the Portuguese governor of Ormus had
erected a fort on Kismis, an island within sight of Ormus, to which the
Persians had laid siege for seven or eight months ineffectually, and had
lost eight or nine thousand men in the siege; wherefore the Khan or
prince of Shiras had, by his ministers, demanded the aid of our ships
against the common enemy, the Portuguese, otherwise threatening to
detain all the goods and money belonging to the company in Persia. In a
consultation held on the 26th December on board the Jonas, in which were
present, Captain Richard Blithe, John Weddell, Edward Monoxe, William
Baffin, and many others, articles of agreement for giving our aid to the
Persians against the Portuguese were drawn up, and being translated into
the Persian language, were forwarded by the governor of the province of
Mogustan to the Khan of Shiras, then on his way towards Mina, near the
mouth of the Persian gulf.

In this consultation, it was considered, as it was required of us by the
Persians, that we should give them aid with our ships and people in this
war, not only for the purpose of vanquishing the Portuguese navy, but
for conquering the island and castle of Ormus; and as we were confident
they would endeavour to force us into this service, by embargoing our
goods, the governors having already refused to give us camels for their
carriage from Mina to the ports: Wherefore, the foresaid proposition
being maturely considered, together with the commission from the factors
at Surat, warranting us to right ourselves for the great losses and
hindrances suffered from the Portuguese, by interrupting our trade both
in India and Persia, and their attack last year against the fleet under
Captain Shilling; we therefore agreed to proffer the following articles
to the Khan, for the public benefit and the securing a peaceable and
profitable trade.

_First_.--In case of conquering the island and castle of Ormus by the
Persians with our aid, one half of the spoil and purchase of both to
belong to the English, and the other half to the Persians.
_Secondly_--The castle of Ormus shall be delivered up to the English,
with all the ordnance, arms, and ammunition thereunto belonging; and the
Persians to build another fortress there for themselves, at their own
charges. _Thirdly_.--The customs of Ormus shall be equally divided
between the English and the Persians, and the English shall be for ever
free from customs. _Fourthly_.--All Christians made prisoners in this
war shall be given up to the disposal of the English, and all Mahomedan
prisoners to the Persians. _Fifthly_.--The Persians shall be at half the
charges of the ships employed in this enterprize, in victuals, wages,
wear-and-tear, and shall furnish all necessary powder and shot at their
sole expence.

These were the chief articles, besides which several others were agreed
upon, to be proposed to the Khan. After his arrival at Mina, Mr Bell and
Mr Monaxe were sent to wait upon him, on the 8th January, 1622, and were
entertained at a sumptuous banquet. A great feast and triumph was also
made, in consequence of intelligence that the Shah had conquered a
great country in Arabia, with its capital Aweiza.[303] Next day, the
Khan sent his vizier and two other principal officers to give an answer
to our proposed articles. The _first_ was granted. For the _second_, it
was substituted that the castle of Ormuz was to be occupied by both
nations till the King's pleasure was known. The _third_ was granted,
provided also, that the goods from India belonging to the king and the
Khan were to pass free of duty. In regard to the _fourth_, reservation
was made as to the two principal Portuguese captains, Ruy Frere, captain
of Kismis Castle, and Simon de Mela, governor of Ormus, till the king's
pleasure were known. Other articles were agreed upon; such as that no
change was to be made in regard to religion, and the expence of military
stores was to be divided. The Khan and Mr Bell signed these articles;
and presently our goods were laden upon the Khan's own camels at free
cost, which could not be procured before for any money.

[Footnote 303: This assuredly alludes to Ahwas in Khosistan, to the N.W.
of the lower Euphrates, opposite to Bussrah, which, though not in
Arabia, is in its immediate neighbourhood, and principally inhabited by
people of Arabian origin.--E.]

The 10th of January we returned to Costack, and going on board,
acquainted our commanders with the success of our mission. When the news
of this agreement became known among the several ships companies, they
consulted among themselves, and with one voice refused to take any share
in the business. This broke out first in the London, in which ship fifty
or sixty of her crew took part in refusing to have any thing to do with
this warlike measure; but, after taking much pains to reconcile them to
the propriety and necessity of joining with the Persians, Captain Blithe
at last prevailed with them, and they promised to go with him wherever
he chose to lead them. In a day or two, the flame of discontent and
opposition spread among the other ships, alleging that it was no
mercantile business, and that it might lead to a breach of the peace
between our nation and Spain; but formal protests being taken against
the crews, what with the fear of forfeiting their wages, and a promised
gratification of a month's pay, they all at last yielded.

We set sail for Ormus on the 19th of January, and anchored on the night
of the 22d before the town, about two leagues from the castle, expecting
that the enemy's armada would come out to fight us, consisting of five
galleons, and some fifteen or twenty frigates, or armed barks; but they
hauled in so near the castle, that we could not get nigh them. For which
reason, and because our avowed enemy, Ruy Frere de Andrada, was in his
newly-erected castle of Kismis, we sailed to that place, where we
arrived the next day, and were just in time to save the lives of the
Portuguese, who were no longer able to hold out against the Persians,
and were willing rather to yield to us than them. After many meetings
and treaties, they yielded up both themselves and their castle into our
hands on the 1st February, it being concluded that the whole garrison
was to depart with their private property to any place except Ormus,
their commander only remaining in our hands as a pledge for the
fulfilment of the capitulation. In this service two of our people were
slain, one of whom was Mr Baffin.[304]

[Footnote 304: Mr Baffin was a mathematician and mariner, to whom our
northern and north-western voyages are much indebted.--_Purch_.

Hence almost certainly the person to whom Baffin's bay, in the
north-east of America, owes its name.--E.]

There were about a thousand persons of all sorts in this castle, of whom
the Portuguese and some Mahometans were sent away: But the Khan required
certain Mahometans to be given up, who he pretended had revolted from
him. They were accordingly delivered up, and, though he had formerly
promised them mercy, he put them all to death. This castle had seventeen
pieces of ordnance, one of which was a brass pedro, two iron
demiculverins, four brass sackers, two iron minions, and six iron
falcons.[305]

[Footnote 305: On a former occasion, we have given an account of the
various kinds of ordnance used about the 17th century. The _pedro_ was
probably a gun of large calibre for throwing _stone_ bullets. In modern
times, cannon are designated by the weights of their respective balls,
in combination with their being long or short, land or sea, field or
garrison, single or double fortified, iron or brass.--E.]

Leaving some Englishmen to assist in keeping possession of this fortress
along with the Persians, according to agreement, we set sail on the 4th
February for Gambroon, on the mainland of Persia, within three leagues
of Ormus, and directly opposite. Ruy Frere de Andrada, the late
commander of Kismis, was sent off for Surat, in the Lion, accompanied by
the Rose and Richard. The London, Jonas, Whale, and Dolphin, with the
two prizes of 250 tons each, remained to transport the Persians in
safety to Ormus. We were royally feasted at Gambroon by the Khan, who
was much dissatisfied that Andrada and some of the Moors had not been
delivered up to him, yet dissembled his discontent, in regard of his
farther need for our ships in the enterprise against Ormus. After the
feast, all the English gentlemen present were presented with vests, each
according to his rank.

On the 9th of February we set sail for Ormus, having about two hundred
Persian boats of all sizes, besides two frigates or barks, and our
ships, having in them about 2500 or 3000 Persian soldiers, of various
sorts. We anchored that night about two leagues from the castle; and
next forenoon all the Persians were landed on the island of Ormus, a
little way from the town, to which they marched in a confused manner,
penetrating as far as the Meidan, or market-place, without resistance.
The market-place was barricadoed and defended for some time by the
Portuguese with shot and pikes; but the Persians soon made way, with
small loss, and drove the Portuguese before them into the castle, like
so many sheep. One Persian only, who first entered, was slain by a pike,
and he who slew him soon lost his head, his heels being too heavy to
carry it away.

On first entering the city, the Persian general, named Einam Culi Beg,
placed captains with detachments of soldiers in various quarters,
proclaiming that each officer was to be answerable for the safety of the
quarter assigned to him, and threatening death to all who were found
pillaging. Some infringing these orders were severely punished, some
being hanged, others having their ears or noses cut off, and others
bastinadoed even for trifles. Yet, in two or three days after, the shops
and houses were forced open, and every man so wearied with carrying away
plunder all day long, and sleeping so securely at night without any
proper military precautions, that the Portuguese might easily have slain
many, if they had ventured upon making a sally.

On the night of our landing, I took possession of a very commodious
house for a factory, which, for convenience and goodness of its rooms,
exceeded, as I think, any factory belonging to the Honourable Company.
But it proved too hot for me on the 13th, in the night, as one of the
master's mates of the Whale, with others of his companions, after I was
in bed, by carelessness of candles, while searching for plunder, set a
room on fire in which were some goods given me in charge by the general.
Fortunately the wind favoured us, so that the house was not consumed.
Considering the strength of this city, and that every house was as it
were a little castle, I was astonished the Portuguese should have
abandoned it so soon. But it seems they were afraid of being intercepted
by the Persians in their retreat to the castle, and dreaded that the
Mahometan inhabitants might have betrayed them.

The Persians began presently to throw up trenches, and daily approached
nearer the castle, and, with our help, erected batteries for ordnance,
and sconces or redoubts for securing their men, and protecting the
trenches. With the cannon from our ships, we sore galled the Portuguese
ships, forcing them to haul in as close as possible to the castle. On
the 24th of February, four of our boats set fire to the San Pedro,
formerly admiral of Andrada's fleet, which put all the rest in great
danger, but the tide carried her out to sea, and her relics were towed
on shore at Gambroon by the Arab and other country boats, some iron
ordnance and shot being got out of her burnt carkass. The Khan was much
rejoiced at this exploit.

The Persians having succeeded in constructing a mine under one of the
bastions, which was charged with upwards of forty barrels of powder, it
was exploded on the 17th of March, by which a practicable breach was
made in the salient angle of the bastion. The Persians made immediately
a fierce assault, and Shah Culi Beg got possession of the bastion with
200 of his bravest men, and maintained himself there for at least three
hours; but the Portuguese made a brave defence, and with powder-pots,
scalding lead, and other devices of fire, did much hurt to the
assailants, burning, scalding, and slaying many of them, so that the
Persians were at last driven out with considerable loss, most of them
being wounded, scalded, or scorched. On the same day, the city was set
on fire in several places, by the command of the Persian general, as was
reported, because his Arab soldiers lurked among the houses, and could
not be got forth to do any service in the siege.

To the number of four or five thousand men, we were now cooped up in a
barren island without shelter, producing nothing in itself except salt;
and I know not by what mistaken policy the general had been induced to
send away all the rice and other victuals, by which means we were
reduced to depend upon the continent for a daily supply of provisions,
and even water; so that, if a fleet of Portuguese frigates had come, as
was expected, we must have been famished, as the country boats durst not
have ventured to us from the main. The rain water in the open cisterns
was daily wasted, and became brackish, no care being taken to fill the
jars and private cisterns in almost every house, while it remained good.
The Persians are quite ignorant in the art of war, for they entered the
breach without fear, precaution, or means of establishing themselves;
and they lost with shame what they might have defended with honour. I
observed other defects in their management, even of the very sinews of
war; and I am astonished that Shah Abbas, the wonder of our age, should
have sent his army on this expedition so weakly provided with money,
arms, ammunition, ships, and all other necessaries. I am even satisfied
that all the money belonging to the khan was consumed in one month's pay
to our ships, and I fear we shall have to wait for the rest till the
plunder is converted into money. In regard to arms and ammunition, they
have only small pieces, with bows and arrows, and swords, some of their
chiefs having coats of mail. They were so scarce of powder, that after
blowing their mine, they had hardly enough to supply the small arms for
entering the breach, though furnished with twenty or twenty-five barrels
from our ships. They had not a single scaling-ladder to assist their
entry. Were we to forsake them, they would soon be completely at a
stand, yet they have already broken conditions with us in several
things, and I much fear, when all is done, we shall be paid with
reversions, and what else they themselves please.

Our ordnance so galled the Portuguese ships from the shore, that a
galleon was sunk on the 19th of March, and two more on the 20th and 23d.
The last come ship from Goa, which was their admiral, and one of the
others, were, I think, sacrificed by the policy of the governor, that
the garrison might have no means of escape, and might therefore defend
themselves manfully to the last, in hopes of relief from Goa, though
some thought they went down in consequence of injuries from sunken
rocks, in hauling them so near the castle to get them out of the range
of our battery.

On the 27th, news was brought me that some of the Portuguese were come
from the castle to treat of peace, upon which I repaired to the
general's tent, where I could well perceive, by the countenances of our
two English commanders, that I was by no means welcome: But, to requite
them in their own coin, both they and I soon saw that none of us were
acceptable to the Persians, for they long delayed bringing in the
Portuguese messenger, in hopes we would have gone away, but at length,
seeing we remained, he was brought in. The drift of his speech was to
the following effect:--"His captain had sent him to kiss the hands of
the general, and to ask the reason of making war upon the Portuguese,
who were friends to the Persians, and thought it strange, considering
their ancient league and friendship, that so great a war should be made
only for one or two wells of water. Besides, that the governor and
people of Ormus were not to blame for what had been done at Kismis by
Ruy Frere de Andrada; yet were they willing, so far as might consist
with the honour of their sovereign, to purchase peace, which they needed
not to do either from fear or weakness, having above a thousand
able-bodied men in the castle, with provisions and water for many
months; besides which, they were in daily expectation of succours from
Goa. He concluded by saying, that the Persians would find it a hard
matter to win the castle, as they were resolved to defend themselves to
the last man."

The latter part of this speech, consisting of bravado, was by no means
pleasing to the Persian general, who desired the messenger to declare
the purpose of his coming. On which he said, the governor wished to know
what the Persian general would have? To this the general answered, that
he would have the castle; and with that answer the messenger was
dismissed, without even the offer of a cup of wine, if I had not caused
one to be given him. I suspect he brought a more substantial message,
which was omitted on account of our presence, having been so instructed
by Shah Culi Beg, in whose house he was at least for an hour before he
was brought before the general. I fear therefore some sinister designs
of the Persians, which a few days will discover.

Our captains, by means of their interpreters, now moved their own
affairs with the general, to which he gave no great heed, but desired
that business might be deferred for some time; yet had he that very day
earnestly entreated them to send him a quantity of powder from the
ships, meaning that night to attempt blowing up the castle, for which
the mines were all ready, and he wanted nothing but powder. They had
accordingly sent him thirty-four barrels, for which forwardness I fear
the Company at home will give them little thanks.

The 28th March, understanding that two chief men of the Portuguese
garrison were in Shah Culi Beg's house, where they had been four or five
hours in conference with the Persian general, without sending to us,
which increased our suspicions that the Persians meant to deal
fraudulently with us; the two English commanders and I went together to
the tent of the Persian general, and expressed our dislike of this
underhand manner of proceeding. We stated, that we were partakers with
them in this war, in which we had hazarded ourselves, our ships, and our
goods, besides the hindrance we sustained by losing the monsoon, and
that we ought to be equal participators in all treaties and proceedings,
as well as in the war, and desired therefore to know what they had
concluded, or meant to conclude, with the Portuguese. To this he
answered, that nothing had been done, neither should any thing be
concluded without acquainting us. This was a mere empty compliment,
which all his actions belied. We must, however, be content to suffer all
with patience: Yet, were it not for our merchants and woods in Persia,
we could easily have remedied this affair, and have brought the
Portuguese to such terms as we pleased. As matters stand, however, we
are so tied down, we must be patient, and I fear things will turn out
very ill, though they pretend all things shall be done to our
contentment.

About noon this day, seeing many Arabs in the Meidan armed with pikes
and guns, whom I did not usually see so armed, I at length observed them
ranged upon both sides of the market-place, and presently afterwards two
Portuguese gentlemen passed, attended by six or eight pages and
servants, one of whom carried an umbrella over their heads. They were
accompanied by Shah Culi Beg, and other chief Persians, who conducted
them to the house of Agariza of Dabul. Though uninvited, I went there
also, and intruded into their company, where I found the Persian general
and other chiefs, his assistants and counsellors. The general gave me a
kind welcome, and made me sit down next himself, which I did not refuse,
that the Portuguese might see we were in grace and favour. Having made
my obeisance to the Persians, I then saluted the Portuguese officers,
who returned the compliment, after which I had some general conversation
with them, not pertaining to the great purpose in hand, of which I did
not presume to speak, till the general gave me occasion, which was not
until after a collation of _pilaw_, and other dishes, after the fashion
of Persia.

The collation being ended, the general asked them what was now their
desire. They answered, that the captain of the castle had given them
written instructions, but had desired them to make their proposals to
the Khan himself, who now resided at Gombroon, if they might be
permitted to wait upon him. To this the general answered, that he durst
not allow them, unless the Khan were first made acquainted with their
desire. I could plainly perceive that this proceeded only from affected
delays on both sides, to give time for attaining their several purposes.
The Portuguese then proceeded to complain, as formerly, against Ruy
Frere, as if he durst have presumed to seize and fortify Kismis without
orders from the king his master. They alleged also that the affair was
in itself of no moment, being only a barren island with a well or two.
To this the Persian general replied, it was of no matter what might be
its value, but they had gone to war against the king of Persia and his
subjects, for which their castle of Ormus must make satisfaction;
wherefore, if they would surrender the castle without any more
bloodshed, they should have good quarter and kind usage. The Portuguese
said they had no commission to treat of any such matter, and so the
conference ended, and they were dismissed.

Notwithstanding of the Portuguese being refused leave to go to the Khan,
they had licence that same night, and were sent over to treat with him
at Gambroon. I could never know the certainty of the proposed treaty,
but shall here insert what I heard reported on the subject. They
proposed, in the first place, to the Khan, to raise the siege, and
permit them to enjoy their city and castle of Ormus as formerly, in
consideration of which, they offered to pay 200,000 tomans in hand, and
the yearly rent they had formerly paid to the king of Ormus, from the
revenue of the custom-house, which, as I have heard, was 140,000 rials
of eight or Spanish dollars yearly. But some said, besides the 200,000
tomans in hand, they offered as much yearly. [306] It was reported that
the Khan demanded 500,000 tomans in hand, equal to L172,418:10:7
sterling,[307] and an yearly rent of 200,000 tomans.

[Footnote 306: A toman, by the data in the text immediately following,
is about seven shillings; hence 200,000 tomans are equal to L70,000
sterling.--E.]

[Footnote 307: At the former computation, this sum is equal to L175,000;
and the conversion in the text gives 6s. 11-3/4d, and a small fraction
more for each toman, being very near 7s. which is more convenient.--E.]

The 2d April, with the aid of the English, the Persians blew up two
other mines, by which a fair and practicable breach was opened, through
which the besiegers might have entered without much difficulty, yet was
there no assault made. Having noticed this carefully, Captain Weddell
went to the Persian general to learn his purposes; when, to excuse the
backwardness of his people, he pretended that the breach was too
difficult to be assaulted with any hope of success. Yet we knew the
contrary, as an English youth, who was servant to the master of the
Jonas, bolder than any of the Persians, had gone up the breach to the
very top of the castle wall, and told us it was as easily ascendible as
a pair of stairs, and broad enough for many men to go abreast. In
representing this to the general, and asking what were his future plans
of proceeding, he told us he would be ready with another mine in three
days. This I believed to be true, for his mining is to procure gold, not
to make breaches, unless breach of promise to us, which he can easily
do; for of late they have not performed any of their engagements, yet
will not this teach us to look to ourselves.

The greatest hurt done by the Portuguese to the Persians in the assault
on the castle, was by means of powder-pots, by which many of the
assailants were scorched and severely burned. To guard against this, the
Khan has now sent over many coats and jackets of leather, as not so
liable to catch fire as their calico coats, quilted or stuffed with
cotton wool. Yet, according to the English proverb, _The burnt child
dreads the fire;_ notwithstanding their leathern coats, none of them are
hardy enough to attempt this new breach, though much easier to enter
than the former, any farther than to pillage certain bales of _bastas_
and other stuffs which have fallen down from a barricade or breast-work,
thrown up by the Portuguese for defending the top of the breach from the
fire of the Persians.

On the 5th of April the Persian general had news that 100,000 maunds of
powder were arrived from Bahrein. On the 12th, a Portuguese came to the
Persian general, having escaped from the castle, and gave accounts of
the great wants and weaknesses of the garrison, insomuch, that six or
eight died daily of the flux, chiefly owing to their having nothing to
drink, but corrupted brackish water, of which even they have so little
as to be put on short allowance, so that several have died of thirst.
Their only food consists of rice and salt fish, both of which would
require a good allowance of drink. Notwithstanding all this, the Persian
general wastes his time in constructing new mines, of which he has no
less than three in hand at this time, as if he proposed to blow up the
wall all round about, before making any fresh assault. On the night of
the 12th, one of our frigates or barks, which belonged to the London,
being on guard alone, to prevent the escape of the Portuguese frigates,
was clapped on board by two of these at once, but beat them both off. I
know not what might be the loss of the Portuguese on this occasion, but
two of our men were slain, and seven wounded; yet, had not our black
rowers forsaken them, our people might easily have taken the assailants.

The 14th, the Persians sprung another mine, by which a very assailable
breach was made, yet no assault was attempted. On this occasion, the
mine had to be sprung before it was quite ready, because the Portuguese
had already come so near it with a counter mine, that the Persians were
afraid of their mine being rendered useless before they could place
their powder. Another deserter came from the castle on the 15th, who
confirmed the report given by the former, and told us that the two
frigates which had assailed ours had come from Muskat, with the son of
the deceased Don Francisco de Sousa, late governor of the castle of
Ormus, who had come on purpose to carry away his mother and other women
from the castle.

At this time, the Moors who had surrendered to us from the castle of
Kismis, were delivered up to the Persian general, at his earnest
request, and partly with their own consent, on promise of being pardoned
for having served under the Portuguese against their own king and
country, and of being provided for and employed in the siege of Ormus.
He seemed to ratify this promise, both to them and us, by entertaining
some of their chiefs in our presence, with much apparent courtesy, even
giving fine new vests to five or six of the principal officers. Yet next
morning he caused eighty of their heads to be cut off, and sent the five
or six newly-vested chiefs to the Khan at Gambroon, to receive their
final doom, which was soon settled, as they were sentenced to the same
fate with their fellows. Mir Senadine, their chief captain, was executed
by the hands of Shere Alli, governor of Mogustan, who had married his
daughter, and yet put his father-in-law to death with as much
willingness as if he had been his mortal enemy.

The 17th of April, the Persians sprung another mine, closely adjoining
their first. This did not produce the effect expected, as it burst out
at the side, carrying part of the wall along with it, yet did little or
no harm upwards, which was the point aimed at, on purpose to widen the
former breach. Yet it encouraged the Persian general to try another
assault, with at least 2000 soldiers. They ran up the breach with great
resolution, into part of a bulwark or bastion, which they might easily
have gained, had not their haste run their resolution out of breath;
insomuch, that eight or ten Portuguese, assisted by a few blacks, armed
only with rapiers, made them give ground and retire to the outer skirt
of the bulwark, where there was not room for forty men to face the
enemy. They here endeavoured, however, to entrench themselves; but,
before they could establish a lodgement, the Portuguese plied two or
three pieces of ordnance upon them from a flanking battery, which sent
some scores of the Persians with news to their prophet _Mortus Alli_
that more of his disciples would shortly be with them. This accordingly
was the case, chiefly owing to their own ignorance and cowardice; for,
had they not made a stand in that place, but rushed pell-mell along with
the Portuguese into the castle, they might have carried it with less
than half the loss they sustained that day to little purpose. Had I not
been an eye-witness, I could hardly have believed the stupid ignorance
of the Persian general on this occasion. He had two breaches, almost
equally good, yet applied all his men to the assault of one only,
instead of attempting both at one time. Besides, he had at least eighty
or an hundred scaling-ladders, yet not one of them was brought near the
castle walls. His soldiers hung clustering on the breach, like a swarm
of bees, or a flock of sheep at a gap, none having the heart to enter,
while the Portuguese gleaned away five or six at a shot, sometimes more,
driving forwards their black soldiers to throw powder-pots among the
Persians.

The assault was renewed on the 18th, but with more harm to the Persians
than the Portuguese. During the intervening night, two blacks made signs
to the Persians on the top of the breach, that they wished to come over
to them, and were drawn up with ropes. By these it was learned that the
captain of the castle had been wounded in the head by a stone; that
there were not above an hundred men in the garrison able to handle their
arms: and that their water grew daily more scanty and worse in quality,
by which the mortality continually increased. They reported also that
great difference in opinion prevailed among the Portuguese, some wishing
to endeavour to escape by sea, while others held it more honourable to
sell their lives at a dear rate, by defending the castle to the last
extremity, and proposed, when they could no longer hold out, to put all
their women and treasure into a house and blow them up, that the
Persians might neither enjoy their wealth nor abuse their wives; and,
when this was done, to rush upon the Persians, and so end their days.

In the evening of the 19th, the Persians made another effort to press
forwards, and got possession of the entire bulwark, forcing the
Portuguese to retire farther within the castle. In this conflict many of
the Portuguese were wounded, and sore scalded with fire-pots, in the
management of which the Persians had now become expert, though many of
them had paid dearly for their instruction. In this conflict four
Portuguese were slain, and their heads brought to the Persian general.
In this art of cutting off heads, the Persians are particularly cunning,
insomuch, that I do not think there is an executioner in all Germany
that can excel them. No sooner does a Persian lay hold of an enemy, than
off goes his head at one blow of his scymitar.[308] He then makes a hole
in the ear or cheek with his dagger, by which he will sometimes bring
three or four heads at once to his general. When it is proposed to send
these heads taken in war to be seen by the king or the khan, they very
adroitly flea off the skin of the head and face, which they stuff up
with straw like a foot-ball, and so send them by whole sackfulls.[309]

[Footnote 308: This, however, is to the praise of the Persians, as good
swordsmen, on which account the Turks fear coming to hand blows with
them.--_Purch_.]

[Footnote 309: In Turkey they manage this barbarous trophy of success
more conveniently, as the Grand Signior is satisfied with a display of
the ears of his enemies preserved in salt.--E.]

This night, one of the frigates that came from Muskat for Douna de
Sousa, made her escape, no doubt very richly freighted. Her consort,
which likewise attempted to get away, was chased in again. That which
escaped, being hailed by the Arab boats that lay in wait to intercept
the passage, got off by using the watch-word usual between the English
and Arabs, _Ingres ingresses,_ which had not been once changed since the
commencement of this enterprize, in which oversight both the Persians
and English were highly blameable, as, by the continual use of this
watch-word, it had come to the knowledge of the Portuguese, who thus
used it to their great benefit.

During the night of the 20th April, the other frigate made an effort to
escape, but was intercepted and taken by the frigate and pinnace
belonging to the London. This frigate was employed to carry away the
Portuguese _almirante,_ named Luis de Brito, a kinsman to the viceroy of
Goa, but the captain of the castle would not permit him to go away; and
the men belonging to this frigate, being seven persons, fearing the
capture of the castle and desirous to secure their own lives, stole away
without leave.

The 21st, the Persians made a display of making themselves masters of
the castle by storm; but, while we expected to see them put this bold
measure in execution, I discovered that they and the Portuguese were
engaged in a parley. While I was preparing to wait on the Persian
general, to enquire the cause of this sudden change of measures, I met a
messenger from our English commanders, informing me that a boat had come
off to our ships from the castle, bearing a flag of truce, and desiring
my presence on board to see what was the purpose of this communication.
On my getting on board the London, I found two Portuguese there, with
the following letters from the captain of the castle, and the almirante:

   "There hath been such ancient friendship between the
   Portuguese and English nations, that, considering the present
   war at this place, we ought to come to a mutual good
   understanding. From what I see of the mines made by the
   Persians, by which one of my bulwarks is already won, I am
   of opinion these could not have been constructed without
   your aid. Wherefore, I request you would be the means of
   procuring peace for me with the Persians, if the same may
   be done with your and their good pleasure, yet so that I may
   not lose my credit, nor you fail to gain honour. Thus, not
   else, our Lord keep you," &c.

   _Simon de Mela Pereira_.

   "This castle is so hard pressed, that the Persians demand
   us to surrender by capitulation, but which we will not consent
   to: For, when reduced to that necessity, we will call
   upon your worships for that purpose, as it were not reasonable
   for us to capitulate with the infidels when you are present.
   We hold it more humane to deliver our innocent women,
   and other unnecessary people, to the rigour of our own
   weapons, than to the clemency of the Persians; and that you
   might know this our purpose, I have written these lines to
   accompany the letter from our captain. What else you may
   wish to know, you may learn from the bearer of these letters,
   to whom you may give the same credit as to myself. And so
   God keep your worships," &c.

   _Luis de Brito Dar_.

   Dated 1st May, 1622.[310]

Taking these letters into consideration, and commiserating their
situation as Christians, it was resolved to give them a favourable
answer, which was done accordingly in a letter to the Captain Simon de
Mela, offering to become an intermedium for procuring them such
conditions from the Persians as might save the lives of the Christians
who still remained in the castle, which we had in our power to warrant,
and were willing to shew them such farther courtesy as might tend to
their relief, as far as we could see. We desired him therefore to put
his demands in writing, and send them to us as soon as possible. A
similar answer was written to the almirante, and with these the two
messengers were sent back to the castle in one of our own boats. They
soon returned with other letters from the captain and almirante, saying,
"That they left themselves entirely in our hands, the necessity of their
situation not allowing time for farther writing, lest the Persians might
in the mean while break in and put them all to the sword."

[Footnote 310: The 1st of May, _new style_, was the 21st April, _old
style_; the difference being then ten days.--E.]

Upon this we addressed ourselves to the Persian general, requesting him
to grant a truce of two days to the distressed Portuguese, in which time
we might treat with them for such conditions as might be at the same
time beneficial for the Persians and ourselves. At length, a Persian
officer and I were deputed to go into the castle to treat with the
Portuguese, and they also desired our vice-admiral, Mr Woodcock, might
accompany us. We all three went to the castle gate, but could not be
allowed to enter; yet were met by Luis de Brito, the Portuguese
almirante, and five or six other _cavalieros_, but did not see the
captain, as the inferior officers and soldiers had mutinied against him,
and detained him as a prisoner. Our whole conference, therefore, was
with the almirante, who chiefly addressed himself to Captain Woodcock,
our almirante, or vice-admiral.

Mir Adul Hassan, and Pulot Beg, had been sent for to the ship, where
some persons had embezzled a portion of treasure, as we now wished them
to be present at the conference on the part of the Khan. They came
accordingly to the English house, when one of them made a long speech,
saying how kindly the Khan esteemed the services and assistance given by
the English in this war, which he should never forget, nor allow to pass
unrewarded. They next declared that the Khan intended to proceed, after
the surrender of Ormus, to besiege both Muskat and Sware, and therefore
that the Portuguese ought on no account to be allowed to go to either of
these places. Lastly, they insinuated basely and dishonourably, that we
should betray the Portuguese captain, and five or six more of his
principal officers, into their hands, as this would tend greatly to the
honour and satisfaction of the Khan, by enabling him to present them to
Shah Abas. On hearing this vile and dishonourable proposal, I left the
room, that my ears might not be contaminated by such abominable
conditions; saying, at my departure, to these Persians, that I would not
be guilty of consenting to so infamous a business for a whole houseful
of gold.

The Portuguese being reduced to such extremity as to be under the
necessity of surrendering on any terms that might save their lives from
the cruelty of the Persians, sent on the morning of the 23d, offering to
put themselves into our hands, on condition that we furnished them with
the means of being conveyed either to Muskat or India. We agreed to this
proposal, on which Captain Blithe and I went as hostages into the
castle, to see them safely set out; the Persian general promising that
not one of his soldiers or men should enter the castle till all the
Portuguese were gone out, and that only three of his people and three of
ours should sit at the gate, to see that they did not carry away any
thing of value. This the Persians watched so narrowly, that they most
basely searched and abused the women. But the king of Ormus with his
rich vizier, together with their women, treasure, and servants, were all
conveyed over the breach in the wall, and not a single Englishman called
or allowed to see what they carried out with them. Not only they, but
all other Mahometans and Banyans, with their treasure and best things,
were conveyed out of the castle in the same manner; whole bales of
goods, with boxes and caskets full of treasure, to an unknown amount,
were carried at the same time over the breaches. No sooner were the
gates opened for letting out the Portuguese, but at least forty Persians
got in and spread themselves about the castle, besides whom, some of the
ruder sort among the English got in likewise, whose coming in I fear was
the cause of the Persians doing the same, judging themselves as worthy
of this liberty as our people.

Before mid-day of the 24th, both the Persians and English began to
pillage in a most shameful manner, so that I was both grieved and
ashamed, yet could see no means of remedy. The Persians drove out the
poor sick, wounded, and scorched Christians, who were not able to help
themselves, so that my heart yearned with compassion to see their woeful
plight. In the evening, the Khan of Shiras came over, as if in triumph,
to view the castle and its great ordnance, of which there were near
three hundred pieces,[311] part of which belonged to the galleons, and
the rest to the castle. This evening, the commanders and I, wishing to
retain possession of the church in which we had placed a quantity of
plate and treasure, for its better security against being embezzled, our
design was utterly denied by Pulot Beg, who told our commanders, in
plain terms, that they might lie out of doors. Being justly incensed at
this, we all three left the castle, the two captains going on board
their ships, while I went to the city; but, as the tide was up, and I
could not get a boat, I had to remain at the castle wall till near
midnight. At this time there came about sixty Persians, by their own
report, sent by the Khan to prevent the Arabs from conveying away any of
the ordnance which lay by the shore, but I suspect their real object was
to cut the throats of the poor Christians who lay at the shore, for want
of boats to carry them on board; but fortunately they were protected by
an English guard. Our chief business the whole of this day was to see
the poor Portuguese sent safely out of the castle, most of them so
weakened by divers maladies, but chiefly by famine, and many of them so
noisome by their putrified wounds, and scorchings with gunpowder, that
their pitiful cries and complaints might have moved pity in a heart of
stone; yet such was the cruel disposition of the Persians, that they
drove them out of the castle like so many dogs, stripping many of them
even of their shirts.

[Footnote 311: In a shorter relation of this siege, by Mr W. Pinder, the
ordnance in the castle of Ormus are thus enumerated:--Fifty-three pieces
mounted, of the following descriptions,--four brass cannons, six brass
demi-cannons, sixteen brass cannons-pedro, nine brass culverins, two
brass demi-culverins, three iron demi-culverins, ten brass basses, one
iron minion, one iron culverin, one iron cannon-pedro. Besides
ninety-two brass pieces not mounted, and seven brass bastels which they
had landed from the ships that were sunk. In all, 152 pieces.--E.]

On the evening of the 27th, we allowed the Portuguese to depart for Goa,
to the number of 2500 persons, including men, women, and children, to
whom we gave our two prizes, the Robert and Shilling, for their
transport, with victuals and water necessary for the voyage, and a pass
to free them from any molestation, in case they met with any of our
ships at sea. Besides these, there were upwards of an hundred persons,
so maimed or sick as to be incapable of being sent off at this time, for
want of room in these two ships.

The king of Ormus was very poor, and lived chiefly on a pension or
allowance of 140,000 rees, allowed him by the king of Spain, with some
small reserved petty customs. In rummaging among his papers, we found
the copy of a letter from him to the king of Spain, complaining loudly
of the injustice of the Portuguese, and charging them with the entire
overthrow of the kingdom of Ormus.[312]

[Footnote 312: Besides this letter, too long and uninteresting for
insertion, there are several other letters and documents in the Pilgrims
at this place, so much in the same predicament as to be here
omitted.--E.]

When we expected to have received 1200 tomans[313] from Pulot Beg, who
was chief commissioner under the Khan of Shiras, as our pay for the time
occupied in this enterprize, he contrived to make us a larger sum in
their debt, under pretence of embezzling the plunder in the castle;
while we, on the other hand, made counter demands of a much larger sum
due to us from the Persians, in the same manner. At length, three months
pay were allowed, and our other demands were shifted off, as he
pretended to have no power to liquidate them without an order from the
Khan. After business was ended, our misery began, occasioned by the
insufferable heat of Ormus, and the disorders of our own people in
drinking arrack, and other excesses no less injurious; through which
such diseases arose among our people, that three-fourths of them were
dangerously sick, and many died so suddenly, that the plague was feared
to have got among them, although no symptoms of that dreadful malady as
yet appeared. This extremity lasted for fourteen days, during which
time, six or seven of our men died every day; but after this, it pleased
God to stay the mortality, and the rest recovered. Ten pieces of
ordnance belonging to the Portuguese, were taken into our ships, to
replace that number of our own which had been broken or otherwise
spoiled during the siege. Our fleet was detained till the 1st September,
owing to the shifting of the monsoon, and waiting its return. Leaving
Ormus on that day, we arrived in Swally roads on the 24th of that month,
where the London, Jonas, and Lion, loaded for England, and sailed
homewards bound on the 30th December. Before setting sail, news was
brought of sinking three Portuguese carracks off the port of
Masulipatam, by the English and Dutch in conjunction.

[Footnote 313: This must be a gross error, as by the value of the toman
formerly given, the sum in the text very little exceeds L400. Purchas
mentions, in a side-note, that he had heard the English received L20,000
for this service from the Persians.--E.]

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Annals of the East India Company,[314] the English are said on
this occasion to have received a proportion of the plunder acquired at
Ormus, and a grant of the moiety of the customs at Gambroon, which
place, in the sequel, became the principal station of their trade with
Persia and other places in the Persian gulf. The treaty made in 1615 by
Mr Connock was also renewed, and an additional phirmaund granted by the
Sophi, allowing them to purchase whatever quantity of Persian silks they
might think proper, in any part of his dominions, with the privilege of
bringing their goods from Gambroon to Ispahan free of duties.

[Footnote 314: Vol. I. p. 236. The historiographer makes, however, a
small mistake, naming Ruy Frere de Andrada as chief commander of the
Portuguese at Ormus, who only commanded in a subordinate fortress at
Kismis.--E.]

In consequence of the war of Ormus, a claim was set up in 1624 by the
crown and the Duke of Buckingham, as lord high admiral of England, by
which the Company was demanded to pay a proportion of the prize-money,
which their ships were supposed to have obtained in the seas bordering
on the countries within the limits of their exclusive charter. In order
to substantiate these claims, Captains Weddell, Blithe, Clevenger,
Beversham, and other officers of the Company's ships were examined, and
particularly those who had been employed against Ormus. According to
their statements, it appeared that the amount of this prize-money was
calculated at L100,000 and 240,000 rials of eight, but without taking
into view the charges and losses incurred by the Company on this
occasion, and by their ships being called off from commercial
engagements, to act as ships of war for the protection of their trade
against the Portuguese, and in the assistance of the government of
Persia, by which they had been compelled, either to engage in this war,
or to relinquish a trade in which they had expended large sums, together
with the loss of all their goods then in Persia. At last the Company was
obliged to compound, by payment of L10,000 to the Duke of Buckingham in
discharge of his claim, and received an order from the secretary of
state, Sir Edward Conway, to pay a similar sum also to the crown.--E.




SECTION XIV.


ACCOUNT OF THE MASSACRE OF AMBOINA, IN 1623.[315]

In the preceding sections of this chapter, the early commercial voyages
of the English East India Company have been detailed; and it is now
proposed to conclude this part of our arrangement, by a brief narrative
of the unjustifiable conduct of the Dutch at Amboina, in cruelly
torturing and executing several Englishmen and others on false pretences
of a conspiracy, but the real purpose of which was to appropriate to
themselves the entire trade of the spice islands, Amboina, Banda, and
the Moluccas. They effectually succeeded in this nefarious attempt, and
preserved that rich, but ill-got source of wealth, for almost two
hundred years; till recently expelled from thence, and from every other
commercial or colonial possession in Asia, Africa, and America. A just
retribution for submitting to, or seconding rather, the revolutionary
phrenzy of French democracy; for which they now deservedly suffer, under
the iron sceptre of the modern Atilla.

[Footnote 315: Purch. Pilgr. II. 1853. Harris, I. 877.]

In giving a short narrative of this infamous transaction, besides the
original account of Purchas, abridged from a more extended relation
published at the time by the East India Company, advantage has been
taken of the account given by Harris of the same event, which is fuller
and better connected than that of Purchas, who most negligently garbled
this story, under pretence of abbreviation. Harris appears evidently to
have used the authorised narrative published by the Company, in drawing
up his account of the event. There are other documents, relative to this
tragical event, both in the Pilgrims of Purchas and the Collection by
Harris, particularly the Dutch justificatory memorial, in which they
endeavour to vindicate their conduct, and to shew that the English
merited the lingering tortures and capital punishments to which they
were condemned; to which is added a reply or refutation, published by
order of the English Company. But the abridged narrative contained in
this section seems quite sufficient on so disgusting a subject,
especially so long after the events which it records.--E.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the fruitless issue of two several treaties, for arranging the
differences that had taken place in eastern India, between the English
and Hollanders respecting the trade of the spice islands, the first at
London in 1613, and the second at the Hague in 1616, a third negociation
was entered into at London in 1619, by which a solemn compact was
concluded upon for settling these disputes, and full and fair
arrangement made for the future proceedings of the servants of both
Companies in the Indies, as well in regard to their trade and commerce,
as to other matters. Among other points, it was agreed, in consideration
of the great losses the Dutch pretended to have sustained, both in men
and expence, in conquering the trade of the isles, namely, the Moluccas,
Banda, and Amboina, from the Spaniards and Portuguese, and in the
erection of forts for securing the same, that the Hollanders were to
enjoy two-third parts of that trade, and the English one-third; the
expences of the forts and garrisons to be maintained by taxes and
impositions, to be levied ratably on the merchandize. In consequence of
this agreement, the English East India Company established certain
factories, for managing their share of this trade, some at the Moluccas,
some at Banda, and others at Amboina.

The island of Amboina, near Ceram, is about forty leagues in circuit,
and gives its name also to some other small adjacent isles. This island
produces cloves, for the purpose of procuring which valuable spice, the
English had five several factories, the head and rendezvous of all being
at the town of Amboina, in which at the first, Mr George Muschamp was
chief factor, who was succeeded by Mr Gabriel Towerson; having authority
over the subordinate factories of Hitto and Larica on the same island,
and at Loho and Cambello on a point of the neighbouring island of Ceram.
On the island of Amboina and the point of Ceram, the Hollanders have
four forts, the chief of all being at the town of Amboina, which is very
strong, having four bastions or bulwarks, on each of which there are six
great cannons, most of them brass. One side of this castle is washed by
the sea, and the other is protected on the land side by a very deep
ditch, four or five fathoms broad, always filled by the sea. The
garrison of this castle consists of about 200 Dutch soldiers, and one
company of free burghers; besides which there are three or four hundred
_mardykers_, by which name the free natives are known, who reside in the
town, and are always ready to serve in the castle at an hour's warning.
There are likewise, for the most part, several good Dutch ships in the
roads, both for the protection of this place by sea, and for the
purposes of trade, as this is the central rendezvous of trade for the
Banda islands, as well as for Amboina. At this place, the English
factory was established in the town, under the protection of the castle,
in a house of their own, where they lived as they thought in security,
both in consideration of the ancient league of amity between the two
nations, and in virtue of the firm compact of union, made by the late
treaty of 1619, already mentioned.

The English factory continued here for about two years, trading
conjunctly with the Hollanders under the treaty. During this period
there occurred several differences and debates between the servants of
the two companies. The English complained that the Hollanders not only
lavished much unnecessary charges, in buildings and other needless
expences upon the forts and otherwise, but also paid the garrisons in
victuals and Coromandel cloths, which they issued to the soldiers at
three or four times the value which they cost, yet would not allow the
English proportion of the charges to be advanced in like manner, but
insisted always on their paying in ready money: Thus drawing from the
English, who only were bound to contribute one-third part, more than
two-thirds of the just and true charges. Upon this head there arose
frequent disputes, and the complaints of the English were conveyed to
Jacatra, now called Batavia, in Java, to the _council of defence_ of
both nations, there residing. The members of that council not being able
to agree upon these points of difference, the complaints were
transmitted to Europe, to be settled between the two companies; or, in
default of their agreement, by the king and the states general, pursuant
to one of the articles of the before-mentioned treaty, providing against
such contingencies. In the meantime, these, and other differences and
discontents between the English and Dutch, daily continued and
increased, till at length this knot, which all the tedious controversies
at Amboina and Jacatra were unable to untie, was cut asunder by the
sword, in the following manner.

About the 11th February, 1622, _old style_, or 21st of that month, 1623,
_new style_, a Japanese soldier belonging to the Dutch garrison of
Amboina castle, walking one night upon the wall, fell into conversation
with a centinel, in the course of which he asked several questions
respecting the strength of the fortifications and the number of its
garrison. It is to be observed, that most of the Japanese in Amboina
were actually soldiers in the Dutch service, yet not in these trusty
bands which always lodged within the castle, but only occasionally
called in from the town to assist in its defence. This Japanese, in
consequence of his conference with the centinel, was soon after
apprehended on suspicion of treason, and put to the torture by the
Dutch, to extort confession. While suffering under the torture, he was
induced to confess, that he and some others of his countrymen had
plotted to take possession of the castle. Several other Japanese were
consequently apprehended, and examined by torture; as also a Portuguese,
who was guardian or superintendent of the slaves belonging to the Dutch.
While these examinations were going on, which continued during three or
four days, some of the English, then resident at Amboina, were several
times in the castle on business, saw the prisoners, and heard of the
tortures they had undergone, and of the crime laid to their charge; yet
during all this time, never once suspected that this affair had any
connection with themselves, being unconscious of any evil intentions,
and having held no conversation with the prisoners.

At this time, one Abel Price, surgeon to the English factory at Amboina,
was a prisoner in the castle, for having offered or attempted, in a fit
of drunkenness, to set a Dutchman's house on fire. The Dutch shewed this
man some of the Japanese whom they had tortured, telling him they had
confessed that the English were in confederacy with them, in the plot
for seizing the castle, and threatened him with similar or worse
tortures, if he did not confess the same; and accordingly, on the 15th
February, O.S. they gave him the torture, and soon made him confess
whatever they were pleased to direct. That same morning, about nine
o'clock, they sent for Captain Gabriel Towerson, and the other
Englishmen belonging to the factory at Amboina, to come to speak with
the governor of the castle; on which they all went, except one, who was
left to take care of the house. On their arrival, the governor told
Captain Towerson, that he and others of his nation were accused of a
conspiracy to surprise the castle, and must therefore remain prisoners,
until tried for the same. The Dutch, immediately after this, took into
custody the person who had been left in charge of the English factory,
sequestrated all the merchandize belonging to the English Company, under
an inventory, and seized all the chests, boxes, books, writings, and
other things in the English house.

Captain Towerson was committed prisoner to his own chamber in the
English house, under a guard of Dutch soldiers. Emanuel Thomson was
imprisoned in the castle. All the rest, namely, John Beaumont, Edward
Collins, William Webber, Ephraim Ramsay, Timothy Johnson, John Fardo,
and Robert Brown, were distributed among the Dutch ships then in the
harbour, and secured in irons. The same day, the governor sent to the
two other factories in the same island, Hitto and Larica, to apprehend
the rest of the English residents, who were all brought prisoners to
Amboina on the 16th; Samuel Colson, John Clark, and George Sharrock,
from the former, and Edward Collins,[2] William Webber,[2] and John
Sadler, from the latter. On the same day, John Pocol, John Wetheral,
Thomas Ladbrook, were apprehended at Cambello, and John Beaumont,[2]
William Griggs, and Ephraim Ramsay,[316] at Loho; and were all brought
in irons to Amboina on the 20th of February.

[Footnote 316: These four persons are already named, as apprehended at
Amboina.--E.]

On the 15th of February, the governor and fiscal began to examine the
prisoners. John Beaumont and Timothy Johnson were first brought to the
castle, John Beaumont being left in a hall under a guard, while Johnson
was conducted into another room. Beaumont soon after heard him cry out
very pitifully, then become quiet for a while, and afterwards cried out
aloud. Abel Price, the surgeon, who was first questioned and put to the
torture, was brought in to confront and accuse him; but as Johnson
refused to confess any thing laid to his charge, Price was soon taken
away, and Johnson again put to the question, when Beaumont heard him
repeatedly roar under the torture. At the end of an hour, Johnson was
brought out into the hall, weeping and lamenting, all cut and cruelly
burnt in many parts of his body, and so laid aside in a corner of the
hall, having a soldier to watch him, with strict injunctions not to
allow him to speak to any one.

Emanuel Thomson was next brought in for examination, not in the same
room where Johnson had been, but in one farther from the hall; yet
Beaumont, who still remained in the hall, heard him often roar out most
lamentably. After half an hour spent in torturing him, he was led to
another place, but not through the hall where Beaumont was. Beaumont was
then called in for examination, and asked many questions concerning the
alleged conspiracy, all knowledge of which he denied with the most
solemn oaths. He was then made fast on purpose to be tortured, having a
cloth fastened about his neck, while two men stood ready with jars of
water to pour on his head: But the governor ordered him to be set loose
again, saying he would spare him for a day or two, being an old man.

Next day, being the 16th, William Webber, Edward Collins, Ephraim
Ramsay, and Robert Brown, were brought on shore for examination; and at
the same time Samuel Colson, William Griggs, John Clark, George
Sharrock, and John Sadler, from Hitto and Larica, were brought into the
hall. Robert Brown, a tailor, was first called in, and being subjected
to torture by water, confessed all in order, as interrogated by the
fiscal. Edward Collins was next called in, and told that those who were
formerly examined had accused him as accessory to the conspiracy for
taking the castle. Denying all knowledge of or participation in any such
plot, with great oaths, his hands and feet were made fast to the rack,
and a cloth bound about his throat, ready to administer the water
torture, upon which he entreated to be let down, saying that he would
confess all. On being loosed, he again protested his entire innocence
and ignorance of every thing laid to his charge; yet, as he knew they
would make him confess any thing they pleased by means of torture,
however false, he said they would do him a great favour by informing him
what they wished he should say, which he would speak as they desired, to
avoid the torture. The fiscal said he mocked them, ordered him to be
fastened up again, and to receive the water torture. After suffering
this for some time, he desired to be let down again to make his
confession, devising as well as he could what he should say.
Accordingly, he said that he, with Thomson, Johnson, Brown, and Fardo,
had plotted about ten weeks before, to surprise the castle with the aid
of the Japanese.

While making this contrived confession, he was interrupted by the
fiscal, who asked whether Captain Towerson were privy to this
conspiracy. He protested that Towerson knew nothing of the matter. "You
lie," said the fiscal, "did not he call you all before him, telling you
that the daily abuses of the Dutch had instigated him to devise a plot,
and that he wanted nothing but your consent and secrecy?" Then a Dutch
merchant who was present, named Jan Igost, asked him, if they had not
all been sworn to secrecy on the Bible? Collins declared with great
oaths, that he knew nothing of any such matter. He was again ordered to
be seized up again to the torture, on which he said that all was true
they had said. Then the fiscal asked, if the English in the other
factories were consenting to this plot? To which he answered, no. The
fiscal then next asked, if the English president at Jacatra, or Mr
Weldon the agent at Banda, were engaged in this plot, or privy to its
contrivance? He again answered, no. The fiscal next enquired by what
means the Japanese were to have executed their purpose? And, when
Collins stood amazed, and devising some probable fictions to satisfy
them, the fiscal helped him out, saying, "Were not two Japanese to have
gone to each bulwark, and two to the door of the governor's chamber, to
have killed him on coming out to enquire into the disturbance you were
to have raised without?" Upon this, a person who stood by, desired the
fiscal not to put words into the mouth of the witness, but to allow him
to speak for himself. After this reproof, without waiting any answer to
his former question, the fiscal asked what reward was to have been given
the Japanese for their services? Collins answered 1000 dollars each. He
was then asked, when this plot was to have been carried into execution?
But, although he made no answer to this question, not knowing on the
sudden what to say, he was dismissed, glad to get away from the torture,
yet certainly believing they would put him to death for his confession.

Samuel Colson was next brought in; and, for fear of the tortures that
Collins had endured, whom he saw brought out in a pitiable condition,
with his eyes almost starting out of their sockets, he chose rather to
confess all they asked, and so was quickly dismissed, yet came out
weeping and lamenting, and protesting his innocence. John Clark was then
taken in, and tortured with fire and water for two hours, in the same
manner as had been done with Johnson and Thomson.[317]

[Footnote 317: The minute description of these tortures, in Purchas, and
copied in Harris, are disgusting; insomuch, that Purchas exclaims at one
place, _I have no heart to proceed_. They are here therefore
omitted,--E.]

Finding that all their cruelties could not force him to any consistent
confession of himself, they helped him along to particular circumstances
of their own contrivance, by leading questions. Thus wearied out and
overpowered, by terror of the tortures being renewed, he answered,
_yes_, to whatever they asked, by which means they trumped up a body of
evidence to this effect:--"That Captain Towerson, on new-year's-day
last, had sworn all the English at Amboina to be secret and aiding in a
plot he had devised for surprising the castle, by the aid of the
Japanese, putting the governor and all the Dutch to death."

On the 17th, William Griggs and John Fardo, with some Japanese, were
brought to examination. The Japanese were first cruelly tortured to
accuse Griggs, which at last they did; and Griggs, to avoid torture,
confessed whatever the fiscal was pleased to demand. The same was next
done with Fardo and other Japanese. Fardo endured the torture for some
time, but at length confessed all they pleased to ask. That same day,
John Beaumont was brought a second time to the fiscal's chamber, when
one Captain Newport, the son of a Dutchman, but born and educated in
England, acted as interpreter. Griggs was also brought in to accuse
Beaumont of being present at the consultation for surprising the castle.
Beaumont denied all, with great earnestness, and many oaths; but, on
enduring the torture, was constrained to confess every thing laid to his
charge.

George Sharrock was then brought in and examined. He fell on his knees,
protesting his innocence, telling them he was at Hitto on
new-year's-day, when the pretended consultation was held, and had not
been at Amboina since the preceding November, as was well known to
several Dutchmen who resided at Hitto along with him. Being ordered to
the rack, he told them he had often heard John Clark say that the Dutch
had done insufferable wrongs to the English, and was resolved to be
revenged on them; for which purpose he had proposed to Captain Towerson
to allow him to go to Macassar, to consult with the Spaniards about
sending some gallies to plunder the small factories of Amboina and Ceram
in the absence of the ships. Being asked what Captain Towerson had said
to all this? he answered, that Towerson was very much offended with
Clark for the proposal, and could never abide him since. The fiscal then
called him a rogue and liar, saying, that he wandered idly from the
matter, and must go to the torture. He craved favour again, and began
another tale, saying, that John Clark had told him at Hitto of a plot to
surprise the castle of Amboina, with the participation of Towerson. He
was then asked, when this consultation was held? which he said was in
November preceding. The fiscal said that could not be, for it was on
new-year's-day. The prisoner urged, as before, that he had not been in
Amboina since last November, till now that he was brought thither in
custody. "Why, then," said the fiscal, "have you belied yourself?" To
this he resolutely answered, that all he had confessed respecting a
conspiracy was false, and merely feigned to avoid torment.

Sharrock was then remanded to prison, but was brought up again next day,
when a formal confession, in writing, of his last-mentioned conference
with Clark, respecting the plot for surprising the castle of Amboina,
was read over to him, after which, the fiscal asked, if it were all
true. To this he answered, that every word of it was false, and that he
had confessed it solely to avoid torture. The fiscal and the rest then
said, in rage, that he was a false liar, for it was all true, and had
been spoken from his own mouth, and therefore he must sign it, which he
did accordingly. Having done this, he broke out into a great passion,
charging them as guilty of the innocent blood of himself and the rest,
which they should have to answer for at the judgment-seat of God. He
even grappled with the fiscal, and would have hindered him from carrying
in the confession to the governor, but was instantly laid hold of, and
carried away to prison.

William Webber was next examined; being told by the fiscal that Clarke
accused him of having sworn to Towerson's plot on new-year's-day, with
all the other circumstances already mentioned; Webber strenuously denied
all this, declaring, that he was then at Larika, and could not possibly
be present in Amboina on that day. But, being put to the torture, he was
forced to confess having been present at the consultation, with all the
other circumstances in regular order, as asked. He also told of having a
letter from Clark, in which was a postscript excusing his brief writing
at this time, as there was then a great business in hand. But a Dutch
merchant, named Kinder, who was present, told the governor that Webber
and he were together making merry at Larika, on new-year's-day, the time
of this pretended consultation. The governor then went away, but the
fiscal held on with him respecting the letter and postscript, promising
to save his life if he would produce these.

Captain Towerson was next brought in for examination, and was shewn what
the others had confessed concerning him. He deeply professed his
innocence, on which Colson was brought in to confront him, being assured
he should be again tortured unless he made good his former confession
against Towerson. On this he repeated what he had said before, and was
then sent away. Griggs and Fardo were next brought in, and desired to
justify to his face what they had before confessed. Captain Towerson
seriously admonished them, as they should answer at the day of judgment,
to speak nothing but the truth. They then fell upon their knees,
beseeching him to forgive them for God's sake, and declared openly that
all they had formerly said was utterly false, and spoken only to avoid
the torture. The fiscal then commanded them to be led to the torture,
which they were unable to endure, and again affirmed their former
extorted confessions to be true. When Colson was required to subscribe
this confession, he asked the fiscal, upon whose head he thought the sin
would rest, whether on his who was constrained to confess falsely, or
upon the constrainer? After a pause on this home-question, the fiscal
went out to speak with the governor, and returned again shortly,
commanding him to subscribe. Colson did so, yet with this remark,--"You
force me to accuse myself and others of that which is as false as God is
true; for I call God to witness that I and they are as innocent as the
child unborn."

Having thus examined all the servants of the English company in the
several factories of the island of Amboina, they began on the 21st of
February to examine John Wetheral, factor at Cambello, in Ceram. He
acknowledged being at Amboina on new-year's-day, but declared he knew of
no other consultation but about certain cloth belonging to the company,
which lay spoiling in the factory, which they considered how best to get
sold. The governor said he was not questioned about cloth, but treason;
and protesting his innocence, he was dismissed for that day. Next day he
was again brought in, and Captain Towerson was produced to confront and
accuse him, as he had formerly emitted something in his confessions
against him. But Towerson only desired him to speak the truth, and
nothing but the truth, as God should put into his heart. Mr Towerson was
then removed, and Mr Wetheral tortured by water, with threats of fire
being applied if he did not confess. At length, they read over to him
the confessions of the others, asking him leading questions from point
to point, to all of which he answered affirmatively, to free himself
from torture.

John Powel, assistant to Mr Wetheral, was next called; but he proved
that he had not been at Amboina since November; and being likewise
spoken for by Jan Joost, his old acquaintance, was dismissed without
torture. Thomas Ladbrook, servant to Wetheral and Powel at Cambello, was
then brought in; but he, too, was speedily dismissed. Ephraim Ramsay,
proving that he was not in Amboina on new-year's-day, and being likewise
spoken for by Joost, was also dismissed, after hanging up some time
ready for being tortured. Lastly, John Sadler, servant to William Griggs
at Larika, was brought in for examination; and as he was not in Amboina
on new-year's-day, he too was dismissed.

On the 25th of February, all the prisoners, English, Portuguese, and
Japanese, were brought into the great hall of the castle, and there
solemnly condemned to die, except John Powel, Ephraim Ramsay, John
Sadler, and Thomas Ladbrook. Next day, they were again brought into the
hall, except Captain Towerson and Emanuel Thomson, to be prepared for
death by the Dutch ministers. That same night, Colson and Collins were
taken into the room where Emanuel Thomson lay, when they were told the
governor was pleased to grant mercy to one of the three, and desired
they might draw lots, when the free lot fell to Edward Collins, who was
then carried to the chamber of the acquitted persons before-named. John
Beaumont was soon after brought to the same place, and told that he owed
his life to Peter Johnson, the Dutch merchant of Loho, and the
secretary, who had begged his life. The condemned, who still remained in
the hall, were afterwards joined by the Dutch ministers, and received
the sacrament, protesting their innocence. Samuel Colson, on this
occasion, said, in a loud voice, "O Lord, as I am innocent of this
treason, do thou pardon all my other sins; and, if in the smallest
degree guilty thereof may I never be a partaker in the joys of thy
heavenly kingdom." To these words all the rest exclaimed, _Amen! for me,
Amen! for me, good Lord!_

After this, each, knowing whom he had accused, went one to another,
craving forgiveness for their false accusations, as wrung from them by
the pains or dread of torture. They all freely forgave their comrades;
for none had been so falsely accused, but that he also had accused
others with equal falseness. In particular, George Sharrock, who
survived to relate the scene exhibited at this time, knelt down to John
Clark, whom he had accused, as before related, earnestly begging
forgiveness. Clark freely forgave him, saying, "How shall I look to be
forgiven of God, if I do not forgive you? as I have myself falsely
accused Captain Towerson and others!" After this, they spent the rest of
this doleful night in prayer and psalm-singing, comforting each other
the best they could. The Dutch who guarded them offered them wine, of
which they desired them to drink heartily, to drive away sorrow, as is
the custom of their country in like situations, but this the English
refused.

Next morning, the 27th February, William Webber was again called before
the fiscal, and offered his life if he would produce the letter and
postscript he confessed to have received from John Clark, which he could
not do, as it never had existed: Yet, at last, they pardoned him, and
sent him to the rest of those who were freed, and Sharrock with him,
whom they also pardoned. That morning, Emanuel Thomson, learning that
John Beaumont was pardoned, contrived to have him allowed to visit him,
which was allowed with much difficulty. Beaumont found him in a most
miserable condition, the wounds or sores occasioned by the torture bound
up, but the blood and matter issuing through the bandages. Taking Mr
Beaumont by the hand, he conjured him, when he came to England, to offer
his duty to the Honourable Company, and others of his friends whom he
named, and to assure them he died innocent, as was well known to
Beaumont.

It is needless to dwell upon the minute circumstances of the catastrophe
of this bloody tragedy: Suffice it to say, that ten Englishmen, one
Portuguese, and eleven Japanese, were publicly executed; of whom the
following is a list:

   _English._

   Capt. Gabriel Towerson, agent for the English at Amboina.
   Samuel Colson, factor at Hitto.
   Emanuel Thomson, assistant at Amboina.
   Timothy Johnson, assistant at the same place.
   John Wetheral, assistant at Cambello.
   John Clark, assistant at Hitto.

   William Griggs, factor at Larika.
   John Fardo, steward of the factory at Amboina.
   Abel Price, surgeon to that factory.
   Robert Brown, tailor.

The only Portuguese was Augustine Perez, born in Bengal, who was
superintendant of the slaves in the employment of the English at
Amboina.

   _Japanese_.
   Hititso, Tsiosa, and Sinsa, natives of Firando.
   Sidney Migial, Pedro Congie, Thomas Corea, from Nangasaki.
   Quinandaya, a native of Coaets.
   Tsabinda, a native of Tsoncketgo.
   Zanchae, a native of Fisien.

Besides these, there were two other Japanese tortured, who both
confessed a participation in the pretended plot, but were not executed,
or even condemned, for reasons which the surviving English did not
learn. The executions were all by cutting off the heads of the condemned
with a scymitar; and the Dutch prepared a black velvet pall for Captain
Towerson's body to fall upon, which they afterwards had the effrontery
to charge in account against the English East India Company.


SECTION XV.

OBSERVATIONS DURING A RESIDENCE IN TISLAND OF CHUSAN, IN 1701, BY DOCTOR
JAMES CUNNINGHAM; WITH SOME EARLY NOTICES RESPECTING CHINA.[318]

Among the early voyages of the English to the East Indies, none have
been preserved that were made to China, nor have we been able to
discover any satisfactory account of the commencement of the trade of
our East India Company with that distant country, now said to be by far
the most profitable branch of the exclusive commerce. In the _Annals of
the Company_,[319] several references are made to the China trade, but
more in the nature of notices or memoranda for the purpose of after
investigation, than as conveying any actual information on the subject.
In this singular paucity of materials, we are reduced to the following
short "Observations and Remarks, by Doctor James Cunningham, made during
his Residence as Physician to the English Factory at the Island of
Chusan, on the Coast of China." Doctor Cunningham is stated by Harris to
have been a fellow of the Royal Society, distinguished by his natural
talents and acquired accomplishments, well versed in ancient and modern
learning, and to have diligently used these advantages in making
judicious remarks on the places where he resided in the service of the
Company. Yet all that has been recorded by Harris of these remarks, give
only a very imperfect account of Chusan and of China. This short article
consists of extracts from two letters written by Cunningham from Chusan,
and a brief supplement by Harris respecting two unfortunate factories at
Pulo Condore and Pulo Laut.--E.

[Footnote 318: Harris. I. 852.]

[Footnote 319: Annals of the E.I. Co. vol. II. and III. _passim_.]

Sec.1. _Voyage to Chusan, and short Notices of that Island_.[320]

In my last letter, from the island of Borneo, I gave you an account of
our arrival at that island on the 17th July. We only remained there two
days, as the season of the year was already far advanced, and made the
best of our way from thence through the Straits of Banda,[321] with
favourable winds and weather. We got upon the coast of China on the 13th
August, when we had variable winds, which carried us abreast of
_Emoy_[322] by the 19th following. The wind then set in fresh at N.E. so
that we were in great fear of losing our passage, and were now obliged
to beat up all the way against both wind and current; yet the weather
remained so favourable that we were never obliged to hand our top-sails,
otherwise we must have lost more way in a single day than we could have
recovered in eight. On the 31st August we came to anchor under the
_Crocodile islands_,[323] both for shelter from the bad weather, usual
on this coast at new and full-moon, which has been fatal to many ships,
and also to procure fresh water, now scarce with us, as we had not
recruited our store since leaving the Cape of Good Hope. These are three
small islands in lat. 26 deg. N. about six leagues from the river of
_Hokien_, [Fo-kien] on two of which we found very good water, with a
convenient landing-place on the S.W. side of the innermost island. By
the assistance of some Chinese fishers, we procured also some fresh
provisions from the main land, not thinking it safe to venture there
ourselves, lest we may have been brought into trouble by the governor of
that part of the country. While here, on the 5th September, we had a
sudden short shift of the monsoon from the S.W. blowing with great fury;
which was also experienced by other vessels then coming on the coast of
China. We again put to sea on the 18th September, turning to windward
night and day on the outside of all the islands, which are very numerous
all along this coast, but with which we were unacquainted after passing
beyond _Emoy_. Besides, the hydrography of this coast is hitherto so
very imperfect, that we could not trust in any degree to our draughts,
owing to which our navigation was both difficult and dangerous.

[Footnote 320: From a letter to a member of the Royal Society, dated in
September, 1701.--Harris.]

[Footnote 321: This must have been the straits of Macasser, as Banda is
far out of the way between Borneo and China.--E.]

[Footnote 322: Emoy or Amoy, was on the coast of China, opposite to the
island of Formosa, and appears, from the Annals, to have been the first
port frequented by the ships of the India Company for the Chinese
trade.--E.]

[Footnote 323: The islands of Pe-la-yang are, in the indicated latitude,
off the estuary of the principal river of the province of Fo-kien.--E.]

On the 1st October, we got into the latitude of 30 deg. N. where we came to
anchor near the land, and found our way by boat to _Chusan_,[324] about
twelve leagues within the islands, whence we got a pilot, who brought
our ship safely to that place on the 11th of the month. The Chinese
government have granted us a settlement on that island, with the liberty
of trade; but do not allow us to go up to Ning-po,[325] which is six or
eight hours sail to the westwards, all the way among islands, of which
this of Chusan is the largest, being eight or nine leagues from E. to W.
and four or five from N. to S.

[Footnote 324: Tcheou-chan, an island about twenty English miles in
length from E. to W. in lat. 30 deg. 23' N. long. 121 deg. 43' E. off the
estuary of Ning-po river, in the province of Che-kiang, is obviously the
Chusan of the text--E.]

[Footnote 325: The city of Ning-po stands at the head of a bay,
stretching from the S. side of the estuary of the river of the same
name, in lat. 30 deg. 10' N. long. 121 deg. E. It appears, from the Annals,
that the English had been excluded from trading at Canton, by the
influence of the Portuguese in Macao.--E.]

About three leagues from the point of land named _Liampo_ by the
Portuguese, and _Khi-tu_ by the Chinese, there is a very safe and
convenient harbour at the west end of this island, where the ships ride
within call of the factory, which stands close to the shore in a low
flat valley, having near two hundred houses built around for the benefit
of trade. The town of Chusan, of which the houses are very mean, is
about three quarters of a mile farther from the shore, and is surrounded
by a fine stone wall, flanked at irregular distances by twenty-two
square bastions or towers; and has four great gates, on which a few old
iron guns are planted, seldom or never used. The _chumpeen_, or governor
of the island, resides here, and the town contains about three or four
thousand beggarly inhabitants, mostly soldiers and fishers; for, as the
trade of this island has only been granted of late, it has not hitherto
attracted any considerable merchants.

This island abounds in all sorts of provisions, as cows, buffaloes,
deer, hogs, both wild and tame, geese, ducks, poultry, rice, wheat,
calavanccs, cole-worts, turnips, carrots, potatoes, beets, spinach, and
so forth. It has, however, no merchandise, except what comes from
Ning-po, Stan-chew,[326] Nankin, and other inland towns and cities. Some
of these I hope to see, when I have acquired a little of the Chinese
language. Tea grows here in great plenty on the tops of the hills, but
is not so much esteemed as that which grows on more mountainous islands.
Although tolerably populous, this island is far from being what it was
in the time of Father Martini, who describes it under the name of
_Cheu-xan_. The superstitious pilgrimages mentioned by him, must refer
to the island of Pou-to,[327] which is nine leagues from this place, and
to another island three miles to the eastwards, to which the emperor
proposes coming to worship at a pagoda greatly renowned for its
sanctity, in the ensuing month of May, being his birth-day, and the
fortieth year of his age. One of his bonzes is already come there, to
get all things in order.

[Footnote 326: Probably Hang-tcheon, a city about forty miles W. from
Ning-po.--E.]

[Footnote 327: Pou-teou, is directly E. from the eastern end of
Tcheou-chan.--E.]

Sec.2. _Ancient and modern State of the Country, and of the coming of the
English to reside there.[328]_

In my former letter, I informed you that the emperor designed to have
come to worship at Pou-to in May last, being the fortieth year of his
age, but I ought to have said of his reign. After every thing was
prepared for his reception, he was dissuaded from his purpose by some of
his mandarins, who made him believe that the thunder at that place was
very dangerous. This Pou-to is a small island, only about five leagues
round, and at the east end of Chusan. It has been famous for the space
of eleven hundred years, for the superstitious pilgrimages made to it,
and is only inhabited by bonzes to the number of three thousand, all of
the sect of _Heshang,_ or unmarried bonzes, who live a Pythagorean life.
They have built four hundred pagodas, two of which are considerable for
their size and splendour, and were lately covered with green and yellow
tiles, brought from the emperor's palace at Nankin. They are adorned
within by stately idols, finely carved and gilded, the chief of these
being an idol named _Quonem._ To-these two pagodas there are two chief
priests, who govern all the rest. They have many walks and avenues cut
in different directions through the island, some of which are paved with
flag-stones, and overshaded by trees planted on both sides. The
dwellings of the bonzes are the best I have seen in these parts, all of
which are maintained by charitable donations. All the Chinese junks
which sail from Ning-po and Chusan touch at Pou-to, both outwards and
homewards-bound, making offerings for the safety of their voyages. There
is another island named _Kim-Tong,_[329] five leagues from hence, on the
way towards Ning-po, where a great many mandarins are said to live in
retirement, after having given up their employments. On that island
there are said to be silver mines, but prohibited from being opened. The
rest of the circumjacent islands are either desert, or very meanly
inhabited, but all of them abound in deer.

[Footnote 328: The sequel of these observations is said by Harris to
have been taken from another letter to the same correspondent with the
former, and dated in November, 1701; but, from circumstances in the
text, it would appear to have been written in 1702.--E.]

[Footnote 329: Probably that named Silver-island in modern maps.--E.]

It is not long since this island of Chusan began to be inhabited. Yet in
the days of Father Martini, about fifty years ago, it was very populous
for three or four years; at which time, in the fury of the Tartar
conquest, it was laid entirely desolate, not even sparing the mulberry
trees, which were then numerous, as they made a great deal of raw silk
here. It continued in this desolate condition till about eighteen years
ago, when the walls of the present town were built by the governor of
_Ting-hai_, as a strong-hold for a garrison, in order to expel some
pirates who had taken shelter on the island. As the island began to grow
populous, a _chumpeen_ was sent to govern it for three years, to whom
the late chumpeen succeeded, who continued till last April, and procured
licence to open this port to strangers. On the last chumpeen being
promoted to the government of _Tien-ching-wei_[330] near Pekin, he was
succeeded by the present governor, who is son to the old chumpeen of
Emoy. They have no arts or manufactures in this island, except lacquered
ware; the particulars of which I cannot as yet send you. They have begun
to plant mulberry-trees, in order to breed up silk-worms for the
production of raw silk; and they gather and cure some tea, but chiefly
for their own use.

[Footnote 330: Probably that called Tien-sing in modern maps, on the
river Pay, between Pekin and the sea.--E.]

Sec.3. _Of the Manner of cultivating Tea in Chusan_.

The three sorts of tea usually carried to England are all from the same
plant, their difference being occasioned by the soils in which they
grow, and the season of the year at which they are gathered. The
_bohea_, or _vo-u-i_, so called from certain mountains in the province
of _Token_,[331] where it is chiefly made, is the very bud, gathered in
the beginning of March, and dried in the shade. The tea named _bing_ is
the second growth, gathered in April, and _siriglo_ is the last growth,
gathered in May and June; both of these being gently dried over the fire
in _taches_ or pans. The tea shrub is an evergreen, being in flower from
October to January, and the seed ripens in the September or October
following, so that both flower and seed may be gathered at the same
time; but for one fully ripened seed, an hundred are abortive. There are
the two sorts of seeds mentioned by Father Le Compte, in his description
of tea; and what be describes as a third sort, under the name of
_slymie_ pease, consists merely of the young flower-buds, not yet open.
The seed vessels of the tea tree are three-capsular, each capsule
containing one nut or seed; and though often two or one of these only
come to perfection, yet the vestiges of the rest may easily be
discerned. It grows naturally in a dry gravelly soil on the sides of
hills, without any cultivation, in several places of this island.

[Footnote 331: Fo-kien is almost certainly here meant--E.]

Le Compte is mistaken in saying that the Chinese are ignorant of the art
of grafting; for I nave seen many of his paradoxical tallow-trees
ingrafted here, besides trees of other sorts. When they ingraft, they do
not slit the stock as we do, but slice off the outside of the stock, to
which they apply the graft, which is cut sloping on one side, to
correspond with the slice on the stock, bringing the bark of the slice
up on the outside of the graft, after which the whole is covered up with
mud and straw, exactly as we do. The commentator on Magalhen seems
doubtful as to the length of the Chinese _che_ or cubit. At this island
they have two sorts, one measuring thirteen inches and seven-tenths
English, which, is commonly used by merchants; the other is only eleven
inches, being used by carpenters, and also in geographical measures.
Though Father Martini is censured by Magalhen for spelling a great many
Chinese words with _ng_, which the Portuguese and others express with
_in_, yet his way is more agreeable to our English pronunciation and
orthography; only the g may be left out in Pekin, Nankin, and some
others.

Having made enquiry about what is mentioned by Father Martini of sowing
their _fields_ at _Van-cheu_ with oyster-shells, to make new ones grow,
I was told, that after they have taken out the oysters, they sprinkle
the empty shells with urine, and throw them into the water, by which
means there grow new oysters on the old shells.[332] Martini says he
could never find a Latin name for the _Tula Mogorin_ of the Portuguese;
but I am sure it is the same with the _Syringa arabica, flore pleno
albo_, of Parkinson. Martini also says that the _kieu-yeu_, or
tallow-tree, bears a white flower, like that of the cherry-tree: But all
that I have seen here bear spikes of small yellow flowers, like the
_julus_ of the _Salix_. The bean-broth, or mandarin-broth, so frequently
mentioned in the Dutch embassy, and by other authors, is only an
emulsion made of the seeds of _sesamum_ with hot water.

[Footnote 332: This strange story may possibly be thus explained. At
certain seasons, numerous minute oysters may be seen sticking to the
shells of the old ones; and the Chinese may have thrown the emptied
shells into the sea, in the highly probable expectation of these minute
oysters continuing to live and grow. The circumstances in the text are
absurd additions, either from ignorance or imposition.--E.]

The chief employments of the people here are fishing and agriculture. In
fishing, they use several sorts of nets and lines as we do; but, as
there are great banks of mud in some places, the fishermen have
contrived a small frame, three or four feet long, not much larger than a
hen-trough, and a little elevated at each end, to enable them to go more
easily on these mud banks. Resting with one knee on the middle of one of
these frames, and leaning his arms on a cross stick raised breast high,
he uses the other foot on the mud to push the frame and himself
forwards.

In their agricultural operations, all their fields on which any thing is
to be cultivated, whether high or low, are formed into such plots or
beds as may admit of retaining water over them when the cultivator
thinks proper. The lands are tilled by ploughs drawn by one cow or
buffalo; and when it is intended to sow rice, the soil is remarkably
well prepared and cleared from all weeds, after which it is moistened
into the state of a pulp, and smoothed by a frame drawn across, when the
rice is sown very thick, and covered over with water, only to the height
of two or three inches. When the seedling plants are six or eight inches
long, they are all pulled up, and transplanted in straight lines into
other fields, which are overflowed with water; and, when weeds grow up,
they destroy them by covering them up in the interstices between the
rows of rice, turning the mud over them with their hands. When they are
to sow wheat, barley, pulse, or other grain, they grub up the surface of
the ground superficially, earth, grass, and rook, and mixing this with
some straw, burn all together. This earth, being sifted fine, they mix
with the seed, which they sow in holes made in straight lines, so that
it grows in tufts or rows like the rice. The field is divided into
regular beds, well harrowed both before and after the seed is sown,
which makes them resemble gardens. The rice grounds are meliorated
merely by letting water into them; but for the other grains, where the
soil requires it, they use dung, night-soil, ashes, and the like. For
watering their fields, they use the machine mentioned by Martini in the
preface to his Atlas, being entirely constructed of wood, and the same
in principle with the chain-pump.

In order to procure salt, as all the shores are of mud instead of sand,
they pare off in summer the superficial part of this mud, which has been
overflowed by the sea-water, and lay it up in heaps, to be used in the
following manner: Having first dried it in the sun, and rubbed it into a
fine powder, they dig a pit, the bottom of which is covered with straw,
and from the bottom a hollow cane leads through the side of the pit to a
jar standing below the level of the bottom. They then fill the pit
almost full of the dried salt mud, and pour on sea-water till it stands
two or three inches above the top of the mud. This sea-water drains
through the mud, carrying the salt along with it from the mud as well as
its own, and runs out into the jar much-saturated with salt; which is
afterwards procured by boiling.

Sec.4. _Of the famous Medicinal Root, called Hu-tchu-u_.

Having last year seen, in a newspaper, some account of a singular root,
brought from China by Father Fontaney, I shall inform you that I have
seen this root since my arrival at Chuaan. It is called _Hu-tchu-n_[333]
by the Chinese, and they ascribe to it most wonderful virtues, such as
prolonging life, and changing grey hair to black, by using its infusion
by way of tea. It is held in such high estimation as to be sold at a
great price, as I have been told, from ten tael up to a thousand, or
even two thousand tael-for a single root; for the larger it is, so much
the greater is its fancied value and efficacy: But the price is too high
to allow me to try the experiment. You will find it mentioned in the
_Medecina Sinica_ of Cleyer, No. 84; under the name of _He-xeu-ti_,
according to the Portuguese orthography. It is also figured in the 27th
table of the plants which Mr _Pettier_ had from me. The following is the
story of its discovery, which I will not warrant for gospel.

[Footnote 333: This is probably the ginseng, so famed for its fancied
virtues.--E.]

Once upon a time, a certain person went to gather simples among the
mountains, and fell by some accident into a vale of which the sides were
so steep that he was unable to get out again. In this situation, he had
to look about for some means to support life, and discovered this root,
of which he made trial, and found that it served him both as food and
cloathing; for it preserved his body in such a temperature, that the
injuries of the weather had no evil influence upon him during a
residence of several hundred years. At length, by means of an
earthquake, the mountains were rent, and he found a passage from the
vale to his house, whence he had been so long absent. But so many
alterations had taken place during his long absence, that nobody would
believe his story; till, on consulting the annals of his family, they
found that one of them had been lost at the time he mentioned, which
confirmed the truth of his relation.--This is a fable, not even credited
among the Chinese, invented merely to blazon forth the virtues of this
wonderful root.

Sec.5. _Removal of Dr Cunningham to Pulo Condore, with an Account of the
Rise, Progress, and Ruin of that Factory_.[334]

The English factory at Chusan was broken up in the year 1702, so that Dr
Cunningham had very little time allowed him for making his proposed
observations respecting China. From this place he removed to another new
settlement at _Pulo Condore,_ in a small cluster of four or five
islands, about fifteen leagues south of the west channel of the river of
Camboja, usually called the Japanese river.[335] I am unable to say what
were the advantages proposed from this factory; but, from the memoirs I
have seen on the subject, this place seems to have been very ill chosen,
and much worse managed. The person who had at this time the management
and direction of the affairs belonging to the East India Company in this
distant part of the world, was one Mr Katchpole, who, according to the
usual custom of the Europeans in eastern India at this period, took into
the service a certain number of Macassers or native soldiers, by whose
assistance he soon constructed a small fort for the protection of the
factory. So far as I can learn, the most indispensable necessaries of
life, water, wood, and fish, were all that these islands ever afforded.

[Footnote 334: This and the subsequent subdivision of the section are
related historically by Harris.--E.]

[Footnote 335: Pulo Condore is in lat. 8 deg. 45' N. long. 106 deg. 5' E. and
the object of a factory at this place was evidently to endeavour to
secure a portion of the trade of China, from which the English at this
time were excluded by the arts of the Portuguese at Macao, as we learn
from the Annals; as also to combine some trade with Siam, Camboja,
Tsiompa, Cochin-China, and Tonquin.--E.]

The Macassers are a brave, industrious, and faithful people, to such as
deal fairly with them; and on this account are highly esteemed in the
Eastern Indies, more especially by the Dutch. They are, however,
daring, cruel, and revengeful, if once provoked. Mr Katchpole had
contracted with these men to serve for three years, at the end of which
period, if they pleased, they were to receive their wages and to depart:
But he, though they strictly performed their part of the agreement,
broke faith with them, keeping them beyond their time against their
will. In addition to this great breach in morality, he added as
notorious an error in politics; for, after provoking these men so
egregiously by refusing to fulfil his engagement, he still confided to
them the guard of his own person and the custody of the factory. This
gave them ample opportunity of revenging the ill usage they had met
with, and with that ferocity which is so natural to untutored
barbarians. They rose in mutiny one night, and murdered Mr Katchpole,
and all who were at the time along with him in the factory. A few, who
happened to lodge on the outside of the fort, hearing the cries of their
friends within during the massacre, fled from their beds to the
sea-shore; where, by a singular interposition of Providence, they found
a bark completely ready for sea, in which they embarked half naked, and
put immediately to sea, just in time to escape the rage of the
Macassers, who came in search of them to the shore, precisely when they
had weighed anchor and pushed off to sea.

Dr Cunningham was one of the number who escaped on this occasion. Their
navigation was attended with excessive difficulty, being exposed at the
same time to incredible fatigue, and to the utmost extremity of hunger
and thirst: But at length, after a tedious and difficult course of an
hundred leagues, in the most wretched condition, they reached a small
creek in the dominions of the king of Johor, where they were received
with kindness.

Sec.6. _Some Account of the Factory at Pulo Laut, with the Overthrow of
that Factory, and of the English Trade to Borneo_.

A year or two after this ruin of the factory at Pulo Condore, the
Company thought fit to order the establishment of a new factory on the
coast of the great island of Borneo. On the south of that vast island,
there is a small isle called Pulo Laut, having an excellent harbour. The
country here is but thinly peopled, and yields nothing except rice; but,
as it lies near the mouth of the great rivers which come from the pepper
countries in the interior; it is extremely well situated for trade.
Between this island and the great island of Borneo, there is a channel
about two miles wide in most places, narrower in some and broader in
others, and having from seven to five fathoms water the whole way
through. On the coast of this channel there are several rising grounds
fit for building on, and which were therefore extremely proper for the
situation of a factory, which, it may be presumed, induced those who had
the direction of the Company's affairs, to make choice of this place.

One Captain Barry, who is said to have been a very ingenious gentleman,
had the charge of establishing this new factory, in which he is reported
to have acted with much skill and prudence. But he died before the works
were completed; and the direction of the factory devolved upon Doctor
Cunningham, who came to this place after the ruin of the factory at Pulo
Condore. He is said to have given himself so entirely up to his studies,
that he left the care of the Company's concerns too much to the people
who were under him, who were unequal to the trust, and proved the ruin
of the factory. Before the fort was half finished, these people began to
insult the natives of the country; and, among other wanton acts of
folly, they very imprudently chose to search one of the boats belonging
to the king, which was carrying a female of rank down the river. This so
provoked the Bornean sovereign that he determined upon the utter
destruction of the English; for which purpose he collected his forces
together, amounting to about three thousand resolute men, which he
embarked in above an hundred proas, and sent them down to attack the
factory and unfinished fort.

There happened at this time to be two ships belonging to the Company in
the river, besides two merchant vessels of inconsiderable force; and as
Cunningham and his people had received advice of the preparations making
against them, they left their factory, taking refuge aboard the ships,
thinking themselves in greater security there than ashore. When all
things were in readiness for the intended assault, the native armament
came down the river in the night; and, while some landed and destroyed
the factory and fortifications, others attacked the ships, which were
fortunately prepared for their reception, the English having made fast
nettings along both sides of their ships, about two fathoms high above
the gunnels, to prevent the enemy from boarding, and were in readiness
to use their blunderbusses and pikes, to prevent them from forcing their
way to the decks.

On seeing the approach of the proas towards the ships, the English plied
their great guns, loaded with double, round, and partridge shot, and
made great carnage among the Borneans, yet this did not deter them from
pushing forwards and using their utmost endeavours to board. But, having
got up to the gunnels, they were unable to get over the netting, and so
were slaughtered with great ease by the English from the decks. Some of
the assailants got in at the _head doors_ of one of the ships and killed
a few of the English on the forecastle, but were soon overpowered and
slain. Thus, after a long and sanguinary contest, the two large ships
beat off the enemy with small loss; but the two little vessels were both
burnt with most of their men, among whom was one Mynheer Hoogh Camber, a
Dutch gentleman who had been ambassador of the king of Persia, and had
fled from Batavia in one of these small vessels. Some say that the
English killed above fifteen hundred of the assailants in two hours, for
the heat of the assault continued during that space, besides many others
wounded and maimed. But the English were under the necessity of
abandoning the settlement at Pulo Laut.

The Bornean king or rajah thought his revenge had gone far enough in
driving the English from their factory: And, finding his revenue
considerably diminished by the loss of trade with the English, he sent
notice to such of them as traded to Johor, and other places in the
neighbourhood of Borneo, that he would still admit them to trade in his
dominions on the old footing, but would never allow them or any other
nation to erect forts in his territories. Several English vessels have
been there since to load pepper, and were civilly treated. The Dutch
also sent a ship there from Batavia in the year 1712; but the natives
refused to have any dealings with them.


END OF THE NINTH VOLUME.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A General History and Collection of
Voyages and Travels, Volume IX., by Robert Kerr

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGES AND TRAVELS, VOL. IX. ***

***** This file should be named 13055.txt or 13055.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/0/5/13055/

Produced by Robert Connal, Graeme Mackreth and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
