The Project Gutenberg EBook of Coralie, by Charlotte M. Braeme

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Coralie

Author: Charlotte M. Braeme

Release Date: August 12, 2004 [EBook #13162]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORALIE ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders.





EVERYDAY LIFE LIBRARY  No. 2

CORALIE

By CHARLOTTE M. BRAEME

Author of "Dora Thorne," "The Mystery of Colde Fell," "The Belle of
Lynn," "Madolin's Lover," "The Heiress of Hilldrop," Etc., Etc.


[Illustration]


CHAPTER I.


"Eighty pounds a year!" My reader can imagine that this was no great
fortune. I had little or nothing to spend in kid gloves or cigars;
indeed, to speak plain, prosaic English, I went without a good dinner
far oftener than I had one. Yet, withal, I was passing rich on eighty
pounds a year.

My father, Captain Trevelyan, a brave and deserving officer, died when I
was a child. My mother, a meek, fragile invalid, never recovered his
loss, but died some years after him, leaving me alone in the world with
my sister Clare.

When I was young I had great dreams of fame and glory. I was to be a
brave soldier like my dear, dead father, or a great writer or a
statesman. I dreamed of everything except falling into the common
grooves of life--which was my fate in after years. My mother, believing
in my dreams, contrived to send me to college--we both considered a
college education the only preliminary to a golden future. How she
managed it out of her slender means I cannot tell, but she kept me at
college for three years. I was just trying to decide what profession to
adopt, when a letter came summoning me suddenly home.

My mother was ill, not expected to live.

When I did reach home I found another source of trouble. My sister
Clare, whom I had left a beautiful, blooming girl of eighteen, had been
ill for the past year. The doctors declared it to be a spinal complaint,
from which she was not likely to recover, although she might live for
years.

She was unable to move, but lay always on a couch or sofa. The first
glimpse of her altered face, so sweet, so sad and colorless, made my
heart ache.

All the youth and bloom had died out of it.

My mother did not live many days; at her death her income ceased, and I
found myself, at twenty, obliged to begin the world as best I could, the
sole protector of my invalid sister. The first step was to sell our
little home, a pretty cottage at Hempstead, then to take lodgings nearer
the city; after that I set vigorously to work to look for a situation.

Ah, me, that weary task! I wonder if any of my readers ever went quite
alone, friendless, almost helpless, into the great, modern Babylon, to
look for a situation; if so, they will know how to pity me. I spent many
pounds in advertisements; I haunted the agency offices; I answered every
advertisement I read--it seemed all in vain.

My father's regiment was then in India, but I wrote to several of the
officers, who had known and valued him. Then, as a last resource, I
looked up the few friends my mother had.

If there is one thing more dreary than looking for a situation, it is
what is commonly called "hunting up one's friends." I found many, but
some were old and indifferent, others too much engrossed in their own
affairs to have any time to devote to mine. Some shook hands, wished me
well, promised to do all they could to help me, and before I had passed
from their sight forgot my existence.

I gave up my friends. Their help in the hour of need is a beautiful
theory, but very seldom put into practice.

Just as I was growing dull and dispirited, a friend upon whom I had not
called, and whose aid I had not solicited, wrote to me and offered me a
situation as clerk in his office, with a salary of eighty pounds per
annum, to be afterward increased. God send to every weary heart the
comfort this news brought to mine. I ran to Clare with the letter in my
hands.

"Eighty pounds a year, darling!" I cried; "there is a fortune."

We had neither of us ever had much to do with money; we were quite
ignorant of its value, how far it would go, what it would purchase, etc.
It seemed an inexhaustible sum. We had cheap, comfortable apartments in
Holloway--a room for my sister and two smaller rooms for myself. When I
think of her patience, her resignation, her unvarying sweetness, her
constant cheerfulness, my heart does homage to the virtue and goodness
of women.

One fine morning in September I went for the first time to work. The
office of Lawson Brothers was in Lincoln's Inn. The elder brother seldom
if ever appeared; the younger was always there. He gave me a very kindly
welcome, said he hoped I should not find my work tiresome, showed me
what I had to do, and, altogether, set me at my ease.

I sighed many times that morning to find of how little use was my
college education to me now and I sighed to think how all my dreams, all
my hopes and aspirations, had ended behind a clerk's desk, with eighty
pounds per annum in lieu of the fortune of which I had dreamed.

After a few days I became used to the novelty and did my best to
discharge my duties well.

Hundreds of young men in London lead lives similar to mine, with very
little variety; the only way in which I differed from them was that I
had my sister Clare to provide for. Alas! how soon I found out what a
small sum eighty pounds a year was! When we had paid the rent of our
three rooms, set aside a small sum for clothes and a small sum for food,
there was nothing left. Clare, whose appetite was dainty and delicate,
suffered greatly. I could not manage to provide even a bunch of grapes
for her; the trifling coppers I spent in flowers, that cheered her as
nothing else ever did, were sorely missed.

How I longed sometimes to take home a ripe peach, a bottle of wine, an
amusing book! But every penny was rigorously needed; there was not one
to spare. How I pitied her for the long hours she spent alone in those
solitary lodgings! A bright inspiration came to me one day; I thought
how glad I should be if I could get some work to do at night, if it were
but possible to earn a few shillings. I advertised again, and after some
time succeeded in getting copying to do, for which I was not overwell
paid.

I earned a pound--positively a whole golden sovereign--and when it lay
in my hand my joy was too great for words. What should I do with one
sovereign and such a multiplicity of wants? Do not laugh at me, reader,
when I tell you what I did do, after long and anxious debate with
myself. I paid a quarter's subscription at Mudie's, so that my poor
sister should have something to while away the dreary hours of the long
day. With the few shillings left I bought her a bottle of wine and some
oranges.

That is years ago, but tears rise in my eyes now when I remember her
pretty joy, how gratefully she thanked me, how delicious she found the
wine, how she made me taste it, how she opened the books one after
another, and could hardly believe that every day she would have the same
happiness--three books, three beautiful new books! Ah, well! As one
grows older, such simple pleasures do not give the same great joy.

It was some time before I earned another. It was just as welcome to me,
and there came to me a great wonder as to whether I should spend the
whole of my life in this hard work with so small a recompense.

"Surely," I said to myself, "I shall rise in time; if I am diligent and
attentive at the office, I must make my way."

But, alas! the steps were very small, and the clerks' salaries were only
increased by five pounds a year at a time. It would be so long before I
earned two hundred a year, and at the same rate I should be an old man
before I reached three hundred.

One morning--it was the 1st of May--bright, warm, sunny day, the London
streets were more gay than usual, and as I walked along I wondered if
ever again I should breathe the perfume of the lime and the lilac in the
springtime. I saw a girl selling violets and daffodils, with crocuses
and spring flowers. I am not ashamed to say that tears came into my
eyes--flowers and sunshine and all things sweet seemed so far from me
now.

I reached the office, and there, to my intense surprise, found a letter
waiting for me.

"Here is a letter for you, Mr. Trevelyan," said the head clerk,
carelessly.

He gave me a large blue official envelope. If he had but known what it
contained!

Some minutes passed before I had time to open it; then I read as
follows:

     "To Sir Edgar Trevelyan:

     "Sir: We beg to inform you that by the death of Sir Barnard
     Trevelyan, and his son, Mr. Miles Trevelyan, who both died of the
     epidemic in Florence, you, as next of kin, will succeed. We are not
     aware that the late Sir Barnard had any other relatives. Crown
     Anstey, the residence of the late baronet, is ready at any time for
     your reception. If you can favor us with a call today, we will
     explain to you the different ways in which the late baronet's large
     fortune is invested. We have managed the Crown Anstey property for
     some years, and hope to have the honor of continuing our business
     relations with you. We are, sir, your obedient servants,

     "Moreland & Paine."

The letter fell from my hands and I looked at it in blank astonishment
too great for words.

Sir Barnard Trevelyan! Crown Anstey! Why, the last time I ever heard
those names my mother sat talking to me about this proud, stately cousin
of my father--cousin who had never noticed either him or us by word or
by look. I was curious, and asked many questions about him. She told me
he had married some great lady, the daughter of a duke, and that he had
two sons--Miles, the eldest, and Cecil. I remembered having heard of
Cecil's death, but never dreamed that it could affect me.

Moreland & Paine! I knew the firm very well; they had large offices in
Lincoln's Inn, and bore a high reputation. Suddenly my heart stood
still. Why, of course, it was a jest--a sorry jest of one of my fellow
clerks. There they were, looking at me with eager, wondering eyes--of
course it was a jest. My heart almost ceased to beat, and I caught my
breath with something like a sob.

They should not laugh at me; they should not read what was passing in my
mind.

I put the letter calmly and deliberately in my pocket and opened my
ledger. I fancied they looked disappointed. Ah! it was but a jest; I
would not think of it.

I worked hard until the dinner hour, and then asked permission to absent
myself for a time. Dinner was not in my thoughts, but I went quickly as
I could walk to the office of Moreland & Paine.




CHAPTER II.


Mr. Paine was not in. Mr. Moreland was in his office. I went up the
stairs, trembling, fearful of being abused for stupidity in taking the
least notice of such a letter.

Mr. Moreland looked up when the clerk announced my name--looked up,
bowed and positively rose from his seat. I took the letter from my
pocket.

"I received this this morning, but, believing it to be a jest played
upon me, I have not mentioned it. I have called to ask you if you know
anything of it."

He took the letter from me with a strange smile.

"I wrote it myself last evening," he said, and I looked at him
bewildered.

Good heaven! it was all true. To this moment I do not know how I bore
the shock. I remember falling into a chair, Mr. Moreland standing over
me with a glass of something in his hand, which he forced me to drink.

"Your fortune has a strange effect upon you," he said, kindly.

"I cannot believe it!" I cried, clasping his hand. "I cannot realize it!
I have been working so hard--so hard for one single sovereign--and now,
you say, I am rich!"

"Now, most certainly," he replied, "you are Sir Edgar Trevelyan, master
of Crown Anstey and a rent roll of ten thousand a year."

I am not ashamed to confess that when I heard that I bowed my head on my
hands and cried like a child.

"You have borne bad fortune better than this," said Mr. Moreland; and
then I remember telling him, in incoherent words, how poor we had been
and how Clare was fading away for want of the nourishment and good
support I was utterly unable to find for her.

After a time I became calmer and listened while he told me of the death
of the stately Sir Barnard and his eldest son. They had gone away
together on a trip to Italy. Miles Trevelyan was very fond of pictures,
and his father had given him permission to buy what he pleased for the
great picture gallery at Crown Anstey.

They went together to Florence, where a fearful epidemic was raging.
They, all unconscious of it, remained there for one night, caught it,
and in two days both lay dead.

I asked how old was Miles, this eldest and favorite son. He told me
twenty-seven. I asked again, had he never been married. He answered no;
that, of course, if he had been married and had children, I should not
be the heir to Crown Anstey.

"There was some little unpleasantness between father and son over a love
affair," said Mr. Moreland. "I do not know the particulars. Mr. Miles
Trevelyan was very proud and reserved. He mentioned it to us, but we
heard no more of it."

"What am I to do next?" I asked him, nervously.

"You ought to go down at once to Crown Anstey. The bodies of the two
gentlemen will be brought home for interment. They died on the 18th;
this is the 22d. We spent three days in trying to find out your address.
They will be at Crown Anstey, I should say, to-morrow. You should be
there to receive them and to officiate as head mourner. Mr. Paine and
myself will both be there, as a matter of course."

"Then I must ask Mr. Lawson's permission," I said, doubtfully.

Mr. Moreland laughed.

"He will soon give you that. You will find the master of Crown Anstey a
powerful personage."

"There is another thing," I said, with a crimson flush burning my face;
"I have but five shillings and sixpence in all the world."

He laughed aloud at this.

"I can advance you whatever you like, then--five hundred pounds or
more."

The very mention of such a sum positively frightened me. Mr. Moreland
looked very much amused.

"It will be some time," he said, "before you grow accustomed to ten
thousand a year."

At that moment we were interrupted by the arrival of another client. I
rose to take my leave, with a check for three hundred pounds in my hand.

"You will go down to Crown Anstey to-night?" said Mr. Moreland, as he
shook hands with me. "We shall be there to-morrow morning. You will make
what arrangements seem best to you over the funeral."

So I went away, the most bewildered man in London. As I re-entered the
office I felt ashamed of my suspicions over my fellow-clerks. They were
all busy, while I--oh, heaven! could it be true?

Mr. Lawson evidently thought I had been drinking when I went, white and
stammering, confused and hesitating, into his room. He looked very
sternly at me.

"What do you want, Mr. Trevelyan? I am very busy."

I took out the letter again and laid it before him.

"Will you read that, sir?" I asked, "It will make you understand more
quickly than I can, I am so confused."

He read it, then held out his hand to me.

"I congratulate you," he said. "Your poor father, the last time I saw
him, spoke to me of his rich cousin. He never expected this. Sir Barnard
had two fine, strong, healthy sons of his own then."

"My father could not have expected it less than myself. I have hardly
ever heard the name of Crown Anstey, and did not know that it was
entailed property. I shall have to ask you to let me go this afternoon,
sir."

He was perfectly willing, I was only at the office an hour, yet the news
seemed to have spread. I promised the clerks a dinner when I returned,
then once more I stood in the street, alone.

My brain was dizzy, my thoughts in a whirl. I remember taking a cab and
driving to a shop into which I had often looked with longing eyes. I
bought wine, grapes, peaches, flowers, dainty jellies--everything that I
thought most likely to please my sister--and then drove home. I had
resolved that I would not tell my good fortune to Clare all at once,
lest there should be some fatal mistake unforeseen by any one. She
looked up astonished when I entered the room, my arms full of fruit and
flowers.

"Oh, Edgar!" she cried, "you have ruined yourself. Why you must have
spent your whole week's money!"

I forgot now what fiction I told here--something of a friend of my
father, who had left me a little money, and that I was going away that
same evening on business.

"Shall you be long?" she asked, with so sad a face I did not like to
leave her.

"Two or three days at the outside," I told her. Then I took twenty
golden sovereigns from my purse and laid them before her, begging her
not to want for anything while I was away.

She looked almost alarmed at such a quantity of money.

"Twenty pounds, Edgar!" she cried. "How rich we are!" And I thought to
myself, "if she only knew!"

Then I went into my own room, and my first action was to thank God for
this wonderful benefit. I thanked Him with streaming eyes and grateful
heart, making a promise--which I have never broken--that I would act as
steward of these great riches, and not forget the needy and the poor.

At five o'clock I started for Thornycroft, the nearest town to Crown
Anstey. The journey was not a very long one, but I took no heed of time.
Was it all a dream, or was I in reality going to take possession of a
new and magnificent home?

I reached the station--it was a large one. Thornycroft seemed to be a
thriving town. No one was there to meet me. I went to the nearest hotel
and ordered a carriage to Crown Anstey.

I can recall even now my ecstasy of bewilderment at the splendid woods,
the beautiful park, the pleasure gardens. How long was it since I had
felt tears rush warm to my eyes at the scent of the violets? Here were
lime trees and lindens, grand old oaks, splendid poplars, beech trees,
cedars, magnolias with luscious blossom, hawthorn, white and pink
larches budding, and all were mine--mine. Then from between the
luxuriant foliage I saw the tall, gray towers of a stately mansion, and
my whole heart went out to it as my future home.

The birds were singing, the sun shining; all nature was so beautiful and
bright that my very soul was enraptured.

Then I caught a glimpse of gold from the laburnums, of purple from the
lilacs, of white from the sweet acacia trees.

The carriage drove up a long grove of chestnut trees, and then for the
first time I saw Crown Anstey. The western sunbeams fell upon it. I
thought of that line of Mrs. Hemans:

    "Bathed in light like floating gold."

They showed so clearly the dainty, delicate tracing, the large, arched
windows. The house itself was built in the old Elizabethan style. I
found afterward that it was called Crown Anstey because it had belonged
in former years to one of the queens of England. The Queen's Chamber was
the largest and best room in it. Report said that a royal head had often
lain there; that the queen to whom the house had belonged had spent many
of her sorrowful and happy hours there. The Queen's Terrace run all
along the western wing, and was shaded by whispering lime trees.
Afterward I found many relics of this ancient time of royal
possessions--antique, out-of-the-way things, with the crown and royal
arms of England upon them. I was not a little proud of these historical
treasures. A broad flight of steps led from the lawn to a broad porch.
As I passed under it I figured to myself the gorgeous splendor of other
days, when "knights and dames of high degree" had entered there.

An old butler, evidently an old family retainer, was the first person I
saw. He bowed low when I told him that I was Sir Edgar Trevelyan, "the
heir come to take possession."

I went through the magnificent house like a man in a dream. Could it be
possible that all this magnificence, all this grandeur, was mine? Mine,
these grand old rooms, with furniture and hangings that once served a
queen; mine, these superb pictures and statues, these gems of art, this
profusion of gold and silver plate? I laughed and cried in the same
breath. I make no pretensions to being a strong-minded hero, and I was
overcome.

Then, when I had some short time alone, the butler, whose name was
Hewson, came back and told me the Red Room was ready for my use. He had
selected it as being the most comfortable. Afterward I could, of course,
take what rooms I liked.

I found myself in a large, spacious chamber, called the Red Room, from
the prevailing tint of everything in it being crimson. The three large
windows were hung with crimson velvet; the carpet was crimson. I opened
one of the windows and looked over the glorious landscape, so full of
sunshine, flowers and beauty, that my heart thrilled within me, and my
soul did homage to the great Creator.




CHAPTER III.


Half an hour later I was summoned to the dining-room, where dinner was
laid for me. God knows that I had never coveted wealth or thought much
of luxury--I had been content with my lot.

What did I think when I saw that stately dining-room, with its brilliant
lights, the gold and silver, the recherche dishes, the odorous wines and
rare fruits? My first feeling was one of wonder that fortune should have
so overpowered me; my second was a fervent wish that such pleasant times
could fall to every one.

I had finished dinner and enjoyed, for the first time in my life, a
really prime cigar, when Hewson came into the library, evidently wishing
to see me.

"I thought I had better tell you. Sir Edgar, that Mademoiselle
d'Aubergne is in the drawing-room."

I looked at him in astonishment.

"Who is Mademoiselle d'Aubergne?" I asked.

"Do you not know, Sir Edgar?" he said, in great surprise.

"I have never even heard the name," I replied.

"Mademoiselle is the daughter of the late Sir Barnard's cousin; she has
been living here for the past five years. Sir Barnard, I believe,
adopted her. I thought perhaps Messrs. Moreland & Paine might have
mentioned her."

They had perhaps forgotten to do so, and I felt quite at a loss what to
do. However, if there was a lady in the house, I was bound to be
courteous; so I went to the drawing-room.

I attempt no description of that magnificent room, its treasures of art,
its statues, pictures, flowers, its wonders of bric-a-brac. For the
first minute my eyes were dazzled, and then I saw--

Well, I had read in the old poets' descriptions of sirens' wondrous
language, wondrous words telling of beauty almost divine in its
radiance--of golden hair that had caught the sunshine and held it
captive--of eyes like lode-stars, in whose depths men lost
themselves--of lovely scarlet lips that could smile and threaten. I saw
such loveliness before me now.

From the luxurious depths of a crimson velvet fauteuil rose a lovely
woman, who advanced to meet me with outstretched hands. Her mourning
dress fell in graceful folds around her tall, queenly figure, and from
the same dark dress her fair face and golden head shone out bright and
luminous as a jewel from a dark background.

"Sir Edgar Trevelyan," she said, "allow me to welcome you home."

Her voice was sweet and rich; she had a pretty, piquant accent, and the
play of her lips as she spoke was simply perfection.

"It is very lonely for you," she said. "There is great gloom over the
house, it is all sad and dark; but the brightness will come back in
time."

I touched the white hand she held out to me; it was warm and soft; the
touch of those slender fingers had a magical effect.

"I must apologize for not having seen you before," I said, "but until
five minutes ago I did not know you were in the house."

"No," she replied, with a faint sigh, "I can believe that."

"You must know," I continued, "that I am a complete stranger to the
family. I never saw any of them in my life. I never heard the name more
than five or six times."

"Then, as a matter of course," she said, "you never heard of me."

"I am at a loss to know whether I should address you as kinswoman or
not," was my confused reply.

"It would take a bench of lawyers to decide," she said. "My mother was a
favorite cousin of Sir Barnard. I think, but I am not sure, that once
upon a time he was fond of her himself. My mother married a French
gentleman, Monsieur d'Aubergne, and at her death Sir Barnard kindly
offered me a home here, since I had no other."

"Is your father living?" I asked.

"Alas! no; he died when I was a child. There had been some quarrel
between my mother and Sir Barnard; perhaps he never forgave her for
marrying a Frenchman. During her lifetime he never wrote to her or took
the least notice of me."

"And then offered you his home?"

"Then he adopted me," she said, looking earnestly at me; "treated me in
every way as his own child. I have been with him ever since. I have no
home except here at Crown Anstey, and I had not a sou in the world
except what he gave me. Ah! I miss him so sorely."

A cloud came over her beautiful face, and her lips quivered. I sat down
in sore perplexity with my inheritance. I had not certainly expected
this. What was I to say to her--this beautiful and radiant woman, who
seemed thrown upon my hands like a child? There was silence between us
for some time, then she said, suddenly:

"How sad this is about poor Sir Barnard and his son, is it not? I
thought at first that I should never recover from the shock. Miles was a
very handsome man; so clever and full of spirits. I am told," she
continued, "that the bodies are to be brought home to-night. Is it true,
Sir Edgar?"

"I believe so. I am here to receive them and to preside at the funeral."

Her face grew a shade paler.

"I am so frightened and nervous at everything connected with death," she
said.

"Your best plan will be to remain in your own room until it is all
over," I suggested, and she seemed very grateful for the thought.

"Will you take some tea?" she asked, suddenly. "I always made tea for
Sir Barnard and Miles."

Then she drew back shrinkingly, her face crimson.

"I beg your pardon," she said. "I forgot; I have no right to take the
same place now."

What could I do but hasten to implore her not to yield to such an idea,
to consider Crown Anstey her home, as it had been--at least for a time?

"You make me so happy!" she said; "but how can I--how can I stay here? I
find it awkward to explain myself--how can I remain here with you?"

I hastened eagerly to explain that I had a sister, an invalid sister,
and that I should be delighted if she would take an interest in her; and
it pleased me to think how happy Clare would be.

"Then you wish me to remain here as a companion to your sister?" she
said, slowly; and there was evidently some little disappointment in her
face.

"Unless we can think of something more pleasant for you," I replied. "We
can make that a temporary arrangement. In any case, permit me to say
that I shall take the care of your future on my hands, as Sir Barnard
would have done."

"You are very kind," she said, thoughtfully; "I had no right to expect
that. I did not anticipate anything of the sort."

We talked then, in low tones, about the late baronet and his son. Of
Miles she said very little. Of Sir Barnard she told me many anecdotes,
illustrating his pride, his grave, stately character, his intense love
of caste, his conservatism. I felt almost as though I had known him
before she had finished.

"And Miles," I said, "the poor young heir; how did you like him?"

Was it my fancy, the light flickering on her face, or did a quick
shudder pass over it?

"Every one liked him," she said, slowly. "He was proud and reserved; yet
he was a general favorite."

She was strangely quiet after that, and I suddenly remembered the
drawing-room was hers. I rose, bidding her good-night.

"You shall be sure to hear the stir of the arrival, mademoiselle," I
said; "do not let it disturb you. I should advise you to keep your room
tomorrow until the funeral is over."

Yet, although I so advised her, it struck me that she did not feel any
great amount of sorrow. I cannot tell why I had that impression, but it
was very strong upon me.

Nine o'clock, and the arrival had not yet taken place. The fragrant
gloaming was giving way to night; there was promise of a bright moon,
and the golden stars were peeping one by one. The night-wind was laden
with odors, a thousand flowers seemed to have given their sweet breath
to fan it. It would have been profanation to have lighted a cigar, so I
went out on the Queen's Terrace and walked under the whispering lime
trees, thinking of all that had passed in those few days.

Slowly but surely the conviction gained upon me that I did not like
Coralie d'Aubergne. I ought, according to all authentic romances, to
have fallen in love with her on the spot, but I was far from doing so.
"Why?" I asked myself. She was very brilliant--very lovely; I had seen
no one like her, yet the vague suspicion grew and grew. It was not the
face of a woman who could be trusted; there was something insincere
beneath its beauty. I should have liked her better if she had shown more
sorrow for the awful event that had happened; as, it was, I could not
help thinking that her chief emotion had been a kind of half fear as to
what would become of herself.

Then I reproached myself for thinking so unkindly of her, and resolved
that I would not judge her; after that I forgot mademoiselle. I heard
the sound of carriage wheels in the distance, and, looking down the long
vista of trees, I saw a hearse slowly driven up, and then I knew that
the dead Trevelyans had been brought home.

The desolation and sadness of that scene I shall never forget--the
hearse, the dark, waving plumes, the sight of the two heavy laden
coffins, the servants all in mourning.

A room next the great entrance hall had been prepared; it was all hung
with black and lighted with wax tapers. In the midst stood the two
coffins covered with a black velvet pall.

On the coffin of Miles Trevelyan, the son and heir, I saw a wreath of
flowers. I asked several times who had brought it, but no one seemed to
know.

I do not think that any one at Crown Anstey went to rest that night,
unless it were mademoiselle. There was something in the event to move
the hardest heart.

Father and son had left Crown Anstey so short a time since, full of
health, vigor, strength and plans for the future. They lay there now,
side by side, silent and dead; no more plans or hopes, wishes or fears.
The saddest day I ever remember was the one on which I helped to lay my
two unknown kinsmen in the family vault of the Trevelyans.




CHAPTER IV.


It was all over. The morning, with its sad office, had passed; the
servants had gone back to their work; the blinds were drawn up, and
light once more found its way into the darkened house. The will was read
in the library; the whole of the property, entailed and unentailed, was
left to his only son, Miles, and after him to his heirs. There was
several legacies to his servants, but no mention was made of
mademoiselle. I thought it strange at the time, afterward I understood
it.

Of course, as the poor young Miles was dead without heirs, I, as next of
kin, took his place. I faithfully carried out every wish expressed in
the will. That same evening I sent orders to London for a splendid
memorial window to be placed in the church, and while I sat wondering
whether I had remembered everything that required attention, there came
a rap at the library door. Mademoiselle would be glad if I could see her
for five minutes.

I went at once to the drawing-room, knowing she would be there. She was
dressed in the deepest mourning, and her face was very pale.

"I knew you would spare me a short time," she said. "I want to ask you a
question that I could not ask any one else. Of course you were present
when the will was read to-day?"

She raised her eyes to mine. I knew not what magnetism, what spell lay
in them; but no other eyes were like them. They compelled attention; a
man could no more release himself from their glance than he could fly. I
was not at all in love with her, yet those eyes held me spell-bound.

"I want you to tell me," she said, "if there was any other will.
Did--did Miles leave one?"

As she put the question to me I saw that her lips were parched and
burning, her white fingers so tightly clenched that they left great red
marks.

"No," I replied; "there was only one will, and that was Sir Barnard's."

A great calm fell over her. After some minutes she looked at me again.

"Was there any mention in that will of me?"

I told her none. Once more she raised those resistless eyes to mine.

"Then I am, indeed, alone in the world--alone and forsaken."

"Nay, nay!" I cried, eagerly; "do not say so. Clare will take care of
you."

"And you?" she asked, in a voice that must have melted an anchorite.

"I will help her--or, rather, I will take care of you both."

"What is your sister like?" she asked, eagerly. "Is she very
clever--very beautiful? Shall I be frightened at her?"

"She is the sweetest and most gentle of girls--doubly gentle from her
great affliction."

"What affliction?" she asked eagerly, "you did not tell me there was
anything the matter with her."

"She has a spinal complaint," I replied, "and is unable to move."

"Is it quite incurable?" she asked again.

"We hope not; perhaps a change of air may do something for her; but even
at the best, it will be years before she is able to go about."

"I am so sorry," she said; "so very sorry. How sad for you and for her.
I can understand why you want a companion for her; she can take no
active share in the management of a large establishment like this."

"No, no share at all. We will not decide anything until my sister comes;
but it seems to me that she will be most thankful to have you here, that
you will be more useful to her than I can say. She would not be able to
see guests, give orders or anything of that kind."

There was a strange light in her eyes, a strange, suppressed glitter in
her face.

"When will your sister come?" she next inquired.

"I am going to-morrow to fetch her. There will be no need for you to
make any alterations. You spoke of going away; there will be no need of
that. I leave here to-morrow, and when my sister comes I suppose the
sternest British propriety will be satisfied."

She smiled.

"I suppose so, too. And Sir Barnard has not even left me a
mourning-ring? Well, I have so much less to be grateful for. The old
servants were all remembered, I hope?"

"All of them. I will say good-night, mademoiselle; I have much to attend
to. I shall hope to find you well when I return."

What a strange fascination her beauty had! I remember it with a shudder.
Her face haunted me all night; I could not forget it.

The following morning I returned to London. I had yet to break the news
of our fortune to Clare, and make arrangements for our journey to Crown
Anstey.

People who wish to be philosophers tell you money is nothing. Certainly,
as far as the spiritual and higher, holier interests of life go, it is
not; but as far as this world is concerned, it is almost everything. I
had been poor and friendless in London, and then it had seemed to me a
desert; now I had money, it was another place--bright, cheerful, every
one kind and friendly. I seemed to float in sunshine; the very air
around me was elastic, full of hope; every step was a pleasure. What
made the difference? I was poor, and now I had money.

Clare was pleased to see me; she cried out in astonishment at my black
clothes, so new and glossy.

"Edgar," she said, "I cannot understand you. You have money, clothes.
How is it? What has happened?"

I knelt down by her side and took her in my arms.

"Clare," I said, "God has been very kind to us. All of our poverty and
privations are ended. Will you be calm and brave if I tell you what it
is?"

"They have taken you into partnership!" she cried, rapturously. "They
have found out how clever and good you are!"

In the midst of my agitation I laughed at this very unbusiness-like
idea.

"It is better than that, Clare. There need be no more business, no more
work for me. You remember hearing my mother speak of my father's cousin,
Sir Barnard Trevelyan, of Crown Anstey?"

"Yes, I remember it," she said. "I had almost forgotten."

"He is dead, and, sad to say, both his sons are dead. One died with him,
and one died years ago. Now do you understand?"

"No," she replied. "They cannot have left us anything, because they did
not know us."

"Sir Barnard and his only son died together, and the heir to Crown
Anstey, the title and the whole of that vast fortune is--myself."

"You are not jesting, Edgar?"

"No; I am telling you the simple, perfect truth." And then, when she had
recovered from what to her was really a shock, I gave her the whole
history.

"I hope you will like Mademoiselle, Clare. She is so utterly friendless
and alone that, unless we keep her with us, I do not know what is to
become of her."

"I shall be sure to like her," she said. "My heart is so full of
happiness that I shall love every one. O, Edgar, if I could but get
well!"

Yes, that was the one drawback to our happiness. The bright, sweet
sister, who would have enjoyed our prosperity so much, was a helpless
invalid.

That same afternoon I went to the office and invited all my fellow
clerks to a sumptuous dinner at a far-famed restaurant. I made some sad
hearts light and happy with my money, thank God! Poor Stephen Knowsley
had a sick mother and was three quarters behind with his rent. I gave
him fifty pounds, and the tears that stood in his eyes were the sweetest
thanks man could have. What gives such pleasure as plenty of money to
help one's friends?

A comfortable invalid carriage was provided for Clare, and the journey
did not fatigue her. We said good-by to the old life, the old
privations, the old trials, and embarked on a new, smiling and sunny
sea.

Another week saw us comfortably settled at Crown Anstey. The first
bewilderment of our new position passed away, I began to feel more at my
ease as master of that magnificent mansion, and on my sister's calm face
I saw already signs of returning health.

We had a grand reception when I returned with Clare to Crown Anstey. The
Anstey church bells pealed out merrily; the servants were all assembled;
mademoiselle, fresh and beautiful as a morning star, was in the hall.

I saw the kindly looks of commiseration that followed my sister. All the
servants in the house vied with one another who should he the most
attentive. Coralie looked at me, with sweet, sisterly anxiety shining in
her eyes.

The following day Coralie suggested we find two nice, large, lofty
cheerful rooms for my sister's use. We decided upon two in the western
wing--they both looked on the Queen's Terrace--large, lofty rooms, with
the sun shining on them all day, each one containing two large windows,
from which could be seen a glorious vista of trees and flowers.

Without saying one word to Clare, they were prepared for her. Books,
music, pictures, statues, flowers, were all arranged in order;
everything bright and beautiful was brought there. A small part of the
room was partitioned off and made into a conservatory, where she could
see the flowers bloom and hear the birds sing all the day long.

I have seen many lovely places since then, but none that looked to me so
bright and beautiful as my sister's rooms. All that money could do to
alleviate her sufferings was done. I ordered the easiest reclining
chair, on which she could be gently moved from room to room, resolving
in my own mind, no matter what went on in other parts of the house, that
in her rooms there should be always sunshine and happiness.

Her joy when she was carried into them was most pretty and pathetic to
see. Then, when she was fairly installed, I wrote to London for the
celebrated Dr. Finlaison, and I placed her under his care. He gave me
some little hope.

In the course of time, he said, with the best of attention, the most
tender care and cheerful society, she would, he believed, recover so as
to be once more able to take her place in the world; and the hour in
which I heard that was, I do not hesitate to say, one of the very
happiest of my life.

This part of my story has been, perhaps, commonplace. There was coming
for me a different phase. If my reader thinks it too romantic, I can
only say--it is true.




CHAPTER V.


It was some little time before I asked Clare how she liked Coralie, then
the answer was most diplomatic.

"I am so very sorry for her, Edgar, and so pleased that she has a home
with us."

She never said more than that, or less. Knowing her amiable character, I
came to the conclusion that she did not like her, but was too
good-natured and kind-hearted to say so.

Mademoiselle, as she was called in the household, was very kind to my
sister. She engaged a maid, whose only business was to wait upon her;
and more than that, she spent some hours, at least, every day in her
room. She attended to her flowers, fed her birds, selected her books,
played and sang to her, read to her, talked to her in her bright, lively
way, superintended her dress, so that I always saw my darling
exquisitely attired; and yet I could not see that Clare liked her.

She soon made herself almost indispensable. She gave orders to the
housekeeper and cook, she managed everything; she received our visitors
and entertained them with marvelous grace and courtesy; she understood
all the affairs of the estate; in fact, she was, to all intents and
purposes, mistress of the house.

I insisted upon making her a very handsome allowance, which, after a
little resistance, she accepted.

For a time everything went on most prosperously. How I loved my new life
no words of mine can tell. The luxury of having plenty of money, of
being able to do what I liked with my time, of seeing my sister so
happy, of being altogether without those dark fears for the future which
so often beset those whose lot is hard work and very limited means--I
thanked God for it all.

I had made the acquaintance of most of the tenants on the estate, and my
neighbors had begun to call upon me. It was surprising how every one
liked, or, I may say, loved, my sister Clare. That invalid couch of hers
became a kind of center of society.

One morning I saw some cards lying on the hall table. Coralie was
standing near when I took them up. "Sir John Thesiger," "Lady Thesiger."

"That is a new name," I said to mademoiselle.

When she took the card from my hand and saw it, a dark look came over
her face; I saw her lips close more firmly.

"Have you not heard of the Thesigers? I thought every one knew Sir John.
They live at Harden Manor, about five miles from here."

"Are they old friends of the family?" I asked.

Again the darkening look and the tightening lips.

"Both Sir Barnard and Miles knew them, but I cannot say whether they
were very great friends. Shall you call?"

She asked the question carelessly, but I saw that she was awaiting my
reply with painful anxiety.

"Yes, I shall go; I like to be on friendly and intimate terms with all
my neighbors. Sir John is the Tory member for Chingwell, is he not?"

"Yes," she replied, shortly.

"And next year I hope to be returned for Anstey, so that, of all men, I
shall probably find him the most useful of acquaintances."

She turned away, and a sudden conviction came over me that, for some
reason or other, Coralie d'Aubergne did not like the Thesigers. I rode
over to Harden Manor on the day following, and found Sir John at home.

I liked him at first sight--a frank, kind-hearted English gentleman. He
was pleased to see me, and we spent some time talking over the late
baronet and his son. He told me something I had not heard from
Coralie--that there had been some slight misunderstanding between father
and son. He asked me if I would join the ladies, who were in the
drawing-room. I was only too pleased.

"Lady Thesiger was Sir Barnard's confidant. He consulted her about
everything--indeed, we were such near and dear friends that you must
forgive me if I cannot look upon you as a stranger."

Entering a very pretty drawing-room, long low and old-fashioned, I saw
two ladies, one a matron, the other a lovely young girl. Sir John
introduced me to his wife and then to Agatha, his daughter.

Looking up, I saw my fate. Never believe those cold-natured,
cold-hearted people who tell you that love grows from respect. It does
not. It comes into existence all at once--suddenly, as a flower is
kissed into color by the sun. When I entered Harden Manor, I was
heart-whole, fancy-free, loving no one but Clare; after one upward look
in Agatha Thesiger's face, I loved her with a love that was my doom.

Sir John looked at me in amazement.

"I--I did not know you had a daughter, Sir John."

"Ah! but I have, and a very precious one, too. Poor Sir Barnard was very
fond of Agatha; he used to call her his sunbeam. I was almost jealous of
him at times."

"There was no need, papa," said a sweet voice, the very sound of which
made me tremble.

Why had mademoiselle never mentioned this young girl, so fair, so
lovely? Why had she told me nothing about her? I should like to describe
her, reader, so as to make you love her. She was tall, very little above
the medium height, slender, graceful, with a delicate, arched neck and
the "fairest face the sun e'er shone on." Not beautiful--that word would
not describe her; fair, sweet and lovely. She had no brilliant or vivid
coloring; her complexion was clear, with the faintest rose-bloom; her
eyes large and blue, her lips sweet and sensitive; a white brow and a
wealth of soft, brown hair. She was no queenly beauty; she had not
Coralie's brilliancy and bright coloring, but she was the fairest and
most lovable girl who ever made a man's heart glad.

I did not know how the next few minutes passed. Sir John and Lady
Thesiger were talking about the neighborhood, and I was thinking that if
Agatha bid me lie down there at her feet and die for her sweet sake, I
should do so with a smile.

When I came to my senses, Lady Thesiger was asking me if I would dine
with them the week following; they were expecting some visitors from
London. I am sure she must have thought me almost an imbecile, I
answered her in such a confused, hesitating way.

All the time Agatha sat opposite to me, her lovely eyes drooping over
the drawing on which she was engaged when I entered. I could bear it no
longer; come what might, I must see those eyes. I went over and stood by
her side.

Alas! I had rarely, if ever, spoken to any young ladies except Clare and
Coralie. I had crossed the room purposely to speak to her. Standing by
her chair, every word I had ever known in my life died from memory, I
could not think of one thing to say.

Bending over the picture, I asked if she were fond of drawing, and then
I hated myself for the utter imbecility of the question.

When at once the blue eyes were raised to mine all constraint died away;
they kindled a fire in my heart that nothing could ever extinguish.

"Miss Thesiger," I said, "I should be so pleased if I could excite your
interest in my sister."

"Have you a sister?" asked Lady Thesiger. "I did not know it; I am
afraid she will think me very remiss."

I told them all about Clare, speaking, as was my fashion, with my heart
upon my lips, telling them of her sweetness, her patience, her long
illness, her cheerful resignation. Agatha forgot her reserve, Lady
Thesiger looked deeply interested, and when I had finished speaking, the
tears were in my eyes.

Lady Thesiger held out her hand.

"You have quite touched my heart, Sir Edgar; I shall not rest until I
have seen Miss Trevelyan."

"Nor I," added the daughter.

I turned eagerly to her.

"You will come over to see my sister? I should be so grateful; she would
welcome you so warmly. I have always longed for her to have a friend."

There was a slight constraint in the faces of mother and daughter. I
wondered what it meant. Lady Thesiger was the first to speak.

"We shall be delighted to do all that lies in our power to soften Miss
Trevelyan's terrible affliction. Pray, pardon me, Sir Edgar, but is
Mademoiselle d'Aubergne still at Crown Anstey?"

"She is staying there as a companion to my sister, who is utterly
incapable of taking any share in the management of the house."

"You must find a wife," said Sir John. "I should say myself that Crown
Anstey requires a mistress."

I longed to say there and then how I should pray him to give me his
daughter for a wife. Our eyes met. She must have read my thoughts, for
her face grew crimson, nor did I catch another glimpse of those lovely
eyes during my visit.

It was with difficulty I could tear myself away. Sir John, who was a
great connoisseur in horses, went with me to see Bonnie Prince. While we
stood on the lawn he turned to me with a constrained smile.

"So mademoiselle is still at Crown Anstey?" he said. "I suppose she is
as beautiful as ever?"

"Tastes differ," I replied, oddly. "Her beauty is not according to my
idea."

His kindly face cleared.

"That is right; she is of the siren order; some people would find her
irresistible. Now, pardon me if I say one word. I have known the lady
for five years, and know nothing against her, still mistrust her without
knowing why. You are young, new to the world; new, perhaps, to the
influence of great womanly beauty; keep your heart safe. Do not let
Mademoiselle d'Aubergne take it from you."

"There is no fear," I replied, with a light laugh. "Some day, Sir John,
I will tell you where my heart has found its home."

"I am glad you know how to take a hint given in all kindness," he said,
cordially. "As my old friend's heir and representative, my heart warms
to you."

I left Harden Manor a changed man. The very earth around seemed changed
to me; the sky wore a deeper blue; the grass a fairer green; there was
new music in the birds' songs and in the whisper of the wind, new hope
in my own heart, new beauty all around me. That was the beginning of the
glamour posts call frenzy, men call love.

Mademoiselle was out on the lawn as I rode up to the door. She came to
meet me, her glittering eyes on my face.

"Have you enjoyed your visit?" was the first question she asked.

"More than I ever enjoyed anything in my life. You did not tell me what
a beautiful neighbor I had at Harden Manor."

"I never thought of it," she replied, carelessly. "Agatha Thesiger is
only a school-girl."

"Then school-girls are very different from what I thought them," was my
reply, and mademoiselle turned away with a strange smile.




CHAPTER VI.


No matter what I did, that face was always before me. If I read it
looked up at me with sweet, serene eyes from the pages of my book. It
rose between me and the blue heavens. I saw it in every flower. It
haunted me until I could have cried out for respite from the pleasure
that was yet half pain.

Poets sing of the joy and the rapture of love. Who knows its pain? For
pain it surely is when no sleep comes near you, and the every-day duties
of life only weary you, and your sole desire is to dream over looks and
words you cannot forget. It is surely pain when a thousand doubts assail
you, when you weigh yourself in the balance and find yourself wanting.

A hundred times each day I found myself wondering whether Sir John would
think me good enough for his daughter. She was not his heiress, I knew,
for he had a son at college, but she was lovely, high-born,
accomplished, and my one great puzzle was whether he would think me a
good match for her.

Other doubts came to madden me. Perhaps she was already engaged. She had
doubtless a number of admirers. Who was I that I should dare to hope for
her favor?

It was only two days since I had seen her, and I longed to see her
again. A fierce, wild desire to look once more into that sweet face took
possession of me. When my longing was gratified the very gates of
Paradise seemed opened to me. One beautiful morning Lady Thesiger and
Agatha came over to Crown Anstey. It so happened that I was in Clare's
room when they arrived, and Coralie, too, was there, attending to the
flowers, giving them fresh water, cutting off dead leaves and gathering
the fairest buds.

Lady Thesiger and Miss Thesiger were suddenly announced. Clare looked
eagerly, and I just caught the dark, bitter expression on Coralie's
face; then they entered. As a matter of course, I introduced Lady
Thesiger first. She stooped down to kiss the sweet face that seemed to
win universal love. Then I remember taking Agatha's hand and leading her
up to Clare. What could they have thought of me? I forgot everything
except that the two women I loved best were there together.

Lady Thesiger then turned toward mademoiselle. There was no kindly hand
extended, no warm greeting, no friendly words. Lady Thesiger made the
most formal of bows, Coralie returned it by one more formal still,
Agatha did the same, and a strange, constrained silence fell upon us
all.

Without a word mademoiselle quitted the room. The beauty of her face was
not pleasant in that moment; there was a glitter in her eye, a
compression of her lips that might have told any one to beware. Lady
Thesiger became her own natural self after Coralie's departure; she
talked so kindly to Clare that I could have kissed her hand in
gratitude.

I took Miss Thesiger to show her my sister's flowers; for no word of
mine would those lovely eyes look up. She was not shy; her grace of
manner was too perfect for that, but she was evidently afraid to look at
me, and I reproached myself that I had perhaps frightened her at first.

Patiently I showed her flower after flower, perfect bud and perfect
blossom, the little white doves I had tamed, the birds of bright plumage
I had bought to amuse my sister. I showed her the little fountains that
rippled all day, the rocks and ferns. She admired everything.

"Your sister must be happy in spite of her illness," she said to me.

But I could bear those drooping eyes no longer.

"Miss Thesiger," I said, hurriedly, "do not be unkind to me. I know I am
very presumptuous, but do, pray do, give me one kind look before you
go."

Then she raised her eyes and looked at me. Alas! my tell-tale face. They
fell again, and the crimson flush mounted to her white brow. I could say
no more to her after that. She went to her mother's side, and they
talked to Clare until it was time for lunch.

I asked if they would remain and take lunch with my sister. They
consented, and when it was arranged I sent to ask Coralie if she would
join us. Her answer was that she was busily engaged and begged we would
excuse her. Again I felt sure that Lady Thesiger looked considerably
relieved.

Every moment I was falling more deeply and more helplessly in love, and
yet across all my rapturous thoughts of Agatha came doubt and wonder as
to why they did not like Coralie.

Strange; she had the beauty of a siren, the grace and wit of a queen of
society, the talents and accomplishments of a complete woman of the
world, yet no one seemed to like her. How could it be?

Lady Thesiger rose at last, declaring that she was ashamed at the length
of her visit. When they were gone I went back to Clare. She looked up
at me with a smile; there was a bright flush of animation on her face.

"How much I like them, Edgar! How kind Lady Thesiger is, and Agatha! Oh,
brother, how I wish I had a sister like her!"

I thought I would ask her to solve my doubt.

"Clare," I said, gravely, "I want you to explain something to me. You,
being a woman, can understand women. Tell me how it is no one likes
Coralie. She is beautiful and clever; why is it no one cares for her?"

My sister looked at me uneasily.

"I cannot tell. I wish you would not ask me, Edgar."

"Nay; tell me what you think?"

"Then I fancy it must be because she is not quite sincere. I do not like
saying anything so unkind. You must not let it prejudice you against
her; but she gives me always the impression of a person who leads two
lives--one that everybody sees and one that nobody understands save
herself."

"How old should you imagine her to be?" I asked; and again my sister
looked uneasily at me.

"We have been in the habit of considering her a young girl," she
replied, "but do you know, Edgar, I believe she is more than thirty?"

"It is impossible!" I cried. "Why, Clare, she does not look a day more
than eighteen."

"She is what the French people call well preserved. She will look no
older for the next ten years. She has a girl's figure and a girl's face,
but a woman's heart, Edgar, I am sure of it."

"She is thirty, you say, and has been here for five years; that would
make her a woman of twenty-five before she left France. A French woman
of twenty-five has lived her life."

"That is just what I mean," she replied. "Rely upon it, for all her
girlish face and girlish ways, Coralie d'Aubergne has lived hers."

"Clare," I asked, half shyly, "how do you like Miss Thesiger?"

A look bright as a sunbeam came over my sister's face.

"Ah! hers is a beautiful nature--sweet, frank, candid, transparent--no
two lives there, Edgar. Her face is as pure as a lily, and her soul is
the same. No need to turn from me, dear; I read your secret when she
came in. If you give me such a sister as that I shall be grateful to
you."

"Then you think there might be some chance for me if I asked her to
become my wife?"

"Assuredly. Why not?"

She said no more, for at that moment Coralie returned; she had been in
the garden gathering some flowers for Clare. The brightest bloom was on
her face; the brightest light was in her eye. Looking at her, it was
impossible to believe that she was anything but a light-hearted happy
girl.

She glanced round the room.

"Your visitors are gone," she said. "I felt sure they were staying for
dinner."

"Coralie," I asked, "Lady Thesiger tells me she has been here a good
deal, yet you do not seem to be on very intimate terms with her?"

"No," she said, with that frank smile that was lovely enough to charm
any one. "I neither like nor admire Lady Thesiger."

Clare uttered a little cry of astonishment.

"Why not?" I asked.

"I should not like to prejudice you against them, Sir Edgar; but as you
ask me, I will tell you. The Thesigers have but one object."

"What is it?" I inquired for she had paused abruptly, and seemed to be
entirely engrossed in her flowers.

"The one aim they have had in view for several years past is to see
Agatha mistress of Crown Anstey. She was educated solely and entirely
for that purpose."

"I do not believe it!" cried Clare, indignantly.

"I should never expect you to do so. You are too unworldly--too good;
you know nothing of the manners of fashionable people. Sir Barnard knew
it. They fairly hunted him down; they were always driving over here, or
asking Sir Barnard and Miles there; they were continually contriving
fresh means to throw Miles and Agatha together."

I would not please her by showing my anger.

"Perhaps," I said, carelessly, "Miles admired her; he may even have been
her lover."

She turned to me with a strange, glittering smile, a look I could not
fathom on her face.

"No," she replied: "Miles knew all about it; he was too sensible to be
caught by the insipid charms of a mere school-girl. Sir Barnard was not
so wise; he would have liked to join the two estates--he spoke of it
very often--but Miles never gave the matter a serious thought."

There was such unconcealed bitterness in her words and look--such malice
in that glittering smile, I turned away half in disgust.

"All our neighbors understand Lady Thesiger's politics," she continued;
"they have been a source of great amusement for some time."

"Miss Thesiger is not a day above eighteen," I said, fairly angry at
last; "so that there can not have been much time for manoeuvring."

"Ah!" she said, "how I admire you, Sir Edgar. That simple, noble faith
you have in women is most beautiful to me; one sees it so seldom in
those who have lived always among fashionable men and women."

A little speech that was intended to remind me how strange and fresh I
was to this upper world. I began to find something like dislike to
mademoiselle growing up in my mind; but I spoke to her of the Thesigers
no more.




CHAPTER VII.


It seems an unmanly thing to write of a woman--my own face flushes hotly
as I write the words--but to make my story plain the truth must be
told. I could not help seeing that Coralie d'Aubergne was growing to
like me very much.

To describe how a man woos a woman is a task pleasant enough. It is
natural and beautiful; he is in his place then and she in hers; but who
would not shrink from the hateful task of describing how a woman woos a
man?

God bless all women, say I! My life has been a long one, and my
experience of them bids me say they are almost all angels. I have found
them true, tender and earnest. I could tell stories of women's quiet
heroism that would move any one's heart. God bless them, one and
all--they are the chief comfort in life!

Still even I, who love and respect them so much, am compelled to own
that there are women wanting in purity and goodness, in modesty and
reserve. I grieve to say Coralie d'Aubergne was one of them. She pursued
me, and yet it was all so quietly done that she left me no room to
speak--no ground on which to interfere.

If I went out in the gloaming to smoke a cigar, as I liked best to do
among the sighs of the roses, in a few minutes that beautiful, fair face
was sure to be smiling at my side. She had a pretty, picturesque way of
throwing a black lace shawl over her shoulders and of draping it round
her head, so making her face look a thousand times more fair.

She would come to me with that graceful, easy, dignified walk of hers
and say:

"If I am not intruding, Sir Edgar, I should enjoy a few minutes with
you."

She had a wonderful gift of conversation--piquant, sparkling and
intellectual. If I had been the dullest of the dull, I should have known
that such a woman would not pass her life as a companion unless she had
some wonderful end in view. She was far too brilliant. She would have
made a good ambassadress, for she could make herself all things to all
men. No matter what subject interested you, on that she could speak. She
seemed to understand every one intuitively; one's likes, dislikes,
tastes. She had a wondrous power of reading character. She was worldly
with the worldly, good with the good, romantic with the young, sensible
with the old. To me she was always the same. Sometimes, when I saw her
coming to meet me along those paths where the rose leaves lay dead, I
felt inclined to go away and leave her; but natural politeness came to
my aid. Then when she had talked to me for a few minutes, a strange,
subtle charm would steal over me.

I knew her well-chosen compliments were all flattery. I knew she was
pursuing me for some object of her own. Yet that charm no words can
describe was stronger than my reason. Away from her I disliked her; my
judgment was all against her; in her presence no man could help being
fascinated.

I thank Heaven that I had the shield of a pure and holy love; I was but
a weak man, and nothing else saved me. If there came a wet day, or one
that was not pleasant for walking, she had a thousand ways of making
time fly. She played billiards as well as any man; she read aloud more
beautifully and perfectly than I have ever heard any one else. She made
every room she entered cheerful; she had a fund of anecdote that never
seemed to be exhausted.

But the time she liked best for weaving her spells was after sunset,
before the lamps were lighted.

"You are fond of music, Sir Edgar," she would say to me. "Come, and I
will sing you some songs I used to sing years ago."

And she did sing. Listening to her, I could well believe in the
far-famed Orpheus lute. It was enough to bewilder any man. She had a
sweet, rich voice, a contralto of no ordinary merit, and the way in
which she used it was something never to be forgotten.

There was a deep bay-window in the drawing-room, my favorite nook; from
it there was a splendid view of waving trees and blooming flowers. She
would place my chair there for me and then sing until she sung my senses
away. There was such power, such pathos, such passion, in her voice that
no one could listen to it unmoved.

Then, when she had sung until my very senses were steeped in the sweet
madness of her music, she would come and sit, sometimes by my side,
sometimes on a Turkish cushion at my feet.

And then--well, I do not like to say more, but as women can woo, she
wooed me. Sometimes her hand, so warm and soft, would touch mine;
sometimes, to see what I was reading, she would bend over me until her
hair brushed my cheek and the perfume of the flowers she always wore
reached me.

Thank God, I say again, that I was shielded by a pure love.

"How I love Crown Anstey!" she said to me one evening; "if I were asked
to choose between being crowned Queen of Great Britain or mistress of
Crown Anstey, I should prefer to remain here."

How well I remember that evening! The golden summer was dying then; the
flowers seemed to be yielding all their sweetest perfumes to it; there
was a lovely light from the evening sky that lingered on the tufted lime
trees; the birds were singing a faint, sweet vesper hymn; the time so
soon was coming when they were to cross the sunny seas in search of
warmer climes.

I had been reading to Clare, but she did not seem to be quite so well
and asked to be left alone.

"Let Coralie play and sing for you, Edgar," she said; "I shall hear the
faint sound of it, and it will make me happy, because I shall know you
are well amused." I did not like to tell her how distasteful Coralie's
playing and singing were to me. We went into the drawing-room together.
I saw how everything was prepared for me; there were fresh flowers, my
favorite periodicals, my favorite chair, placed in the nook I liked
best.

"I shall sing to you some gay French chansons," said Coralie, "and we
will leave the door open so that Clare may hear them."

A few moments later and I was in an atmosphere of delight. The rich,
sweet music rose and fell; it cheered me like strong wine.

Then after a time its character changed; it was no longer gay,
triumphant and mirthful. The very spirit of love and pathos seemed to
breathe through it. My heart beat; every nerve thrilled; every sense
answered to these sweet, soft words.

It ceased then, and Coralie came over to the bay-window. She sat down
upon the Turkish curtains, and looked with longing eyes at the light on
the trees and flowers. There was a softened expression on her face, a
flush as of awakened emotion, a new and brighter light in those dark,
dangerous eyes. The white fingers trembled, the white bosom heaved as
though she had felt deeply the words she had been singing.

Then it was said she would rather be mistress of Crown Anstey than Queen
of Great Britain.

I laughed, not knowing what to say.

"Crown Anstey ought to thank you very much," I said. "You pay it a great
compliment."

"My heart is here," she continued, those dreamy eyes still fixed upon
mine. "I think if any one were to say to me, 'You must leave Crown
Anstey,' I should die."

All the music on earth seemed embodied in those few words.

"I should die," she repeated, "just as a flower dies when it is torn
from the soil it has taken deep root."

"Why do you speak of such things?" I asked. "No one thinks of your
going; this is your home."

"In my happiest hours the fear lies heaviest upon me," she replied. "No
one has ever spoken of my going, that is true; but I have common sense,
and common sense tells me if certain events happen I must go."

"What events do you mean?" I asked, all unconsciously.

She sighed deeply.

"If you were to be married, Sir Edgar--Cousin Edgar, I like to say
best--then I must go."

"I do not see the necessity."

"Ah! you do not understand; women are all jealous. I have grown so
accustomed to perform a hundred little services for you, they make the
pleasure and sunshine of my life. To be able to do some little thing to
help you is the highest earthly joy that I can ever know. When you are
married, Sir Edgar, your wife will take all this happiness from me."

"I do not see why," I replied, dryly, inwardly wishing myself safe in
Clare's room.

"Ah! you do not understand--men never can understand the love of women.
Wives, above all, are so very jealous. Fancy, if ever I wanted to make
your tea, or get anything ready for you, she would be angry, and I
should be wretched."

"In that case you must make tea for Clare instead of me."

"If I am anywhere near you, I must always attend to you before every one
and anything in the wide world," she said, impulsively.

"You are making very sure that my wife will not like you," I said. "What
if I have no wife?"

She shook her head gravely.

"You will marry, Sir Edgar. All the Trevelyans of Crown Anstey marry,
as becomes the head of a grand old family. You will marry, and your wife
will be the happiest woman in the world."

"I may be a modern Bluebeard, Coralie."

"No; you will not. Ah, me! To go away and leave Crown Anstey--to leave
you--I shall feel like Eve driven forth from Paradise to die."

My hand lay carelessly on the back of a chair. She bent down swiftly and
laid her burning lips upon it. I would not tell--my face flames as I
write the word--but unless you know all, reader, you will not understand
my story.

She laid her warm, soft lips upon it! And though I did not love her--did
not even trust her--the magnetic touch thrilled every nerve. I took my
hand away.

"Ah, cousin!" she said, looking at me with those dark, dangerous eyes,
"you love even your dog Hector better than me."

She was so near to me that the perfume from her flowers reached me. It
was by a desperate effort I broke the spell.

"This room is insufferably warm," I said; "I am going into the garden.
You had better see if Clare wants anything, Coralie."

So, like many another man, I ran away, not knowing how to meet my fair
adversary on equal grounds.




CHAPTER VIII.


Walking among the whispering leaves, the conclusion I came to was that I
must take some precaution, or Coralie d'Aubergne would marry me whether
I was willing or not. A siren is a faint shadow compared with a
beautiful woman resolved to win a man whether he wants winning or not.

Why not risk my fate and ask Agatha to be my wife? There was a faint
hope in my heart that she would not refuse me, yet she was so modest, so
retiring, that though I had most perseveringly sought her favor since
the first moment I had seen her, I could not tell whether she cared for
me or not.

To judge by Coralie's standard, she did not like me. In all our
conversation it half maddened me to see the lovely eyes I loved so
dearly dropped shyly away from me.

It may not be a very elegant comparison, but she always reminded me of
some shy, beautiful bird. She had a bright, half-startled way of looking
at me. Several times, when I met her suddenly, I saw the lovely face
flush and the little hands tremble.

Did she love me or did she not? I could not tell. Of whom should I take
counsel? There was a bird singing over me; I wondered if that sweet
night-song was all of love. Alas! that I had not been more into the
world of women--their ways and fashions were all mysteries to me.

"Faint heart never won fair lady," says the old proverb, and it ran
through my mind. I resolved to try my fortune. If she did not love me,
why then, life held nothing more for me. If I could not win her I would
never ask the love of woman more, but live out my life with Clare.

Like many other anxious lovers, I lay awake all night, wondering what I
should say to her, how I should woo her, in what words I should ask her
to be my wife. When day dawned I was still undecided, only that it was
to be.

"You are going away early," said Coralie, as I ordered my horse. "Surely
you will not be away all day, Sir Edgar?"

"I am going to Harden Manor, and cannot say when I shall return. Do not
wait dinner for me--I may dine there."

"It will be a long, dark day," she said, with a sigh. "Do not be
late--every hour will seem like two."

She hovered round me, asking many questions, evidently seeking to know
my business there. When my horse was brought to the door, she came to me
with a delicate spray of heliotrope.

"Let me fasten this in your coat, Sir Edgar. No gentleman looks
completely dressed without a flower. You do not know what heliotrope
means. Men never--or, at least, very seldom--care for the sweetest of
all languages--the language of flowers. What that heliotrope means,
cousin, I say to you."

It was not until some weeks afterward that, looking quite accidentally
over an old book, I discovered the spray of heliotrope meant, "I love
you."

The beautiful picture of this fair, passionate woman died from my mind
as I went to seek one a thousand times more fair. How well I remember
the day--the golden sunshine, the fragrant wind, the blooming flowers,
as I rode forth to win my love! It seemed to me that the summer skies
smiled on me, and the singing birds wished me joy.

The way to Harden Manor lay through green, flowery lanes and a shady
highroad. It seemed long because my heart sighed to be with her; yet
short because I was so uncertain what to say, and how my wooing would
end.

I reached the manor at last. Sir John was from home. Lady Thesiger and
Agatha were busily engaged in making pretty fancy articles for a grand
fancy fair that was to be held--for the benefit of some out-of-the-way
people--by special permission of His Grace the Duke of Fairholme in the
grounds of Fairholme Castle.

Lady Thesiger looked up when I entered, with a smile.

"Good morning, Sir Edgar; I am very glad to see you. Agatha and I were
just wishing we had a gentleman to help us. Are you willing to assist us
for a day?"

My face flushed hotly with delight.

"Am I willing to give myself a day of Utopian delight, Lady Thesiger?
Most certainly. I will do anything--I can be very useful. I can mount
drawings, frame photographs, sketch and design, and my humble talents
are all yours."

Then Agatha looked at me, and the glance of those eyes was so sweet I
almost lost myself.

"The Cherokee Indians, or whatever they are called, will be much obliged
to you," she said. "I cannot call working for them 'Utopian delight;' my
fingers ache with this stiff cardboard."

"You willfully misunderstand me, Miss Thesiger; the delight consists in
being with you, not in working for the Cherokees. Save that I shudder
when I hear that they have eaten a missionary, they have no particular
interest for me."

Lady Thesiger smiled.

"You must work, not talk, Sir Edgar. Sit down here, pray, and if you
think Miss Trevelyan will be uneasy, I will send a servant to tell her
that you will remain here for lunch and for dinner."

"I prepared her for that emergency; now give me something to do for the
Cherokees."

My hands were soon filled. It was pleasant sitting there in that
fragrant, sunny drawing-room, with two of the most gracious and graceful
women in England. Yet it was hard. I had gone there purposely to tell
the story of my love, and now I was condemned to sit for hours by
Agatha's side and say nothing to her.

"Perhaps fortune may favor me," I thought; "Lady Thesiger may leave the
room, and then I will not lose a moment."

How fervently I blessed these Cherokees before the day was ended no one
will ever know. Lady Thesiger never left us; Agatha worked very hard.
Looking at the sweet, calm, high-bred face, I wondered if she knew that
a lover, with his heart on fire, sat near her.

Lunch came--we went to the dining-room. Lady Thesiger told us we had
only half an hour to spare; she had promised the duchess to send
everything in that evening, and she did not wish to break her word.

"It is worse than slavery," I said, and Lady Thesiger laughed, little
knowing why I was so impatient.

Back again to work. Happily, all was finished, and the servants were
called in to pack the pretty, fragile articles.

"Now I shall have five minutes," I thought to myself, "and I will find
out whether she cares for me or not."

Alas! there was the dressing-bell. "We have just finished in time for
dinner," said Lady Thesiger. "Sir John will not be at home; he does not
return until late."

I was tortured with impatience. Had I been waiting for a verdict over
life or death, my agony would not have been one-half so great.

The long ordeal of dinner had to pass.

"You will allow me to go to the drawing-room with you," I said to the
mistress of the house. "I could not sit here alone."

Then I saw a chance. Agatha went to the piano and played one of
Mendelssohn's "Songs Without Words." The difference between the pure,
sweet, high-bred English girl and the brilliant, seductive French woman
never appeared to me so great as when they were at the piano. Coralie's
music wrapped one's soul, steeped one's senses, brought one nearer to
earth; Agatha took one almost straight to heaven. Listening to her, pure
and holy thoughts came, high and noble impulses.

Then, seeing that Lady Thesiger looked tired, I suggested that she
should rest upon the sofa while I took Miss Thesiger for a little stroll
through the gardens. The evening was beautiful, warm and clear, the
golden sun lingering as though loath to leave the fair world to
darkness.

At last, at last! My hands trembled with impatience as I drew the black
lace mantilla over her white shoulders. At last, at last I had her all
to myself, only the birds and flowers around us, only the blue sky
overhead.

Then, when I would have given worlds for the power of speech, a strange,
dull silence came over me.

"Agatha," I said at last, "I came over today on purpose to see you. I
want to ask you something, a favor so great my lips can hardly frame the
words."

She looked at me. There was infinite wonder, infinite gentleness in her
eyes. I took courage then, and told my tale in burning words. I cannot
remember now, but I told her how I had loved her from the first moment I
had ever seen her, and had resolved upon winning her, if she was to be
won.

Never mind what passed. I only know the sun never shone so brightly, the
flowers were never one-half so fair, the world so bright, no man ever
one-half so happy.

For she--well, she had listened to me, and her sweet lips quivered, her
beautiful face had grown tender and soft; she laid her little, white
hands in mine and said she loved me.

I have wondered since that the weight of my own happiness did not break
my heart, the suspense had been so great.

"You love me? Say it again, Agatha. I cannot believe it. Oh, my darling,
it seemed to me easier to reach the golden stars than to win you!"

"You did not try," she said, with a smile half sweet, half divine. "You
always looked frightened at me."

"So I was, but I will grow bolder now. Such beauty, such purity, such
goodness as yours would awe anyone. I can hardly believe now in my own
good fortune. Say it again, darling."

She raised her sweet face to mine.

"I love you," she said, simply; and it seemed to me the words died away
in the summer wind more sweetly than an echo from heaven would die.

"And you will be my wife? Agatha, promise me."

"I will be your wife," she said; and then, to my thinking, we went
straight away to fairyland.

I do not remember the sun setting, although it must have set; for when
my senses returned to me a servant was standing before us, saying that
Lady Thesiger was afraid it was growing cold.

There lay the dew shining on the trees and flowers, yet we had not even
seen it fall.




CHAPTER IX.


I would not leave the manor house until I had seen Sir John. Agatha did
not go back to the drawing-room with me.

"What will mamma think?" she said, in utter dismay. "See how late it is;
and the dew has fallen."

"I will tell her why I detained you, Agatha. You are sure that I shall
not wake up tomorrow and find all this is a dream?"

"I do not think so," she replied; and then she would not stop for
another word, and I went in to meet Lady Thesiger alone.

She was surprised when I told her. No matter what Coralie said about
maneuvering, if ever I saw real, genuine surprise in any woman's face,
it was in Lady Thesiger's this evening.

"You have asked Agatha to marry you!" she repeated, looking half
bewildered; "and pray, Sir Edgar, what did the child say?"

"She promised to marry me," I replied, more boldly; "that is, of course,
if Sir John and you, Lady Thesiger, have no objection."

"I am afraid that you have not taken that much into consideration. Asked
the child to marry you! Why, Sir Edgar, how long have you been in love
with her?"

"From the very first moment I ever saw her."

"Why," cried her ladyship, "Sir John told me you were in love, and had
promised to confide in him."

Remembering what I had said to him, I explained to her that in speaking
as I had done I referred entirely to Agatha.

"It is so utterly unexpected," she said, "that you must pardon my
strange reception of your intelligence."

She sat quite silent for some minutes, then continued:

"It seems so strange for you to fall in love with Agatha. The dearest
wish of Sir Barnard's heart was to have her for a daughter-in-law."

A fierce spasm of jealousy almost robbed me of my breath.

"Did she--did she--"

Then I could get no further.

"No, Agatha did not like Miles, if that is what you mean?"

"Did Miles love her?"

"I cannot tell--there was something very mysterious about him. He looked
to me like one who had a secret on his mind. I have often wondered what
it could be. He was not a happy man of late years."

"You have not told me yet, Lady Thesiger, if I have your good wishes."

She held out her hand with a gracious, kindly smile.

"Shall I tell you the truth--no flattery, but just the simple truth? I
would rather Agatha married you than any other man in the nation. She
has not only my full consent, but I am pleased, proud and happy."

"And Sir John, shall I have his consent?"

"There is little doubt of it. I hear him now--he has just arrived, I
suppose. You shall see him at once."

I rode away from Harden Manor that night a happy man. Sir John, like
Lady Thesiger, gave his full, free, unhesitating consent. We had a long,
confidential conversation. He told me how his affairs stood. He was a
wealthy man, but his expenses were great. He told me frankly that he
should not be able to give Agatha a large portion at her marriage, nor
could he leave her anything considerable at his death. Harden Manor,
with its rich revenues, was all entailed on his son.

"So that I am glad, Sir Edgar," he said, "she is likely to marry a rich
man. She has been brought up in all luxury, and would never be able to
bear privation. I shall feel satisfied of her future now."

Alas! so did I. I rode home through the sweet, gathering gloom and the
starlight, one of the happiest men in England. I had won my love. She
loved me whom I loved best.

There seemed to be nothing wanting then. Two short years ago I was poor,
my daily life one of monotonous toil, without the least hope of relief.
Now the silvery moon fell upon the woods and silvered the roof of the
grand old mansion, and all this fair land over which I was riding was
mine.

Coralie was waiting for me. She affected to be just crossing the hall,
but I knew that she had been waiting there to have the first word with
me. She looked eagerly into my face.

"How long you have been away, Sir Edgar! Surely the starlight agrees
with you. I have coffee ready for you in the drawing-room--you have
dined, I suppose?"

"Yes, I dined at Harden Manor. I have been there all day."

A dark cloud came for a moment over her radiant face.

"All day," she repeated. "Ah, poor Miles! If he rode over in the morning
they were always sure to make him stay to the evening, if they could."

"If Miles found the place as pleasant as I do, the length of his visits
would not surprise me," I said, laughingly. "I will run up to see Clare
first and then try your coffee, Coralie."

I longed to tell my good news to my sister.

"Clare," I said, kneeling by her side, "look at me. Do you know, can you
guess, what news I have to tell you?"

She raised her eyes to mine; she laid her dear hand on my brow.

"I can guess," she said, quietly. "You have told Agatha you love her,
and have asked her to be your wife. Is that it?"

"Yes. She has promised, Clare. She loves me--she whom I have always
looked up to as some queen so far above me."

"Any good woman would love you, Edgar," said my sister. She hesitated,
then asked slowly: "Have you said anything to Coralie?"

"Certainly not. Why should I?"

A delicate color flushed my sister's face.

"To tell you the truth," she replied, "I have fancied of late that
Coralie likes you. Nay, I need not mince matters; I am quite sure she
loves you."

"She loves us both, because we are all in the world she has to love; but
not in the way you mean, Clare."

But Clare shook her head doubtfully.

"I hope I may be mistaken; but, Edgar, I have a nervous feeling about
it, difficult to describe and hard to bear, as though evil would come to
you through her. I cannot tell you how the thought haunts and perplexes
me."

I laughed, little dreaming then how it would be.

"Sheer nervous fancy, Clare. Take it at the very worst, that Coralie
does like me, perhaps, a little too well, and is both piqued and angry
at my engagement, in the name of common sense, I ask you, what possible
harm can she do to me?"

"None that I can see; yet the dread lies heavy upon me, brother."

"You will forget it all, darling, when you hear the chimes of wedding
bells. Ah, Clare, if you could get better I should not have a wish left
ungratified."

Then, still smiling at Clare's nervous fancy, I went to the
drawing-room. Coralie was there awaiting me. The picture, in all its
details, rises before me as vividly as though I had only seen it
yesterday.

Although the day had been warm, the evening was chilly, and a small fire
burned brightly in the grate; the lamps were lighted, and gleamed like
huge, soft, warm, pearls; the air of the room was heavy with sweet and
subtle perfume. I have seen no woman who could arrange flowers like
Coralie. The way in which she gathered them and placed each fragrant
flower so that it could be most perfectly seen was wonderful. Great
masses of crimson against white, amber and blue. She had the instinctive
elegance of a true Parisienne.

It struck me as I entered that I had never seen so many lovely flowers;
the vases and the stands were all full. Coralie herself sat in a large
velvet fauteuil, the rich color of which formed a magnificent background
to her bright face and golden-brown hair. She was dressed with unusual
elegance; a robe of soft, black crape fell in graceful folds around her.
I never shall understand ladies' dresses, but this was made so that the
beautiful, white neck and arms were bare.

I remember, too, that she had great sprays of heliotrope in the bodice
of her dress and in her hair. She looked more lovely, more seductive,
than any words of mine could describe, if I wrote for six months.

On the table by her side was a tray set with delicate china and silver,
over which the firelight played cheerily. It was a picture of luxurious
home comfort. She looked up as I entered with a grave, sweet smile.

"Your coffee is ready, Sir Edgar."

There was my favorite chair drawn up to the table. As I sat down I said
aloud:

"This is comfortable."

Her smile brightened and deepened.

"You are like Miles, Sir Edgar. No matter where he went, he always said
coming home was the most pleasant part of the day."

Then, with her white, jeweled hand, she poured out my coffee, and
certainly the aromatic fragrance was very pleasant.

"You must be like Miles in something else," she said. "He always
declared that I made better coffee than anyone else--better than he
tasted in all his travels. Do you not think the same?" And she looked at
me as anxiously as though the making of coffee to please me were the
chief aim of life.

"Was Sir John at home?" she asked, after a few minutes.

Then I had to describe my day, to give her a history of the coming fair,
in which she affected great interest.

"I should like to go very much," she said. "I have read in fashionable
novels of fancy fairs, but I have never seen one. Are you going, Sir
Edgar?"

"Lady Thesiger has asked my assistance, and I have promised it. We shall
make up a party. If you wish to go, Coralie, you shall."

She thanked me, and when I had finished my coffee, rang the bell and
ordered it to be cleared away.

"I am going to sing to you," she said. "I know you are tired. Throw your
head back, shut your eyes and listen. Do not speak, because I am going
to weave a charm for you."

I declare before Heaven that when I remember the magic of that charm my
heart beats even now with fear!

Are you keenly sensitive to music, reader? If so, you will understand.
I could neither sing nor play, but I loved music with a perfect passion.
There was not a nerve or pulse in my body, not a thrill in my heart,
that did not answer it. Listening to beautiful music, sweet, soothing
and sad, this world fell from me. I was in an ideal life, with vague,
glorious fancies floating round me, beautiful, lofty dreams filling my
whole soul.

In this higher world Coralie's music wrapped me; then I came to myself
with a sudden start, for there was Coralie half kneeling by my side,
covering my hand with kisses and tears.




CHAPTER X.


"Coralie!" I cried, in surprise. "What is the matter? What are you
doing?"

She looked up at me, the fire of her eyes flashing through the mist of
tears.

"Don't scold me, Edgar; it is the fault of the music. It sent me here to
tell you how dearly I love you, and to ask from you one kind word."

I was terribly embarrassed. Could it be possible this beautiful woman
was confessing her love for me?

"Do not judge me hastily," she said. "I am not like the fair, cold girls
of this northern clime. My father had Spanish blood in his veins, and
some of it flows in mine. My music went deep into my heart, and my heart
cried aloud for one kind word from you."

"Am I not always kind, Coralie?"

"Ah, yes, with that cold, English kindness which kills even sooner than
your keen frost and biting winds. I want something more than this cruel
kindness. Oh, cousin, can you not see I love you? I love you--ah,
heaven, how dearly!--and I want your love in return."

Believe me, reader, I was speechless. I would fain have raised her, have
told her, in short, sharp words, that what she was saying branded her as
unmaidenly and indiscreet; but I was powerless either to move or to
speak.

"I loved you," she said, "the first moment I saw you. You are not like
other men, Sir Edgar. You are so generous, so simply truthful, so noble.
No wonder that I love you; no wonder that I look proud of my love. Ah,
me! ah, me! would that I knew how to tell you! Give me your love; you
shall never repent it. I will make home heaven for you. Men say that I
have beauty and talent. Ah, me! I would use every gift I have for you;
help you to win high honors that cold, unambitious natures never dream
of. Ah, love me; love me, cousin! You will find no one else so true!"

Her face paled with passion; her glorious eyes, dim with tears, were
raised to mine.

"Forgive me that I have spoken first. I should have died with my love. I
know that other women in my place would have done so. I could not; life
is strong within me. I could not die here, tortured to death by inches,
without telling you. Ah, say to me that I shall not die!"

Weak words of mine cannot tell the passionate music of her voice, the
passionate beauty of her face.

"You do not speak to me; you cannot forgive me that I have not borne my
love and sorrow in silence until it killed me. Ah, see what love must
mine be to make me to speak to you, to make me kneel to you, asking for
my life, my life!" and as she uttered the words her head dropped on my
arm, and her wealth of golden-brown hair fell over me.

God knows I would have given worlds to have rushed away. Never was man
more unwillingly drawn into an embarrassing situation. And that very day
Agatha had promised to be my wife. It was high time I said something.
Gently as my patience and embarrassment would allow me, I raised the
girl.

"Coralie," I said, gravely, "you are not yourself, I am sure."

"It is for my life," she said. "I am asking for my life!"

"You are easily excited and impulsive," I said; "that music has
bewildered you. I do love you, Coralie; so does Clare. You are our
kinswoman and our charge. How can we help loving you?"

"Ah, me!" she moaned, "you will not understand; it is not that love,
Edgar. I want to pass my life by your side. I want your joys to be
mine--your sorrows to be mine, darling; I want to share your interests.
Will you not understand?"

"I do understand, Coralie. All the love of my heart is given--gone from
me. Only this day I asked Miss Thesiger to be my wife, and she
consented. All my love, my faith, my loyalty are hers."

I shall never forget how that fair woman rose and looked at me. The
love-light and the mist of tears died from her eyes. All the lovely
color faded from her face.

"You have slain me; you have given me, my death-blow!"

"Nay, Coralie; you are too sensible and brave."

She waved her hand with a gesture commanding silence.

"Do not seek to comfort me," she said. "You cannot. I have humiliated
myself in vain. I have shown the depth of my heart, the very secrets of
my soul, only that you may laugh at me with your fair-faced Agatha."

"Hush, Coralie; you have no right to say such things; what you have just
said will never pass my lips. I shall not even think of it. You cannot
suspect me of the meanness to talk to Miss Thesiger of anything of the
kind."

She looked at me with a dazed face, as though she could barely grasp my
meaning.

"Tell me it again," she said. "I cannot believe it."

"Listen, Coralie: I love Agatha Thesiger with all my heart, and hope
very soon to make her my wife. I love her so dearly that I have no room
in my heart for even a thought of any other woman."

Her face grew ghastly in its pallor.

"That is sufficient," she said; "now I understand."

"We will both forget what has been said tonight, Coralie; we will never
think of it, but for the future be good cousins and good friends."

"No," she said, proudly; "there can be no friendship between us."

"You will think better of it; believe me, you have no truer friends than
Clare and myself."

"If I ask for bread and you give me a stone, is that anything to make me
grateful? But I declare to you, Sir Edgar Trevelyan, that you have
slain me; you have slain the womanhood in me tonight by the most cruel
blow!"

She looked so wild, so white, so despairing, I went up to her.

"Coralie," I said, "forget all this nonsense and be your own bright self
again."

"My own bright self will never live again; a man's scorn has killed me."

Suddenly, before I knew what she was doing, she had flung herself in a
fearful passion of tears in my arms. She was sobbing with her face close
to mine and her hot hands clinging to me.

"With it all, Edgar, she does not love you; she loved Miles; she loves
Crown Anstey, and not you. Forget her, dear; give her up. I love you.
She is cold and formal and prudish; she is not capable of loving you as
I do. She loves your fortune, not you, and I--oh, I would die if you bid
me! Give her up, Edgar, and love me!"

When the passionate outburst of tears had had full vent, I unclasped her
arms and placed her in a chair.

"Let us talk reasonably, Coralie. You ask me what is impossible. I shall
never, with life, give up my engagement to Miss Thesiger."

A strange, bitter smile parted her white lips. I knew afterward what
that meant.

"It is better to speak plainly," I continued, "in a case like
this--better for both. Listen to me, and believe, Coralie, that even had
I never seen Miss Thesiger, I--forgive me, but it is the truth--I should
never have loved you with more than a cousin's love; my friendship, my
esteem, my care, are all yours; more I can never give you."

Pray God I may never see another woman as I saw her then. She rose; with
her white face and glittering eyes. Then came to mind that line:

    "Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned."

"You throw the love I have offered you back in my face, Sir Edgar?"

"No, dear; I lay it kindly and gratefully in your hands, to make the joy
and happiness of some good man's life."

"You distinctly tell me that you never did--never could love me?"

"I love you as my cousin, Coralie--not in any other way."

"You would never, never, under any circumstances, make me your wife?"

"Why do you pain me so, Coralie?"

"I want a plain answer--you would never marry me? Say 'yes' or 'no.'"

"No--since you force me into ungracious speech."

"Thank you," she said, bitterly; "I am answered--there can be no
mistake. Sir Edgar, you speak your mind with honorable frankness. I have
given you every chance to correct yourself, should you be mistaken. I
am, perhaps, more richly endowed than you think for. Would my dowry make
any difference?"

"No," I replied, sternly; "and, Coralie, pray pardon me; it is high time
that this should end."

"It shall end at once," she replied. "It is to be war between us, Sir
Edgar--war to the knife!"

"There is no need for war," I said, wearily. "Let us forget all about
it. There will be no need for you to do anything romantic, Coralie.
Stay on at Crown Anstey, and make yourself happy with Clare."

"Yes," she replied, with that strange smile, "I shall remain at Crown
Anstey--I have no thought of going away."

She turned as though she would quit the room. I went up to her.

"Good night, Coralie. Shake hands, and let us part friends."

"When I touch your hand again, Sir Edgar, it will be under very
different circumstances. Good night."

She swept from the room with the dignity of an outraged queen, leaving
me unhappy, bewildered and anxious.

I had the most chivalrous love and devotion for all womankind, and I
must confess to feeling most dreadfully shocked. It seemed almost
unheard of.

Then I tried to forget it--the passionate words, the pale, tearful
beauty of that wonderful face. Strange that Clare's conviction should so
soon be realized. What of that nervous conviction she had that evil
would come of this fair woman's love? What if that were realized, too?

I sat late that night, dreaming not only of the pure, sweet girl I had
won, but of the woman whose burning tears had fallen on my hands. What
harm could she do if she tried? What did she mean by being richly
dowered? Had she any fortune that I did not know of? Her words were
mysterious. Strange to say, the same nervous forebodings that had seized
Clare seized me.

Evil would come of it; how or why I could not imagine, but it would
come. I felt it gathering round me; then I laughed at myself, at my own
foolish fancy.

Yet the same fancy had shaken me so that when I went into Clare's room
to say "Good night," she asked me if I were ill, and would not be
satisfied until I laughingly told her my happiness had been too much for
me.

I felt shy as a girl the next morning at the thought of coming
downstairs to meet mademoiselle. Nor was I quite devoid of some little
fear. Would she be sorrowful, resigned, pathetic, angry, or what? It was
impossible to tell.

Imagine my surprise on opening the breakfast-room door to find her
already at the table, looking blooming and beautiful as a June rose. She
greeted me gayly, with bright smiles and bright words. I might have
thought all the passion, the sorrow and despair of last night a dream.

Only too happy to imitate her, I began to talk of a score of indifferent
matters. About everything she had some piquant, bright words to say. By
the time breakfast was ended I had really begun to think I must have
dreamed the most unpleasant scene.

Yet I thought to myself that I must be guarded. I must continue to be
kind to her because she had no other friends, but all kindness shown to
her must be of the true, cousinly type.

This morning, instead of lingering with her while she went through the
conservatories, as had been my idle fashion, I went at once into Clare's
room. Coralie noticed the change, for her face grew pale as I quitted
the room.

Some weeks passed without anything happening. I went over to Harden
Manor every day. The sun never set without my seeing Agatha, and every
day I loved her more and more.

She was so simple, so tender, so true; now that she had promised to be
my wife, there was no idle coquetry about her, no affection of shyness.
She was simply perfect, and it seemed to me that by some wonderful
miracle I had reached the golden land at last.

Then I began to agitate for an early marriage. Why wait? Lady Thesiger
told me laughingly that there was much to do at Crown Anstey before I
could take my wife home.

"Remember," she said, "that before your sister came there had been no
ladies at the Hall for some years. The late Lady Trevelyan died sixteen
years ago."

I saw that she had completely forgotten the existence of mademoiselle,
and did not care to remind her of it.

"You will want to refurnish a suite of rooms for Agatha," she continued;
"and there will really be so much to do that if we say Christmas for the
wedding, that will be quite soon enough."

"It seems like an eternity!" I said, discontentedly.

"It is the most picturesque season of the year for a wedding," said Lady
Thesiger, "I like the holly and evergreens even better than summer
flowers."

So it was settled; Clare agreed with Lady Thesiger that Crown Anstey
required preparation for a bride.

"Those reception rooms want refurnishing," said my sister. "Of course,
after your marriage you will give parties and balls. You will have to
show hospitality to all the county, Edgar."

Half to my consternation, she said this before Coralie. I looked at her
hastily, wondering how she would take it. Her beautiful face was quite
calm, and wore an expression of pleased interest.

"Do you agree with me, Coralie?" asked my unsuspecting sister.

"Certainly; there is no position in the county equal to that of Lady
Trevelyan of Crown Anstey."

"How strange it is, Edgar, that you should be married, and your wife
Lady Trevelyan! Sometimes it seems to me all a dream."

"Dreams come and go so lightly," said Coralie, with that smile which
always made me slightly afraid.

The remainder of that day we spent in making out a long list of all
things needful. Coralie's taste was paramount. She decided upon little
matters of elegance we never even thought of. It was she who strongly
advised me to send to London for Mr. Dickson, the well-known decorator.

"He will arrange a suite of rooms so perfectly that you will hardly know
them," she said.

So it was decided. Mr. Dickson came, and when he found there was to be
no limit either to time, expense, money, or anything else, he promised
me something that should make Crown Anstey famous. All things went on
perfectly. The magnificent preparations making for my darling occupied
my time most happily. It was now almost the end of November, and our
marriage was to take place on the 26th of December. Mr. Dickson and his
army of workmen had taken their departure, and the rooms prepared for my
wife were beyond all praise.

The boudoir was hung in blue and silver; it was a perfect little
fairyland; nothing was wanting to make it a nest of luxury. The boudoir
opened into a pretty little library, where all the books that I thought
would please Agatha were arranged. There was a dressing-room, a
bath-room and a sleeping-room, all en suite. Mr. Dickson had improvised
a pretty flight of stairs leading into a small conservatory, and that
opened into the garden.

When the pictures, the flowers, the statues, the rich hangings and the
graceful ornaments were all arranged, I was more pleased than I had been
for some time. Lady Thesiger came over to look at them, but my darling
was not to see them until they were her own.

There was an unpleasant duty to perform. What was to be done with
Coralie? Knowing Lady Thesiger's opinion of her, I felt sure she would
never allow her daughter to live in the same house. What was to be done
with her? Where was she to go? I did not know in the least what to
suggest. I was perfectly willing to offer her a very handsome allowance,
knowing that, as Sir Barnard's charge, she had some claim on me.

I might have spared myself all the trouble of thinking and deciding. One
morning Mrs. Newsham, a pretty young matron, very popular in our
neighborhood, paid us a visit.

Coralie, as usual, received her, and did the honors of the house. A very
beautiful fountain had just been placed in the lawn, and we went to look
at it. I had left the two ladies looking over the basin of the fountain
while I raised the branches of a rare and valuable plant.

Stooping down, I did not hear the commencement of the conversation. When
my attention was attracted, Mrs. Newsham was concluding a sentence with
these words: "If ever you leave Crown Anstey."

I saw Coralie d'Aubergne look up at her with a quiet smile.

"I shall never leave Crown Anstey," she said, "under any possible
circumstances."

Mrs. Newsham laughed.

"You may be married, or Lady Trevelyan may not like the place and wish
it closed--a thousand things may happen to prevent you remaining here
always."

But I saw Coralie d'Aubergne shake her head, while she replied, calmly:

"No, Mrs. Newsham, I shall never leave Crown Anstey."

I cannot tell how the words impressed me. I found myself repeating them
over and over again--"I shall never leave Crown Anstey."

Yet she must have known that when my young wife came home, Crown Anstey
would be no place for her.

Was there any meaning in the words she repeated so often, or did she say
them merely with an idea of comforting herself?

It was that very evening that I sat by myself in the library arranging
some papers, and thinking at the same time what I must say to Coralie,
and how I must say it, when the door suddenly opened and she entered.

I looked at her, surprised, for she did not often intrude when I was
alone and occupied. She was very pale. With quiet determination on her
beautiful face, she walked up to me and leaned her arm on the back of my
chair.

"So, cousin," she said, "this marriage is going on?"

"Certainly, Coralie. I pray to God nothing may prevent it."

"You would lose your reason, I suppose, if you lost Agatha?"

"I cannot tell. I only know that, no matter how long I lived, life would
have no further charm for me."

She bent her head caressingly over me; her perfumed hair touched my
face.

"Edgar," she whispered, "once more I lose sight of my woman's pride;
once more I come to you and ask you--ah! do not turn from me--I ask you
to give up Agatha, and"--

She paused, for very shame, I hope.

"Give up Agatha and marry you, you would say, Coralie?"

"Ah, dear, I love you so! You would never repent it. I would make you
happy as a crowned king."

I stopped her.

"Say no more, Coralie! I am grieved and shocked that you should renew
the subject. I told you before I should never love any woman, save
Agatha Thesiger, were I to live forever."

"Nothing will ever induce you to change your mind?" she asked, slowly.

"No, nothing in the wide world."

She paused for a few minutes, then she quietly lifted her arm from the
chair.

"Has it ever struck you," she said, "it may be in my power to do you
deadly mischief?"

"I never thought you capable of such a thing, nor do I believe that it
is in your power."

"It is," she said; "you and your sister are both in my power. If you are
a wise man, you will take my terms and save yourself while there is
time. Of course, if I were Lady Trevelyan, my interests would be yours;
then, if I knew anything against your welfare, I should keep the secret
faithfully--ah! a thousand times more faithfully than if it concerned my
own life."

She looked earnestly at me.

"You hold no secrets of mine, Coralie. I have no secrets. Thank God, my
life is clear and open--a book any one may read. Supposing I had a
secret, I should not purchase the keeping of it by any such compromise
as you suggest. I detest all mysteries, Coralie--all underhand doings,
all deceit. Speak out and tell me, Coralie, what you mean."

"I shall speak out when the time comes. Once more, Cousin Edgar, be
reasonable; save yourself--save me."

She withdrew some steps from me, and looked at me with her whole soul in
her eyes.

"I will not hear another word, Coralie. I do not wish to offend you, or
to speak harshly to you; but this I do say--if ever you mention this, to
me, hateful subject, I will never voluntarily address you again--never
while I live."

She made no answer. She turned, with a dignified gesture, and quitted
the room.

I never gave one serious thought to her threats, looking upon them as
the angry words of an angry woman. They did not even remain upon my mind
or disturb my rest.




CHAPTER XI.


On the following day Lady Thesiger had arranged to come to Crown Anstey
with Agatha, for the purpose of choosing from some very choice
engravings that had been sent to me from London. I asked Sir John to
accompany them and stay at lunch. It was always a red-letter day to me
when my darling came to my house, and I remember this one--ah, me!--so
well. It was fine, clear and frosty; the sky was blue; the sun shone
with that clear gold gleam it has in winter; the hoar frost sparkled on
the leafless trees and hedges; the ground was hard and seemed to ring
beneath one's feet.

"A bright, clear day," said Coralie, as we sat at breakfast together.

"Yes," I replied. "Coralie, will you see that a good luncheon is served
today? Sir John and Lady Thesiger are coming--Miss Thesiger, too--and
they will remain for lunch."

Her face cleared and brightened.

"Coming today, are they? I am very glad."

I looked upon this as an amiable wish to atone for the unpleasantness of
last night, and answered her in the same good spirit.

I am half ashamed to confess that when Agatha was coming I seldom did
anything but stand, watch in hand, somewhere near the entrance gates.
That I did today, and was soon rewarded by seeing the Harden carriage.

Ah, me! will the memory of that day ever die with me? My darling came
and seemed to me more beautiful than ever. Her sweet, frank eyes looked
into mine; her pure, beautiful face had a delicate flush of delight, and
I--God help me!--forgot everything while by her side.

We were all in the library. How I thanked God afterward that Clare had
not felt well enough to have the engravings sent to her room, as I
proposed! We sat round the large center-table on which the folios lay
open, Sir John, who took great delight in such things, explaining to
Lady Thesiger. I was showing Agatha those I liked best, when quite
unexpectedly, Coralie entered the room.

The moment I saw her face I knew that she meant mischief. Surely,
woman's face never had so hard, so wicked a look before.

Sir John rose and bowed. Lady Thesiger looked, as she always did in the
presence of mademoiselle, constrained and annoyed. Agatha's look was one
of sheer surprise, for Coralie walked up to the table.

"Choosing engravings, Miss Thesiger?" she said, with an easy smile. "I
must ask you to give me your attention for a short time. Perhaps you
will not think the engravings of much importance after that."

She declined the chair Sir John placed for her with the hauteur of a
grand duchess. As she stood there, calmly surveying us, she looked the
most beautiful yet the most determined of women.

"May I ask," she said, "the exact date fixed for the marriage?"

Sir John answered her:

"The 26th of December, mademoiselle."

"May I ask," she said, "what Sir Edgar has thought of doing for me?
Doubtless Lady Thesiger will have advised him. This has been my home for
many years, and is my only home now. Has the question been considered?
In the event of Sir Edgar bringing a young wife here, what is to become
of me?"

There was a mocking smile on her beautiful face; her dark eyes flashed
from one to the other of us; we felt uncomfortable. She had just hit
upon the weak point that disturbed us all, the one cloud in a clear sky.

As no one else seemed inclined to speak, I answered:

"Everything will be done for your comfort, Coralie; you may be sure of
that, for Sir Barnard's sake."

"And not for my own?" she said. "What is your idea of comfort, Sir
Edgar? Do you propose offering me a little cottage and a few pounds per
week? That would not content me."

She looked so imperial, so beautiful, that I wondered involuntarily what
would content her, she who might have anything.

"Whatever you yourself think right, Coralie, you shall have."

I saw a strong disapproval in Lady Thesiger's face, and Coralie's quick
eyes, following mine, read the same.

"Ah!" she said, hastily, "Lady Thesiger does not approve of carte
blanche to ambitious cousins."

Lady Thesiger really restrained herself; she was tempted to speak--I saw
that--but refrained.

"The best plan," said Sir John, calmly, "would be for Mademoiselle
d'Aubergne to say what she herself wishes."

"I will tell you," she replied, "what I claim."

Then, as we looked up at her in wonder, she continued, with bland
calmness:

"I claim as my own and right, on the part of my infant son, the whole of
the estate and revenues of Crown Anstey. I claim, as widow of the late
Miles Trevelyan, Esq., my share of all due to me at his death."

A thunder-bolt falling in our midst would not have alarmed us as those
words did. Sir John looked sternly at her.

"In the name of heaven, what do you mean?"

"Just what I say, Sir John. I was the wife, and am now the widow, of the
late Miles Trevelyan, Esq."

"But that is monstrous!" he cried. "Miles was never married."

"Miles was married to me, Sir John."

"But we must have proof; your word goes for nothing. There must be
indisputable proof of such an assertion."

She smiled with quiet superiority.

"Knowing with whom I have to contend, it is not probable that I should
assert anything false. I am prepared to prove everything I say."

My darling's face grew white as death. I was bewildered. If this were
true--oh, my God! if it were true--fortune, love and everything else
were lost.

"Where were you married?" asked Sir John.

"At Edgerton--St. Helen's, Edgerton. The Rev. Henry Morton married us,
and the two witnesses were Sarah Smith, who was my maid, and Arthur
Ireton, who was head game-keeper here at Crown Anstey."

It was so quickly told and so seemingly correct, we looked at each other
in amaze.

"We must examine into it," said Sir John, "before going any further."

"That will be best," she replied, composedly. "I had better explain that
Miles, poor fellow, fell in love with me the first time he saw me. Sir
Barnard would not hear of such a thing. He told Miles that if he
persisted in marrying me he would curse him. Perhaps he had his own
reasons for not liking me. His son tried to obey him, but I am proud to
say that the love Miles had for me was far stronger than fear of his
father. Still, for pecuniary reasons he did not care to offend him, so
we were married privately the second year of my stay at Crown Anstey."

She turned to Lady Thesiger with a mocking smile.

"I know perfectly well," she said, "why your ladyship has never liked
me. You met me walking one evening with Miles Trevelyan in the Anstey
woods; you saw him kiss me. You know, now, that he was my husband and
had a right to kiss me if he chose."

Lady Thesiger bowed very stiffly.

"Two years after our marriage," Coralie continued, "my little son,
called Rupert, after the Crusader Trevelyan, was born. Under the
pretense of visiting some of my relations, I went to Lincoln. In the
registry of the church of St. Morton Friars you will find the proper
attestation of my son's birth."

"Where is that son?" asked Sir John, incredulously.

"At Lincoln. I can send for him. You can go there and see him; he is
under the care of Sarah Smith, my nurse. He is living and well, and he,
not Mr. Edgar, is the heir of Crown Anstey."

"But why," asked Sir John, incredulously, "why have you never told this
story before? It seems incredible that you should have waited until
now."

"I have my own reasons," she replied. "I waited first to see what Sir
Edgar would be like; then, when I saw him--I--I need not be ashamed to
own it, even before Miss Thesiger--I liked him, and if he had been
reasonable I should never have told my story at all."

"That is," said Sir John, with supreme disgust, "if Edgar had been duped
by you and had married you, you would have defrauded your son of his
rights?"

"Yes," she replied, with a smile; "it is Crown Anstey I love, and I
would rather be the wife than the mother of the master of Crown Anstey."

"You are a wicked woman," he said, sternly.

"I am a successful one," she retorted. "Pray, Sir John, examine all
these proofs at your earliest convenience; I am anxious to take my place
as mistress of my own house; I am anxious to have my child here in his
own home."

We all rose; no words can express my emotions. It was not the fortune,
God knows--not the fortune; but I knew when I lost that I lost Agatha.

I felt my face growing white as death itself and my hands trembled.

"One moment," I said. "A year ago the doctor told me if my sister kept
up her strength, and had nothing to make her either anxious nor unhappy,
she would in all probability recover. Now, whether this story be true or
false, I pray you all, for God's sake, keep it from her!"

"I shall not mention it," said Coralie.

"Do not despair, Edgar," said Sir John. "I do not believe--I never
shall!"

"I wrote to London last night," continued Coralie, "for Mr. Dempster,
who was Sir Barnard's lawyer on one or two occasions. You, of course,
Mr. Edgar Trevelyan, will retain the services of the family solicitors."

"I shall need no solicitors if your story be true. I shall not seek to
defraud Miles' son of his birthright; I shall yield it to him."

"You will find it true in every particular," she said; "and remember
always that it is your own fault I have told it."

With that parting shot she quitted the room.

"My poor boy," said Sir John, "this is a terrible blow to you."

"I am afraid," said Lady Thesiger, "that this abominable woman has
spoken the truth. I always thought poor Miles had something on his
mind--some secret. I told him so one day, and he did not deny it."

My darling came up to me with her sweet, pale face and outstretched
hands.

"Never mind, Edgar," she said. "If you lose Crown Anstey I will try to
love you all the more to make up for it."

What could I do but bless her and thank her? Yet I knew--God help me, I
knew in losing my fortune I lost her!




CHAPTER XII.


The little party that had so gayly assembled in the old library broke up
in the deepest gloom. Sir John was the only one who seemed at all
incredulous.

"Rely upon it," he said, "that, after all, it is some trick of the
French woman."

But Lady Thesiger had no such hope.

"I felt sure there was something wrong with Miles," she said. "He was
not happy. He had married in haste and repented at leisure."

For my own part, I had no hope. Remembering the subtle, seductive beauty
of the woman, I could well imagine Miles being led, even against
himself, into a marriage or anything else.

When they were gone I went back to the library. I wanted to face this
terrible blow alone, to realize the possibility that instead of being
Sir Edgar Trevelyan, of Crown Anstey, wealthy, honored and powerful, I
was Edgar Trevelyan, poor, homeless and penniless.

Could it be possible that after this life of ease, luxury and happiness,
I was to fall back into the old position--hard, monotonous labor, with
eighty pounds per annum?

It seemed too hard. Do not think any the worse of me, reader, if I own
that the tears came into my eyes. It was bitterly hard.

Without warning Coralie entered the room. It must have been a triumph to
her to see the tears in my eyes. She stood at some little distance from
me.

"Edgar," she asked, "do you hate me?"

"No! I am too just to hate you for claiming what is your own. You ought
to have told me before, Coralie. It has been most cruel to let me live
in this delusive dream. If you had told me that night when I came here
first, it would have been a momentary disappointment, but I should have
gone back to my work none the worse for it."

"I might have done it, but I saw in this, my secret power, the means of
winning you. Edgar, it is not too late even now. Make me mistress of
Crown Anstey, and I will find the means of restoring your lost position
to you."

I turned from her in unutterable loathing. She was so lost to all
womanly honor and delicacy, my whole soul revolted against her.

"Not another word, Coralie. I would not take Crown Anstey from you if
the alternative were death!"

"That is very decisive," she replied, with the mocking smile I dreaded.
"We shall see."

"You will keep your word to me?" I cried, hastily. "You will say nothing
to Clare? She will soon be well. I could not bear to have any obstacles
thrown in the way of her recovery. When I leave her, my friends will
make some arrangements to spare her the shock of knowing why--at least,
for a time."

"I shall respect your wishes, Edgar. I have no desire to hurt your
sister. She is quite safe, so far as I am concerned."

It may be imagined that I did not sleep very well that night. Early on
the following morning Sir John rode over.

"The sooner we look into this affair the better," he said. "We will ride
over to Edgerton today and examine the church register."

We did so. Alas! there was no mistake; the marriage had been celebrated
on the 14th of June. The two witnesses, as she said, were Sarah Smith
and Arthur Ireton. The marriage service had been performed by the
Reverend Henry Morton.

The entry was perfectly regular, no flaw in it. Sir John's face fell as
he read it.

"Now," he said, "the marriage laws in England are very strict; there is
no evading them. If this marriage is perfectly legal we shall find an
entry of it in the registrar's books. We must pay for a copy of the
certificate."

We went to the registrar's office. There, sure enough, was the entry,
all perfectly legal and straightforward.

"Now," said Sir John, "before we rest let us find out the Reverend Henry
Morton, and see what he knows about it."

That involved a journey to Leamington, where he was then residing. We
found him without difficulty. He remembered the marriage, and had no
hesitation in answering any questions about it. He knew Miles Trevelyan,
and had remonstrated with him over the marriage. But what could he do?
Miles was of full age, and told him frankly that if he refused to marry
him someone else would.

"I have been ill and occupied," he said, "and have heard nothing of the
Trevelyans since I left Edgerton. However, if my evidence and solemn
assurance are of any service, you have them. They were properly and
legally married; nothing in the world can upset that fact."

"So it seems," said Sir John, with a deep sigh, "Edgar, you have lost
Crown Anstey."

The next day I wrote to Moreland & Paine, asking one or both to come
over at once. Mr. Paine arrived the same evening, and looked very grave
when he was in full possession of the case. He had a long interview with
Mrs. Trevelyan, as we called her now; also with her solicitor, Mr.
Dempster. Then he sought me.

"This is a bad business, Mr. Trevelyan," he said; and by his ceasing to
use the title, I knew he had given up all hope of my cause. "Of course,"
he continued, "you can go to law if you like, but I tell you quite
honestly you have no chance. The evidence is clear and without a flaw;
nothing can shake it. If you have a lawsuit you will lose it, and
probably have to pay all costs."

I told him that I had no such intention; that if the estate were not
legally mine, I had no wish to claim it.

"It was a very sad thing for you, Mr. Trevelyan. I am heartily grieved
for you."

"I must bear it like a man. I am not the first who has lost a fortune."

But Sir John would not hear of my final arrangements until we had been
to Lincoln and had seen the child.

"No one knows the depth of those French women," he said. "It is possible
there may be no child. Let us take her by surprise this very day, and
ask her to accompany us to the house where the nurse lives."

Both lawyers applauded the idea.

"If there be any imposture we are sure to find it out," they said.

Without a minute's loss of time, Mrs. Trevelyan was asked to join us in
the library. She complied at once.

"We want you to go with us to Lincoln to show us the child," said Sir
John, abruptly.

She consented at once so readily that I felt certain that our quest was
useless. We started in an hour's time, my poor Clare being led to
believe that we had gone to Harden on a visit.

We reached Lincoln about six o'clock at night. While we stood in the
station waiting for a cab Mr. Paine turned suddenly to Coralie.

"What is the address?" he asked.

Again there was not a moment's hesitation.

"No. 6 Lime Cottages, Berkdale Road," she replied; and fast as a
somewhat tired horse could take us we went there.

We reached the place at last; a row of pretty cottages that in summer
must have been sheltered by the lime trees, and the door of No. 6 was
quickly opened to us--opened by a woman with a pleasant face, who looked
exceedingly astonished at seeing us. Coralie came forward.

"I had no time to write and warn you of this visit, Mrs. Smith. Be kind
enough to answer any questions these gentlemen may wish to ask you."

We all made way for Mr. Paine. I shall never forget the group, the
anxiety and suspense on each face.

"Have you a child here in your charge?" asked the lawyer.

But she looked at Coralie.

"Am I to answer, madam?"

"You are to answer any questions put to you; my story is known."

"Have you a child here in your charge?" he repeated.

"I have," she repeated.

"Who is it? Tell us in your own words, if you please."

"He is the son of the late Mr. Miles Trevelyan and his wife, who was
Mademoiselle d'Aubergne."

"Where were they married?" he asked.

"They were married at the Church of St. Helen's, Edgerton. I was one
witness; the other was Arthur Ireton, the head game-keeper."

"Where was this child born?" he asked again.

"Here, sir, at this house. Mrs. Trevelyan left home, it was believed, to
visit some friends. She came here and took this house. I remained with
her, and have had charge of little Master Rupert ever since."

He asked fifty other questions; they were answered with equal clearness
and precision.

"Let us see the child," said Sir John, impatiently.

She went into the next room and brought out a lovely little boy. He was
asleep, but at the sound of strange voices opened his eyes.

"Mamma!" he cried when he saw Coralie, and she took him in her arms.

Sir John looked earnestly at him.

"There is no mistake," he said; "we want no further evidence. I can tell
by his face this is poor Miles' son."

He was a lovely, bright-eyed boy; he had Coralie's golden-brown hair,
which fell in thick ringlets down his pretty neck.

"But it is Miles' face," Sir John repeated, and we did not doubt him.
"There remains but one thing more to make the whole evidence complete.
We must see the registration of the birth of the child, and it would be
better to see the doctor who attended you, madam."

We did both on the following day. The registration of the child's birth
was right, perfect and without a flaw.

The doctor, a highly respectable medical practitioner, offered us his
evidence on oath.

There was nothing left, then, but to return to Crown Anstey and give up
possession.

I loved the little boy. It was too absurd to feel any enmity against
him. He was so bright and clever; it would have been unmanly not to have
loved dead Miles' son.

Of Coralie Trevelyan I asked but one favor; that she would allow me one
week in which to make some arrangement for Clare before she brought the
young heir home. She cheerfully agreed to this.

"You bear your reverses very bravely," she said.

"Better than I bore prosperity," I replied, and that, God knows, was
true.

This new trial had braced my nerves and made me stronger than I had ever
been in my whole life before.




CHAPTER XIII.


The arrangement made for my sister was one I knew not how to be grateful
enough for. Lady Thesiger insisted that she should go to Harden and
remain there until she was well.

"She need know nothing of your misfortune yet. We have but to say that
she must be kept quiet and admit no visitors except such as we can trust
to say nothing to her. Agatha and myself will take the greatest care of
her, and when she has recovered we will break the news to her."

I was deeply grateful. It was all arranged without exciting my sister's
suspicions. She told her that for many reasons it had been considered
better to put off the marriage for some time; that I was going abroad
for a year, and that she was to spend the year with Lady Thesiger.

She looked wistfully at me.

"It's all very sudden, Edgar. Are you sure it is for the best?"

I steadied my voice and told her laughingly it was all for the best.

She asked where Coralie would be, and I told her that when she returned
from the visit she was paying she would remain at Crown Anstey.

There was not a dry eye among the servants when my sister was carried
from the home where she had been so happy. Of course, they all knew the
story--it had spread like wild fire all over the neighborhood--yet every
one understood how vitally important it was that it should be kept from
her.

Can I ever tell in words how kindly Lady Thesiger received her? True
friends, they took no note of altered fortunes. My sister was
comfortably installed in the charming rooms they had prepared for her.
Her favorite maid was to stay with her.

Then came the agony I had long known must come. I must give up Agatha.
How could I, who had not one shilling in my pocket, marry the daughter
of Sir John Thesiger, a girl, delicate and refined, who had been brought
up in all imaginable luxury? Let me work hard as I might, I could hardly
hope to make two hundred a year. In all honor and in all conscience I
was bound to give her up.

I had no prospect before me save that of returning to my former position
as clerk. Agatha Thesiger must never be a clerk's wife, she who could
marry any peer in the land!

Talk of waiting and hoping! I had nothing to hope for. The savings of my
whole life would not keep her, as she had been kept, for even one year.

I must give her up. Ah, my God! It was hard--so bitterly hard! I told
Sir John, and he looked wretched as myself.

"I see, I see. It is the only thing to be done. If I could give her a
fortune you should not lose her; but I cannot, and she must not come to
poverty."

Lady Thesiger wept bitterly over me.

"I foresaw it from the first," she said. "I knew it was not the loss of
Crown Anstey, but the loss of Agatha, that would be your sorest trial."

Then I said "good-by" to her whom I had hoped so soon to call my wife. I
kissed her white face and trembling hands for the last time.

But the dear soul clung to me, weeping.

"You may say you must leave me a thousand times, Edgar, but I shall
never be left. I shall wait for you; and if it be never in your power
to claim me, I shall marry no other man. I will be yours in death as in
life."

And though I tried to shake her resolution, I knew that it would be so.
I knew that no other man would ever call her wife.

The day before I left, Mrs. Trevelyan, with her little Sir Rupert, took
possession of the Hall. She must have found many thorns in her path,
for, although she had attained her heart's desire, and was now mistress
of Crown Anstey, she was shunned and disliked by all the neighborhood.

"An adventuress," they called her, and as such refused to receive her
into their society. Perhaps she had foreseen this when she wished to
marry me.

By Sir John's influence, the post of secretary was found for me with an
English nobleman residing in Paris. I was to live in the house; my
duties were sufficiently onerous, and I was to receive a salary of one
hundred and fifty pounds per annum; so that, after all, I was better off
than I had once expected to be.

I bade farewell to Agatha, to Clare, to my kind friends Sir John and
Lady Thesiger. God knew the grief that filled my heart; I cannot
describe it.

On my road to the station I met the Crown Anstey carriage. Mrs Trevelyan
bowed to me from it. She was taking a drive with the little Sir Rupert.

"God bless the child!" I said, as his little face smiled from the
carriage window. "God bless him and send him a happy life!"

It took me some little time to settle down to my new life. My employer,
Lord Winter, lived in the Champs Elysees. He preferred Paris to England,
because it was brighter and gayer. I often wondered how that mattered to
him, for he lived only in his books.

I was required to assist him in making extracts, answering letters,
searching for all kinds of odd information, and I do believe I learned
more in that time than I should have done in a lifetime differently
spent.

I became reconciled to it after a hard struggle. From Harden Manor I
constantly received the kindest letters. Agatha wrote to me, and
although the word "love" seldom occurred in her letters, I knew her
heart was, and always would be mine. She would never forget me, nor
would that crown of all sorrows be mine--I should never have to give her
up to a wealthier rival. Although she said nothing of the kind in her
letters, I felt that it was true.

A year passed, and at last came good tidings of my sister; she was able
to sit up, even to walk across the room, and the doctor said that in
another month she would in all probability be able to take her place in
the world again.

How that gladdened my heart! Lady Thesiger said she had not the least
idea yet of the change in my fortunes, although she wondered incessantly
why I was absent.

"Have no fear for your sister's future," wrote kind Lady Thesiger.
"While Agatha lives at home she is a most charming companion for her.
Should she ever leave home, she would be the same to me. We shall only
be too happy if she will spend the rest of her life at Harden Manor."

I was grateful for that. Now, then, fate seemed kinder. I could fight
through for myself, providing that my fragile, delicate Clare was safely
taken care of.

Another six months passed. Clare knew all then and was resigned. God had
been very good to her. She could walk; distance did not fatigue her, and
the doctors thought it was very unlikely that the same disease would
attack her again.

She wrote and told me about it.

"I was out yesterday," she said, "with Agatha, and we met the Crown
Anstey carriage. Coralie was most gracious--overwhelmed me with
congratulations, invited me to the Hall. And I saw little Sir Rupert. He
is so bright and beautiful--the most princely boy I ever beheld. 'I am
going to have a white pony,' he said to me, and I kissed him, Edgar,
with all my heart. Coralie inquired very minutely after you, and asked
me if I owed her any ill-will for what she had done. I said no, not in
the least, and that I hoped little Sir Rupert would live to make her
very happy. I am not quite sure, but I think there were tears glistening
in her eyes when she drove away."

Some weeks afterward I received the following letter from Mrs.
Trevelyan:

     "My Dear Edgar--Once again, I address you--once again, setting
     pride and all things aside, I offer you Crown Anstey. You have been
     away some time now, and know how different is your present hard
     life from the happy, luxurious one you led here. Your engagement
     with Miss Thesiger is, of course, broken off. I hear she has a
     wealthy suitor--Lord Abberley. It will be a good match for her.
     Edgar, you will find no one in the world so true to you as myself.
     See, I forgot all the past. Once more I offer you my love, my hand,
     and with it, until my son is of age, Crown Anstey. I never intended
     you to give it up as you have done. I always wished to offer
     yourself and your sister an income sufficient for your maintenance.
     I have not done so before because I hoped that poverty would seem
     so hateful to you you would gradually come to think better of my
     offer. Is it so, Edgar? Will you recognize my love, my fidelity, my
     devotion at last? One word and all your troubles cease, you are
     back again in the beautiful old home, and I am happy. Only one
     word. From your ever loving, devoted

     CORALIE."

I need not repeat my answer. It was, No! I was no more free, no more
inclined to return to Crown Anstey than I had been to remain there.

After that there was a long silence. Agatha told me herself all about
Lord Abberley; that he had been very kind to her, was very fond of her,
but she had told him our story, and he had most generously forborne to
press his suit.

Time was doing much for me; every hour was golden in its acquisition of
blanks in my life were filled by books. God sent every one the same
comfort I had.

[Transcriber's note: One or more lines appear to be missing from the
previous paragraph.]




CHAPTER XIV.


It was just three years since I had left Crown Anstey. Lord Winter told
me I should have some weeks to myself, but he was so incessantly
occupied I never liked to ask for them.

I had never seen or heard anything of Crown Anstey since I left it. At
Harden Manor all was the same, unchanged and unaltered.

One morning, when I went into the library, a letter lay waiting for me.
I saw that it was Coralie's handwriting, and my first impulse was to
burn it unread. Why should she write to me again? Her letters only
pained me. I threw it aside and began to work--in the busy occupation of
the morning I forgot all about it.

I did not open it until evening. It was from Coralie, but it only held
these few words:

     "Edgar--My boy--my beautiful boy--is dying. Come to me; for if I
     lose him I shall die, too. In my distress I would rather have you
     near me than any one else.

     CORALIE TREVELYAN."

Was it true, or was it an invention? Poor little Rupert dying! Why, no
one had even told me he was ill. Perhaps I had better go. No mother
could be so cold and so wicked as to feign death for her only child.

Lord Winter raised no objections.

"It was not very convenient," he said, but of course he "must bow to
necessity."

I was in time to catch the mail train. Eight o'clock found me the next
morning in London, and, without waiting for rest or refreshment, I
started at once for Crown Anstey.

It was only too true. I found my old home full of the wildest confusion;
women were weeping and wringing their hands--the whole place was in
disorder.

I was shown into the library, and in a few minutes Coralie came to me. I
hardly recognized her; her face was white, her eyes were dim with long
watching and bitter tears.

"I knew you would come," she said. "He is dying, Edgar; nothing in the
world can save him. Come with me."

I followed her to the pretty chamber where little Sir Rupert lay. Yes,
he was dying, poor child! He lay on the pretty, white bed; a grave-faced
doctor was near; the nurse, Sarah Smith, sat by his side.

His mother went up to him.

"No better! No change!" she cried, wringing her hands. "Oh, my God! must
I lose him? Must he die?"

He was my unconscious rival; his little life stood between me and all I
valued most, yet I knelt and prayed God, as I had never prayed before,
that He would spare him. I would have given Crown Anstey twice over for
that life; but it was not to be.

"Do not disturb him with cries," said the doctor to his mother; "he has
not long to live."

She knelt by his side in silence, her face colorless as that of a marble
statue, the very picture of desolation, the very image of woe.

So for some minutes we sat; the little breath grew fainter and more
feeble, the gray shadow deepened on the lovely face.

"Mamma!" he cried. "I see! I see!"

She bent over him, and at that moment he died.

I can never forget it--the wild, bitter anguish of that unhappy woman,
how she wept, how she tore her hair, how she called her child back by
every tender name a mother's love could invent.

It was better, the doctor said, that the first paroxysm of grief should
have full vent. All attempts at comfort and consolation were unavailing.
I raised her from the ground, and when she saw my face she cried:

"Oh, Edgar! Edgar! it is my just punishment!"

I did my best to console her. I told her that her little child would be
better off in heaven than were he master of fifty Crown Ansteys. But I
soon found that my words fell on deaf ears; she was unconscious.

"I do not like the look of Mrs. Trevelyan," said the doctor. "I should
not be surprised to find that she has caught the fever herself. If so,
in her present state of agitation, it will go hard with her."

He was right; before sunset Coralie lay in the fierce clutches of the
fever, insensible to everything.

I do not like dwelling on this part of the story; it is so long, long
since it all happened, but the memory of it stings like a sharp pain.

Clare came to nurse her, and everything that human science and skill
could suggest was done to save her. It was all in vain.

We buried the little child on the Tuesday morning, when the sun was
shining and the birds were singing in the trees, and on the Saturday
they told us his mother could not live.

It was early on the dawn of the Sunday morning when they sent for me.
She was dying, and wished to speak to me.

I went into her room. Clare knelt by her side. She turned her white face
to me with a smile.

"Edgar," she said, "I am glad you have come. I want to--to die in your
arms. Bend down to me," she whispered. "I want to speak to you. Will you
forgive me? I can see now how wrong I was, how wicked to love you so
much, and how wicked to tell you so. Will you forgive me, and now that I
am dying say one kind word to me, and tell me you can respect me in
death?"

I pillowed that dying head on my arm, and told her I should only
remember of her what had been kind and good.

"You will only remember that I loved you, Edgar, not that I was
unwomanly and wicked?"

"I will forget everything, except that you were my dear cousin and dear
friend."

"You will marry Agatha," she said, faintly, "and bring her home here. I
hope you will be happy; but, oh! Edgar--Edgar--when she is your wife,
and you are so happy together, you will not forget me; you will stroll
out sometimes when the dew is falling to look at my grave and say, 'Poor
Coralie! how well she loved me--so well--so dearly!' You will do that,
Edgar?"

My tears were falling warm and fast on her face.

"Are these your tears? Then you care a little for me. Ah, then, I am
willing to die!"

And so, with her head pillowed on my arm, and a smile on her lips, she
died.

We buried her by the side of Miles Trevelyan. After life's fitful fever
she sleeps well.

From the first hour of her illness the doctor had no hope for her. I
learned afterward that for some time before the child took the fever she
had been ailing and ill.

It was such a strange life. Thinking over it afterward, it seemed to me
more like romance than reality.

A year passed before the dream of my life was fulfilled and Agatha came
to Crown Anstey. I need not to say how happy we were.

Lady Trevelyan is the most beloved and popular lady in the county; our
children are growing up good and happy; we have not a care or trouble in
the world, and the sharpest pain I have is the memory of Coralie.


[The end.]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Coralie, by Charlotte M. Braeme

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORALIE ***

***** This file should be named 13162.txt or 13162.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/1/6/13162/

Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
