The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror Of Literature, Amusement, And
Instruction, No. 496, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror Of Literature, Amusement, And Instruction, No. 496
       Vol. 17, No. 496, June 27, 1831

Author: Various

Release Date: September 6, 2004 [EBook #13382]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR, NO. 496 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, William Flis, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

Vol. 17, No. 496.] SATURDAY, June 27, 1831. [PRICE 2d.




       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: BARON BROUGHAM & VAUX.

Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain,

&c. &c.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

MIRROR

OF

LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT,

AND

INSTRUCTION:

CONTAINING

ORIGINAL ESSAYS;

HISTORICAL NARRATIVES; BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS; SKETCHES OF SOCIETY;
TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTIONS; NOVELS AND TALES; ANECDOTES;

SELECT EXTRACTS

FROM

NEW AND EXPENSIVE WORKS;

_POETRY, ORIGINAL AND SELECTED;_

THE SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS;

DISCOVERIES IN THE ARTS AND SCIENCES;

_USEFUL DOMESTIC HINTS;_

&C. &C. &C.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XVII.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. LIMBIRD, 143, STRAND,

(_NEAR SOMERSET HOUSE._)

1831.

       *       *       *       *       *




PREFACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Each of our semi-anniversaries calls for a variation in our thankful
expressions to the public for their continued patronage. Yet we are
prone to confess ourselves puzzled to ring the changes even on so
pleasurable a theme as gratitude--although it is equally delightful
to the donor and receiver. We will, however, persevere, to keep
our friendship with the public in constant repair, and to gain new
friends; for it is in the course of a periodical work as elsewhere
in the world: "if a man does not make new acquaintance as he advances
through life, he will soon find himself left alone." There is,
moreover, something agreeable in writing a preface: it yields a second
crop of pleasurable associations: and the brief retrospect of six
months breaks up the _tedium_ which may at some time or other be
attached to literary pursuits. We collect the six-and-twenty sheets
into a volume, and turn over their leaves until they almost become
new acquaintance: some of their columns point to current events, and
thus by a little aid of memory, make an outline chronology of the
half-year; and, above all, if we have pleased the reader, we, at the
same time, enjoy the self-satisfaction of having been employed to so
gratifying an end. We like too the spirit of acquaintanceship which
these prefacings, meetings, and greetings tend to keep up, although
there may be persons who impatiently turn over a preface as the
majority of an audience at the theatre rise to leave as soon as the
last scene of a pantomime is shown.

       *       *       *       *       *

The contributions of Correspondents abound in this volume. Their
subjects belong to that class of inquiry which is useful and
entertaining, and their research is amusing without dry-as-dust
antiquarianism: this is a serviceable feature, inasmuch as it is
conversational; and we know "what is said upon a subject is to
be gathered from a hundred people." So it is with not a few of
these communications: separately, their value may be small; but,
collectively, they remind us of Dr. Johnson's quaint illustration of
the many ingredients of human felicity: "Pound St. Paul's Church,
into atoms, and consider any single atom; it is, to be sure, good for
nothing: but put all these together, and you have St. Paul's Church."
A single article may occasionally appear trifling; but, take the
sheet, and its bearing is obvious; and in the volume still more so.
Our Correspondents only enjoy the reward of seeing their papers in
print: _esto perpetua_ is the only charm we use; and our poetical
friends would gladly accept the _perpetua_ for the

  Nods, and becks, and wreathed smiles

of the heroines of their verse.

SEVENTEEN is a promising time in life: it is redolent of youth, and
hope, and joy; may not the context hold good in art and literature.
Strictly speaking, we are but in our ninth year, although our volumes
number seventeen. If we continue to partake as largely of the gale of
public favour as hitherto, we shall not despair of an evergreen old
age. We know the value of this favour, and shall strive to maintain it
accordingly. It is to us like the Queen of Chess:

  Lose not the Queen, for ten to one,
  If she be lost, the game is gone.

Sterne, who delighted in large type and blanks, would probably call
this, as he did all life, "a mingled yarn;" and so we have done.

143, Strand, June 27, 1831.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEMOIR

OF

BARON BROUGHAM AND VAUX,

LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR OF GREAT BRITAIN, &C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  His purpose chose, he forward pressed outright,
  Nor turned aside for danger or delight.--_COWLEY_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The illustrious subject of this Memoir is the eldest son of a
gentleman of small fortune, but ancient family, in Cumberland,[1] His
mother was the daughter of a Scotch clergyman; in the mansion of whose
widow, on the Castle Hill of Edinburgh, the father of Lord Brougham
lodged when prosecuting his studies at the University there. Chambers,
the laborious topographical historian of the Modern Athens, says that
Lord Brougham was born in St. Andrew's Square, in that city, though
this has been disputed. The family of the late Mr. Brougham consisted
of four sons:--Henry John, an extensive wine-merchant in Edinburgh,
who died at Boulogne, about two years since; James, the Chancery
Barrister, who formerly sat with Baron Abercromby in parliament, for
Tregony, and sits at present for Downton, Wilts; and William, who has
recently been appointed a Master in Chancery, and elected Member for
the Borough of Southwark.

In early life Mr. Brougham was called to the bar of the Supreme Court
of Edinburgh, where he practised for some time, and with considerable
success, if we may judge from his frequent employment in Scotch
appeals. His selection, too, on the part of persons charged with
political offences to conduct their defence, would imply him to be
well read in the institutions of his country. It was while at the
Scotch Bar that, in conjunction with the late Mr. Francis Homer and
Mr. Jeffrey, he planned and established the _Edinburgh Review_, of
which he was for many years a most able and constant supporter. About
this time also he became a member of the celebrated Debating Society
at Edinburgh.

Although professionally a lawyer, Mr. Brougham's ambition soon became
directed to the senate; and, observes a clever contemporary, "it is
an instructive example of the working of our admirable system of
representation, that, up to the 16th of October last, Henry Brougham,
the greatest orator and statesman that perhaps ever enlightened
Parliament, was indebted for his seat to the patronage of a
borough-holding Peer." He first took his seat for Camelford, a
borough in the interest of the Duke of Bedford. In 1812, he contested
Liverpool with Mr. Canning, and failed; and, in the same year, he
was nominated for the Inverkeithing district of Boroughs, and failed
there also. He was, however, subsequently returned for Winchelsea, in
Sussex. During the discussions in parliament respecting the Princess
of Wales, Mr. Brougham, we believe, was honoured with the confidence
of her Royal Highness, and espoused her cause with much effect. His
earliest efforts as a British senator were likewise distinguished
by the same regard to the rights of individuals, and the liberties
of the country, which he has uniformly manifested to the present
time. Nor was he then less firm in opposition to what he deemed the
encroachments of the crown, and the extravagances and abuses of
the government, than he has since proved. His bold denial of the
sovereign's right to the droits of the Admiralty, in 1812, will not
soon be forgotten.

In the early part of 1816, Mr. Brougham brought forward a motion
for preserving and extending the liberty of the press, for which the
ministers, particularly Lord Castlereagh (who knew well how to use
"the delicious essence,") passed on him the highest encomiums; and
miscalculating the firmness of the bepraised, some persons thought the
minister's eulogy a lure for the member's vote; but the result proved
that Mr. Brougham was above all temptation. In the same year he made a
tour on the continent: in France he was the object of much attention;
and he afterwards visited the residence of the Princess of Wales, in
Italy, as was supposed, on a mission of some importance.

In this year also, Mr. Brougham delivered two speeches in parliament,
which are memorable for the truth of their prospective results. In
one of them, on the treaty of the Holy Alliance, occurs the following
almost prophetic passage: "I always think there is something
suspicious in what a French writer calls, '_les abouchemens des
rois_.' When crowned heads meet, the result of their united councils
is not always favourable to the interest of humanity. It is not the
first time that Austria, Russia, and Prussia have laid their heads
together. On a former occasion, after professing a vast regard for
truth, religion and justice, they adopted a course which brought
such misery on their own subjects, as well as those of a neighbouring
state--they made war against that unoffending country, which
found little reason to felicitate itself on its conquerors being
distinguished by Christian feelings. The war against Poland, and
the subsequent partition of that devoted country, were prefaced by
language very similar to that which this treaty contains; and the
proclamation of the Empress Catherine, which wound up that fatal
tragedy, had almost the very same words."--The second speech to
which we allude was on the abuses of ancient charitable institutions.
Speaking of schools, the funds of which were landed and freehold
property, Mr. Brougham remarked, "In one instance, where the funds of
the charity are L450, one boy only is boarded and educated. In another
case, where the revenue of the establishment is L1,500. a year, the
appointment of a master lying in the lord of the manor, that gentleman
gave it to a clergyman, who out of this sum paid a carpenter in the
village L40. for attending the school. The funds in the country,
applicable to the education of the poor, cannot," he added, "be less
than one hundred and fifty thousand pounds." The result of these
and similar representations was the appointment of a committee to
investigate the state of the various charities of the kingdom, and
inquire into the application of their funds; from which measure great
public good has already resulted.

In 1818, Mr. Brougham was invited to become a candidate for the county
of Westmoreland, where his family have been settled for the last
sixty or seventy years: he could not, however, withstand the powerful
influence of the Lowther family, and thus lost his election. He made
another effort, at the dissolution of parliament, consequent upon the
death of George III., but was again unsuccessful; and a third time in
1826.

We are now approaching one of the most eventful eras of Mr. Brougham's
parliamentary life: we mean his intrepid defence of the late Queen.
Mr. Brougham was the first to dispatch M. Sicard, the old and faithful
servant of the Queen, with the intelligence of the death of George
III. The Queen immediately replied to Mr. Brougham, that she was
determined to return to England; and on February 22, 1820, Mr.
Brougham received from Lord Castlereagh an assurance that no indignity
should be offered to her Majesty while abroad. Mr. Brougham was now
appointed her Majesty's Attorney-General, on which occasion he
was admitted within the bar, and assumed the silk gown, which was
subsequently taken from him, but restored.

The Queen having arrived at St. Omer, on her way to England, Lord
Hutchinson, on the part of the King, was despatched to prevent, by a
liberal offer, her leaving the continent. Mr. Brougham consented to
accompany his lordship, willing to co-operate in the purpose yet bound
by office and by friendship to secure for the queen the best possible
terms. The Queen, however, was resolved, and while the deputies were
exchanging notes, her Majesty sailed for England, and proceeded to
London amidst all the demonstrations of popular triumph. Mr. Brougham,
with Mr. Denman, on behalf of the Queen, next met the Duke of
Wellington and Lord Castlereagh, on behalf of the King, to propose
measures for an amicable arrangement, but the insertion of her
Majesty's name in the Liturgy being refused, the negotiation failed.
The struggle was now fast approaching. The notable green bag was laid
on the table of the House of Commons, and Mr. Brougham commenced by
deprecating a hasty discussion. The next day the minister developed
the projected prosecutions of the government; Mr. Brougham replied,
and concluded by demanding for the Queen a speedy and open trial.
We need only advert to his subsequent reply to the note of Lord
Liverpool, to the speech of Mr. Canning, and to the conciliatory
proposition of Mr. Wilberforce. Then followed his speech at the bar
of the House of Lords against the intended mode of investigation--his
speech against the bill of Pains and Penalties--his reply to the
crown counsel, and afterwards to the Lord Chancellor--and finally his
defence of the Queen against the several charges. His _defence_, it
will be remembered, lasted nearly two days, and Mr. Brougham, amidst
profound silence, concluded one of the most eloquent speeches ever
heard within the walls of parliament--with this pathetic appeal:--

"My lords, I call upon you to pause. You stand on the brink of a
precipice. You may go on in your precipitate career--you may pronounce
against your Queen, but it will be the last judgment you ever will
pronounce. Her persecutors will fail in their objects, and the ruin
with which they seek to cover the Queen, will return to overwhelm
themselves. Rescue the country; save the people, of whom you are
the ornaments; but severed from whom, you can no more live than the
blossom that is severed from the root and tree on which it grows. Save
the country, that you may continue to adorn it--save the crown, which
is threatened with irreparable injury--save the aristocracy, which is
surrounded with danger--save the altar, which is no longer safe when
its kindred throne is shaken. You see that when the church and the
throne would allow of no church solemnity in behalf of the Queen, the
heartfelt prayers of the people rose to heaven for her protection. I
pray heaven for her; and I here pour forth my fervent supplications
at the throne of mercy, that mercies may descend on the people of this
country richer than their rulers have deserved; and that your hearts
may be turned to justice."

The result need scarcely be alluded to. Men of all parties,
however discordant might be their opinions upon the point at issue,
acknowledged and admired the intrepidity and splendid talents of Mr.
Brougham on this memorable occasion.

Brilliant as has been the parliamentary career of Mr. Brougham from
this period, our limits will allow us only to advert to a few of its
brightest epochs. Whether advocating the rights and liberties, and
a spirit of social improvement, at home, or aiding the progress of
liberal opinion abroad, we find Mr. Brougham exercising the same
uncompromising integrity and patriotic zeal. Spain, in 1823, became a
fitting subject for his masterly eloquence. His remarks on the French
government, on April 14, in the House of Commons, on the consideration
of the policy observed by Great Britain in the affairs of France and
Spain, will not soon be forgotten: "I do not," said Mr. Brougham,
"identify the people of France with their government; for I believe
that every wish of the French nation is in unison with those
sentiments which animate the Spaniards. Neither does the army concur
in this aggression; for the army alike detests the work of tyranny,
plunder, cant, and hypocrisy. The war is not commenced because the
people or the army require it, but because three or four French
emigrants have obtained possession of power. It is for such miserable
objects as these that the Spaniards are to be punished, because
they have dared to vindicate their rights as a free and independent
people. I hope to God that the Spaniards may succeed in the noble and
righteous cause in which they are engaged."

In 1824, (June 1), we find Mr. Brougham in the House of Commons,
moving an address to the King, relative to the proceedings at Demerara
against Smith, the missionary; but, after a debate of two days, the
motion was negatived.[2]

During the period of Mr. Canning's ministry, his liberality gained Mr.
Brougham's support: this is the only instance of Mr. Brougham's not
being opposed to the minister of the day; and, observes a political
writer, "he has been as much above the task of drudging for a party as
drudging for a ministry."

The year 1828 is a memorable one in Mr. Brougham's parliamentary life.
Early in the session, upon the debate of the battle of Navarino, we
find him expressing his readiness to support the ministry as long as
the members who composed it showed a determination to retrench the
expenditure of the country, to improve its domestic arrangements,
and to adopt a truly British system of foreign policy. It was on this
occasion that Mr. Brougham used the expression which has since become
so familiar--"The schoolmaster is abroad." On Feb. 7, Mr. Brougham
brought forward a motion on the State of the Law, in an elaborate
speech of six hours delivery. The debate was adjourned to February 29,
when Mr. Brougham's motion, in an amended shape, was put and agreed
to, requesting the King to cause "due inquiry to be made into the
origin, progress, and termination of actions in the superior courts of
common law in this country;" and "into the state of the law regarding
the transfer of real property." Even the heads of this speech would
occupy one of our pages. A passage much quoted at the time of its
publication is a good specimen of Mr. Brougham's forcible style of
illustration: "He was guilty of no error--he was chargeable with no
exaggeration--he was betrayed by his fancy into no metaphor, who once
said, that all we can see about us, King, Lords, and Commons, the
whole machinery of the State, all the apparatus of the system and its
varied workings, end simply in bringing twelve good men into a box."
In the same month, Mr. Brougham spoke at great length in support of
Lord John Russell's motion for the repeal of the Test and Corporation
Acts. On March 6, Mr. Brougham spoke in support of Mr. Peel's motion
for Catholic Emancipation, which he described as going "the full
length that any reasonable man ever did or ever can demand; it does
equal justice to his Majesty's Roman Catholic subjects; it puts
an end to all religious distinctions; it exterminates all civil
disqualifications on account of religious belief. It is simple and
efficacious; clogged with no exceptions, unless such as even the most
zealous of the Catholics themselves must admit to be of necessity
parcel of the measure."

In the session of 1829, Mr. Brougham explained the proceedings of
the Commissioners appointed to inquire into Public Charities, who, it
appeared, had examined sixteen counties, and partially examined ten;
altogether amounting to more than 19,000 charities, being more than
half the number in the whole kingdom.

In 1830, Mr. Brougham supported Lord John Russell's plan for
Parliamentary Reform, as an amendment to a motion of Mr. O'Connell;
in which Mr. Brougham opposed universal suffrage and vote by ballot.
In the same week also, he spoke at some length on the punishment of
Forgery by death. The opinions which he expressed, Mr. Brougham said,
he had learned from his great and lamented friend, Sir Samuel Romilly;
and he concluded by expressing his hope that he should live to see the
day when this stain should be removed from our statute-book. In the
following month Mr. Brougham brought in a bill for local jurisdictions
in England, for diminishing the expense of legal proceedings. On June
24, Mr. Brougham spoke at great length upon the inadequacy of the
ministerial bill for the reform of the Court of Chancery. On July 13,
he moved for the abolition of West India Slavery, and expatiated at
great length and with extreme earnestness--first, on the right of the
mother country to legislate for the colonies, and next on the legal
and moral nature of slavery.

Upon the dissolution of parliament, consequent upon the death of
George IV., Mr. Brougham was invited to the representation of the
extensive and wealthy county of York. In his speech to the electors
he alluded to Parliamentary Reform, a revision of the Corn Laws,
and the extinction of Colonial Slavery, as three grand objects
of his ambition; and concluded by thus explaining his becoming a
candidate--"_because it would arm him with an extraordinary and a vast
and important accession of power to serve the people of England_." It
need scarcely be added, that his election was secured; his return was
free of all expense: indeed, never was triumph more complete.[3]

Soon after the assembling of the new parliament, Mr. Brougham, in
connexion with the topic of the recent revolutions on the continent,
and parliamentary reform in this country, concluded an interesting
debate by saying--"He was for reform--for preserving, not for
pulling down--for restoration, not for revolution. He was a shallow
politician, a miserable reasoner, and he thought no very trustworthy
man, who argued, that because the people of Paris had justifiably
and gloriously resisted lawless oppression, the people of London and
Dublin ought to rise for reform. Devoted as he was to the cause of
parliamentary reform, he did not consider that the refusal of that
benefit, or, he would say, that right, to the people of this country
(if it were a legal refusal by King, Lords, and Commons, which he
hoped to God would not take place) would be in the slightest degree a
parallel case to any thing which had happened in France."

Mr. Brougham's elevation to the exalted station which he now fills
need be related but briefly, since the particulars must be fresh
in the recollection of our readers. Upon the resignation of the
Wellington ministry--with the title of BARON BROUGHAM AND VAUX, he
took the oaths as Lord Chancellor, November 22, and his seat in the
Chancery Court on November 25, 1830.

In the House of Lords, in reply to some censurable observations on
his acceptance of office which had been made elsewhere, his lordship
explained his motives with great candour. After an allusion to his
difficulty in resigning his high station as a representative for
Yorkshire, Lord Brougham said, "I need not add, that in changing
my station in parliament, the principles which have ever guided me
remain unchanged. When I accepted the high office to which I have been
called, I did so in the full and perfect conviction, that far from
disabling me to discharge my duty to my country--far from rendering my
services less efficient, it but enlarged the sphere of my utility. The
thing which dazzled me most in the prospect which opened to my view,
was not the gewgaw splendour of the place, but because it seemed
to afford me, if I were honest--on which I could rely; if I were
consistent--which I knew to be matter of absolute necessity in
my nature; and if I were as able as I knew myself honest and
consistent--a field of exertion more extended. That by which the Great
Seal dazzled my eyes, and induced me to quit a station which till this
time I deemed the most proud which an Englishman could enjoy, was,
that it seemed to hold out the gratifying prospect that in serving my
king I should be better able to serve my country."

Already has the official elevation of Lord Brougham been attended with
manifest advantages, and promises of still greater benefits to the
nation. Only such as are accustomed to the cares of office can form
but a faint idea of the perplexities which beset the Lord Chancellor
on the recent dissolution of parliament; yet in this arduous scene
Lord Brougham is believed by all but the bitterest of his political
opponents, to have comported himself with becoming equanimity. A
political contemporary observes, upon his recent appointment--"There
is no instance in modern times of an elevation marked with the same
characters. Lord Brougham had never before been in office; he had
passed through none of the degrees which for the most part, lead
to the proud eminence where he now stands. We have had learned
Chancellors, and political--or, we would rather say, politic
Chancellors--but never before Lord Brougham (with, perhaps, the
exception of Erskine), have we had what may be justly called a popular
Chancellor. * * The consideration which he disdained to accept from
party or from power in the House, his conduct has won from the great
mass of his countrymen out of it. We speak the plain and simple truth
when we say--and that not for the first time--that at no period of
our history since the era of the Commonwealth has any one Englishman
contrived to fix so many eyes upon him as Lord Brougham has for the
last few years."[4]

Of Lord Brougham's qualifications as a barrister we have already
spoken. To the hearing of appeals in the House of Lords, an important
section of the public business, his Lordship brings qualifications
not possessed by any of his predecessors. Seven years' practice at
the Scotch bar, and a very extensive employment in appeals from that
country (for he has been engaged in almost every case of importance
for the last ten years) have made him familiar with the machinery of
the law on which his decisions bear; and he therefore undertakes his
judicial task with professional confidence.

Besides contributing to the _Edinburgh Review_, as we have noticed,
Lord Brougham is the author of several papers in _Nicholson's
Journal_, and in the Transactions of the Royal Society, of which his
Lordship is a distinguished member. The chief entire work which bears
his name is entitled, "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the
European States," 2 vols. 8vo. 1828; and a masterly pamphlet "On the
State of the Nation," which has run through many editions. Several of
his speeches have likewise been published.

It is, however, in connexion with _Public Education_, that the pen
of Lord Brougham has been more extensively employed. His zealous
co-operation with Dr. Birkbeck, and other patriotic men of talent, in
the establishment of Mechanics' Institutions in the year 1824, must
be gratefully remembered by thousands who have enjoyed their benefits;
and, for the advantage of the London Mechanics' Institution, were
republished from the _Edinburgh Review_, his excellent "_Practical
Observations upon the Education of the People_, addressed to the
Working Classes and their Employers."--The twentieth edition of
this pamphlet is now before us, and from its conclusion, to show
the practical utility of the author's suggestions, we quote the
following:--

"I rejoice to think that it is not necessary to close these
observations by combating objections to the diffusion of science
among the working classes, arising from considerations of a political
nature. Happily the time is past and gone when bigots could persuade
mankind that the lights of philosophy were to be extinguished
as dangerous to religion; and when tyrants could proscribe
the instructors of the people as enemies to their power. It is
preposterous to imagine that the enlargement of our acquaintance with
the laws which regulate the universe, can dispose to unbelief. It
may be a cure for superstition--for intolerance it will be the most
certain cure; but a pure and true religion has nothing to fear
from the greatest expansion which the understanding can receive by
the study either of matter or of mind. The more widely science is
diffused, the better will the Author of all things be known, and the
less will the people be 'tossed to and fro by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.' To tyrants,
indeed, and bad rulers, the progress of knowledge among the mass of
mankind is a just object of terror: it is fatal to them and their
designs; they know this by unerring instinct, and unceasingly they
dread the light. But they will find it more easy to curse than to
extinguish. It is spreading in spite of them, even in those countries
where arbitrary power deems itself most secure; and in England,
any attempt to check its progress would only bring about the sudden
destruction of him who should be insane enough to make it.

"To the Upper Classes of society, then, I would say, that the question
no longer is whether or not the people shall be instructed--for that
has been determined long ago, and the decision is irreversible--but
whether they shall be well or ill taught--half informed or as
thoroughly as their circumstances permit and their wants require.
Let no one be afraid of the bulk of the community becoming too
accomplished for their superiors. Well educated, and even well versed
in the most elevated sciences, they assuredly may become; and the
worst consequence that can follow to their superiors will be, that to
deserve being called their _betters_, they too must devote themselves
more to the pursuit of solid and refined learning; the present public
seminaries must be enlarged: and some of the greater cities of the
kingdom, especially the metropolis, must not be left destitute of the
regular means within themselves of scientific education.

"To the Working Classes I would say, that this is the time when by
a great effort they may secure for ever the inestimable blessing of
knowledge. Never was the disposition more universal among the rich to
lend the requisite assistance for setting in motion the great engines
of instruction; but the people must come forward to profit by the
opportunity thus afforded, and they must themselves continue the
movement once begun. Those who have already started in the pursuit of
science, and tasted its sweets, require no exhortation to persevere;
but if these pages should fall into the hands of any one at an hour
for the first time stolen from his needful rest after his day's work
is done, I ask of him to reward me (who have written them for his
benefit at the like hours) by saving threepence during the next
fortnight, buying with it Franklin's Life, and reading the first page.
I am quite sure he will read the rest; I am almost quite sure he will
resolve to spend his spare time and money, in gaining those kinds of
knowledge which from a printer's boy made that great man the first
philosopher, and one of the first statesmen of his age. Few are
fitted by nature to go as far as he did, and it is not necessary to
lead so perfectly abstemious a life, and to be so rigidly saving of
every instant of time. But all may go a good way after him, both in
temperance, industry, and knowledge, and no one can tell before he
tries how near he may be able to approach him."

We may here mention that in 1825, Lord Brougham was elected Lord
Rector of the University of Glasgow; his opponent, Sir Walter Scott,
lost the election by the casting vote of Sir James Mackintosh, in
favour of Lord Brougham.

Among the originators of the London University, Lord Brougham occupies
a foremost rank, and partly by the aid of his indefatigable talents,
that establishment was opened, in 1828, within seventeen months from
the day on which the first stone was laid.

Early in the year 1827 was established "the Society for the Diffusion
of Useful Knowledge," of which Lord Brougham became, and continues
to this day, chairman. In the original prospectus, issued under his
sanction, we find "The object of the Society is strictly limited to
what its title imports, namely, the imparting useful information to
all classes of the community, particularly to such as are unable to
avail themselves of experienced teachers, or may prefer learning
by themselves." The Society commenced their labours by a set of
Treatises, the first or "Preliminary Treatise," "_On the objects,
pleasures, and advantages of Science_," being from the pen of Lord
Brougham; and in perspicuity and popular interest, this treatise
is unrivalled in our times. His Lordship is also understood, in
conjunction with Mr. Charles Bell, to be engaged in illustrating
with notes an edition of Paley's works, to be published by the above
Society.

In the preceding outline of the political life of Lord Brougham, we
have quoted but few points of his personal character. This has been
so well drawn, and so recently too, that we are induced to adopt the
following traits from a contemporary Magazine.[5] The paper whence
these are extracted, purports to be a description of the Lord
Chancellor's first levee:--

"Unfeigned respect for, and a slight personal acquaintance with, the
noble person who now holds the seals, led me to attend his last levee.
The practice of receiving the respects of the public on one or two
stated occasions is sufficiently ancient, but I have understood was
discontinued, or not much observed, in the latter days of Lord Eldon.
It was revived with somewhat greater splendour by Lord Lyndhurst, but
still it attracted little public notice. I incline to think that it
was reserved for Brougham to illustrate the ancient custom, by the
splendour of those who chose to be dutiful to the Lord Chancellor.
The fashion of going to court is such, that it infers little personal
respect to the individual monarch; but the practice of attending the
levee of an inferior personage is to be ascribed to the respect which
individual eminence commands. When Lord Brougham announced his levees,
it could not be known whether he should receive the homage of the
aristocracy, to whom it was not supposed that his lordship's politics
were very amicable. It was moreover thought that the republican, or,
to speak more guardedly, the whig Lord Chancellor would care little
for a custom in which there was no manifest utility. He had declared
that the gewgaws of office delighted him not; and I dare say he would
fain bring his mind to believe that all ceremonial was idle, perhaps
contemptible. But it is the greatest mistake to suppose that Lord
Brougham is inattentive to the ceremonies with which his high place
is surrounded. A careful observer will see clearly that imposing
forms are perfectly agreeable to his mind; nobody could ridicule form
better, so long as he held no situation which required the observance
of customary rules; but elevated to his present distinction, it is
plain that he enjoys all the little peculiarities of his office.
Somebody said that he presided in the House of Lords in a bar whig,
and instanced the fact as a proof of his reforming temper; but it
was not true. Accident may have obliged him to take his seat in this
ungainly form, but he had no purpose of deviating from the ancient
full-bottom, and he is now to be seen in all the amplitude of the
olden fleece. In like manner he observes the strict _regime_, so
fantastical to a stranger, of causing counsel to be shouted for
from without, although they are actually present; and he adds to the
oddness of this custom by receiving them with a most imposing mien,
and putting on his chapeau as they advance. This is a form, for
which the model is not to be found in the practice of his immediate
predecessors. It is possible, however, that his extensive and minute
reading may have made him aware that Wolsey, peradventure, or
some great chancellor of old, had the fancy to be covered when the
suppliants approached. Let any one observe with what studied dignity
he performs the duty of announcing the royal assent to Acts of
Parliament: he assumes a solemnity of tone for which his voice is not
ill-fitted, but which is unusual with him. These small circumstances,
and many such which might be mentioned, show that State is not
uncongenial to his mind. Why should it? His weakness consists in the
unreal contempt for what is not really contemptible. With his high
notions of office, I should have been surprised if he had foregone the
levee; and assuredly he has not reckoned without reason; for a more
splendid or flattering pageant could not be witnessed than that which
his rooms exhibited. Unquestionably the most remarkable man in the
empire at this moment, it is his fortune to attract the honourable
regards of all who are distinguished as compeers. It is not my
intention to offer any estimate of what I conceive to be his genuine
worth, as he may be appreciated in a more dispassionate time; I
speak of him only as a great man filling a very large space in the
consideration of the empire. Judging from the throng of all classes
upon this occasion, whose favour is desirable, no man is more popular
* * *. The Chancellor took his place at a corner of the room, backed
by his chaplain, and was soon encircled by the visitants; his dress
remarkably plain, being a simple suit of velvet in the court cut. The
names were announced from the bottom of the stairs, and each person as
he entered walked up to the Chancellor and offered his respects. The
numbers were so great that it was impossible to devote any marked
attention to each; as soon, therefore, as the visiter had made his
bow, he retired into the throng, or took his departure through the
adjoining room. I was not present at the first of the levees which
were held, and at which the attendance was very distinguished; but
a friend who was, spoke very highly of the manner in which the
Chancellor performed his noviciate. The Archbishop of Canterbury came
early, and was very kindly received: he was followed by the Archbishop
of York, and several other bishops, whose attendance gave proof that,
differ as they might from Lord Brougham, they surely did not consider
him an enemy to the Church * * *. The most remarkable visiter of that
evening was the Duke of Wellington;--the crowd was astonished, and
I dare say the Chancellor himself was surprised, when his name was
sent up--I doubt if they had ever met in the same room before. Their
political lives, with the exception of the Catholic Question, were one
unvarying course of opposition, if not enmity. I suspect that for a
time the Duke despised the talk of the lawyer; and, on the other hand,
Brougham had often declared, that the respect which he entertained
for military glory was not very lofty. Some of his bitterest tirades
were levelled at the Duke personally. No one will deny that it was
high-minded in the Duke to lay aside resentment of every sort, and
offer this mark of respect as well to the man as the office. The
Chancellor was flattered by the attention, and shook the Duke by the
hand very cordially * * *. Not the least remarkable personage in the
room was the Lord Advocate of Scotland. Brougham and he are very old
friends, and have been much engaged in the same species of literature.
Brougham was his predecessor in the editorship of the Edinburgh
Review--a fact which is not generally known, but which is certain.
Brougham was not the first editor, having filled that office for a
short time after Sidney Smith withdrew from the situation. Jeffrey
appeared extremely _petit_ in his court-dress, and did not seem very
much at home: he was acquainted with but few of his fellow visiters,
and had too much good taste to occupy much of the Chancellor's
attention: they did not seem to hold any conversation beyond the usual
common-place inquiries * * *. After I had paid my respects to the
Chancellor, there came tripping up the Marquess of Bristol, with a
springy step, which he must surely have acquired at the old court
of France; for I am sure that no such movement could be attained on
English ground. The elasticity of this noble lord was such, that when
once put in motion, he continued to spring up and down in the manner
of the Chinese figures, which are hawked by the Italian toy-venders.
Had I been told that the head of the house of Newry was a
dancing-master, who had not yet learned the present modes, I should
certainly have believed the story without scruple, if I had met him
anywhere else. He had no sooner left the Chancellor, than he was laid
hold of by a fidgetty solicitor, who was the only member of his class
in the room, and who, I understand, is a sort of favourite of the
Chancellor. The obsequious grin, and the affected ease of this worthy,
do not convey any very favourable impression on his behalf. He was
solicitor for the Queen, and in this capacity formed an intimacy with
her chief counsel, which an ill-natured person would perhaps think
makes him now forget in some measure the great disparity betwixt
their present condition. The Chancellor gave no discouragement to
his familiarity * * *. A variety of lords, squires, generals, _ossa
innominata_ followed, for whom the Chancellor cared perhaps about as
much as I did. At length Sir James Scarlett was announced, and the
Chancellor left his place to meet him. His welcome was very hearty.
Brougham was doubtless gratified by this token of respect from a man
who was indisputably his leader in the courts, and for whose forensic
abilities it is known, that he entertains, and has often expressed,
the highest admiration. The position of the two men was singular, and
to the ex-attorney not very enviable. Scarlett was in high practice
before Brougham was even called to the bar. He kept a head of him in
their profession throughout; and twice he had filled the first places
at the bar, when the respective attainments of these eminent persons
were such, that if Brougham had been placed before him, Scarlett would
have had just ground of complaint; and the bar would have unanimously
decried the appointment. Now, however, by one of those cross accidents
which will occur in the most fortunate lives, Scarlett was, with
strict justice and universal acquiescence, placed below his former
competitor, and in direct opposition to all the early friends with
whom he commenced his political career. It was matter of necessity
and of course that he should go out when his employers were obliged to
surrender office; and no man could complain that Brougham should then
be elevated to a distinction, which in other circumstances Scarlett
might have thought his own by indisputable right * * *. The Speaker of
the House of Commons was then announced. Brougham and he met as warm
friends, though certainly men having little in kindred. In point of
talent there is no ground of comparison; yet it may be doubted whether
they are not nearly as great in their own way. I have no notion of
the place which the Speaker held in parliament before he was elected
to the chair, and I know few situations which require more tact and
management. In these qualifications the present Speaker is signally
gifted. He brings a degree of good nature to the office, which no
event, however untoward, can ruffle;--his calmness never forsakes him:
he is the same easy, dignified chairman at all times. The Commons are
a truly turbulent body, but they are not impatient of his sway. In all
emergencies he is vigorously supported: in his hands, the authority
of his office, though rarely exercised, has lost none of its force.
Brougham himself was one of the most fiery spirits in this hot region;
but a word from the Speaker would calm him in an instant. Among
other qualifications for command, he is possessed of a fine mellow,
deep-toned voice, which, while it powerfully enunciates the "Order,"
frees the command from all harshness or severity. As the first
commoner in the land, and a truly estimable gentleman, he was entitled
to be well received * * *. The last person of note who arrived before
I departed was Sir Thomas Denman. The Chancellor was engaged with some
one at the moment, and nothing passed betwixt them but an exchange
of bows. It was nearly ten years since I had seen Brougham and Denman
together; the Queen's trial was then the all-engrossing topic of
public consideration. Who could then have foretold that these men
would have in so short a space won the confidence of a sovereign, whom
they attacked with a degree of virulence which, even in those days
of party violence, was generally condemned? The change in feeling is
creditable alike to all."

Of the eloquence and general character of Lord Brougham, we have the
following excellent portraiture by a master-hand:[6]--

"Mr. Brougham is from the North of England, but he was educated
in Edinburgh, and represents that school of politics and political
economy in the house. He differs from Sir James Mackintosh in this,
that he deals less in abstract principles, and more in individual
details. He makes less use of general topics, and more of immediate
facts. Sir James is better acquainted with the balance of an argument
in old authors; Mr. Brougham with the balance of power in Europe. If
the first is better versed in the progress of history, no man excels
the last in a knowledge of the course of exchange. He is apprized of
the exact state of our exports and imports, and scarce a ship clears
out its cargo at Liverpool or Hull, but he has notice of the bill
of lading. Our colonial policy, prison discipline, the state of the
hulks, agricultural distress, commerce and manufactures, the bullion
question, the Catholic Question, the Bourbons or the Inquisition,
'domestic treason, foreign levy,' nothing can come amiss to him--he
is at home in the crooked mazes of rotten boroughs, is not baffled
by Scotch law, and can follow the meaning of one of Mr. Canning's
speeches. With so many resources, with such variety and solidity of
information, Mr. Brougham is rather a powerful and alarming, than an
effectual debater. In so many details (which he himself goes through
with unwearied and unshrinking resolution) the spirit of the question
is lost to others who have not the same voluntary power of attention
or the same interest in hearing that he has in speaking; the original
impulse that urged him forward is forgotten in so wide a field, in so
interminable a career. If he can, others _cannot_ carry all he knows
in their heads at the same time; a rope of circumstantial evidence
does not hold well together, nor drag the unwilling mind along with
it (the willing mind hurries on before it, and grows impatient and
absent)--he moves in an unmanageable procession of facts and proofs,
instead of coming to the point at once--and his premises (so anxious
is he to proceed on sure and ample grounds) overlay and block up his
conclusion, so that you cannot arrive at it, or not till the first
fury and shock of the onset is over. The ball, from the too great
width of the _calibre_ from which it is sent, and from striking
against such a number of hard, projecting points, is almost
spent before it reaches its destination. He keeps a ledger or a
debtor-and-creditor account between the government and the country,
posts so much actual crime, corruption, and injustice against so much
contingent advantage or sluggish prejudice, and at the bottom of the
page brings in the balance of indignation and contempt, where it
is due. But people are not to be _calculated into_ contempt or
indignation on abstract grounds; for however they may submit to this
process where their own interests are concerned, in what regards the
public good we believe they must see and feel instinctively, or not
at all. There is (it is to be lamented) a good deal of froth as well
as strength in the popular spirit, which will not admit of being
_decanted_ or served out in formal driblets; nor will spleen (the soul
of opposition) bear to be corked up in square patent bottles, and kept
for future use!

"Mr. Brougham speaks in a loud and unmitigated tone of voice,
sometimes almost approaching to a scream. He is fluent, rapid,
vehement, full of his subject, with evidently a great deal to say, and
very regardless of the manner of saying it. As a lawyer, he has not
hitherto been remarkably successful. He is not profound in cases and
reports, nor does he take much interest in the peculiar features of
a particular cause, or show much adroitness in the management of it.
He carries too much weight of metal for ordinary and petty occasions:
he must have a pretty large question to discuss, and must make
_thorough-stitch_ work of it. Mr. Brougham writes almost, if not
quite, as well as he speaks. In the midst of an election contest
he comes out to address the populace, and goes back to his study to
finish an article for the _Edinburgh Review_, sometimes indeed wedging
three or four articles (in the shape of _refaccimentos_ of his own
pamphlets or speeches in parliament) into a single number. Such indeed
is the activity of his mind that it appears to require neither repose,
nor any other stimulus than a delight in its own exercise. He can
turn his hand to any thing, but he cannot be idle. There are few
intellectual accomplishments which he does not possess, and possess in
a very high degree. He speaks French (and, we believe, several other
modern languages) fluently: is a capital mathematician, and obtained
an introduction to the celebrated Carnot in this latter character,
when the conversation turned on squaring the circle, and not on
the propriety of confining France within the natural boundary of
the Rhine. Mr. Brougham is, in fact, a striking instance of the
versatility and strength of the human mind, and also in one sense of
the length of human life, if we make a good use of our time. There is
room enough to crowd almost every art and science into it. If we pass
'no day without a line,' visit no place without the company of a book,
we may with ease fill libraries or empty them of their contents. Those
who complain of the shortness of life, let it slide by them without
wishing to seize and make the most of its golden minutes. The more
we do, the more we can do; the more busy we are, the more leisure we
have. Mr. Brougham, among other means of strengthening and enlarging
his views, has visited, we believe, most of the courts, and turned
his attention to most of the constitutions of the continent. He is, no
doubt, a very accomplished, active-minded, and admirable person."

Lord Brougham married, in 1816, Mary Anne, relict of John Slade, Esq.,
of Hill street, Berkeley-square; by whom he has one daughter. Lady
Brougham's maiden name was Eden: she is nearly related to the Auckland
and Handley families. At her marriage with Mr. Slade, in 1808, she
was accounted an extremely beautiful young woman; and she was still
possessed of great personal charms at the period of her second union.
Lady Brougham had by her former marriage a son, who inherits his
father's estate, and is an. officer in the army, and a daughter. Lady
Brougham brought no property to her husband but her jointure of L1,500
a-year, and the house No. 5, Hill-street.

Lord Brougham was born in 1779, and is, consequently, in his
fifty-second year.

[Footnote 1: We are aware of having already quoted these particulars,
from the _Spectator_ newspaper, at page 412 of the _Mirror_, vol.
xvi. but their repetition here is essential to the completeness of the
present Memoir. Of Lord Brougham's family, in connexion with Brougham
Castle, in Westmoreland, there were many conflicting statements at the
period of his lordship's elevation to the peerage towards the close
of last year. The Chancellor is said to have had a latent claim as
heir-general to the Barony of Vaux, (whose arms are to be seen on the
tower of Brougham Castle,) and hence his creation by that title. Some
exclusive information, obligingly furnished, (at the Chancellor's
request, in reply to our application) by a relative of his lordship,
will also be found at length in the _Mirror_, vol. xvi. but for the
reader's convenience we quote its substance: "Before the time of
the Norman Conquest, the manor and lordship of Brougham (then called
Burgham) were held by the Saxon family of de Burgham, from whom the
Lord Chancellor is lineally descended. After the Conquest, William the
Norman granted to Robert de Veteripont, or Vipont, extensive rights
and territories in Westmoreland; and among others, some oppressive
rights of seigniory over the manor of Brougham, then held by Walter de
Burgham. To relieve the estate of such services, Gilbert de Burgham,
in the reign of King John, agreed to give up absolutely one-third
part of his estate to Robert de Veteripont, and also the advowson of
the rectory of Brougham. This third comprises the land upon which the
castle is built, and the estate afterwards given by Anne Countess of
Pembroke, (heiress of Veteripont,) to the Hospital of Poor Widows
at Appleby. Brougham Castle, if not built, was much extended by
Veteripont; and afterwards still more enlarged by Roger Clifford,
who succeeded, by marriage, to the Veteripont possessions. The manor
house, about three quarters of a mile from the castle, continued
in the Brougham family; and part of it, especially the gateway,
is supposed to be of Saxon architecture: at all events, it is the
earliest Norman. The chapel is also old, except the roof, which was
renewed in the year 1659. In the year 1607, Thomas Brougham, then Lord
of the Manor of Brougham, died without issue male, and the estate
was sold to one Bird, who was steward of the Clifford family; the
heir male of the Brougham family then residing at Scales Hall, in
Cumberland. About 1680, John Brougham of Scales, re-purchased the
estate and manor of Brougham from Bird's grandson and entailed it
on his nephew, from whom it passed by succession to the Lord
Chancellor."]

[Footnote 2: The reader will find a concise narrative of the case of
Mr. Smith, at page 408, vol. iii. of the _Mirror_.]

[Footnote 3: In one day, during his visits to the freeholders, Mr.
Brougham spoke eight speeches to eight meetings, travelled 120 miles,
and entered court the next morning, wigged and gowned as if he had
never quitted his chambers.]

[Footnote 4: _Spectator_ Newspaper, No. 126.]

[Footnote 5: _Metropolitan_, edited by T. Campbell, Esq.--No. 1.]

[Footnote 6: _Spirit of the Age; or, Contemporary Portraits_, 1825. By
the late Mr. Hazlitt.]

       *       *       *       *       *




INDEX.


  ANECDOTE GALLERY, 35-358-378
  COSMOPOLITE, THE, 282-299-405
  EMBELLISHED ARTICLES IN EACH NUMBER,
  FINE ARTS, 158-265-278-300-363
  GATHERER IN EACH NUMBER,
  ILLUSTRATIONS OF SHAKSPEARE, 136
  MANNERS AND CUSTOMS, 104-140-154-206-246-292-367-372-424
  NATURALIST, THE, 22-46, 70, 116-250-348-387-406-423
  NOTES OF A READER, 13-23-105-118-133-158-171-219-261-314-328-361-
      389-408
  NOVELIST, THE, 71-228-323-420
  OLD POETS, 103-284
  ORIGINAL ARTICLES IN EACH NUMBER,
  RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS, 19-60-117-162-227
  SELECT BIOGRAPHY, 99-121-344
  SELECTOR, AND NOTICES OF NEW WORKS, 26-42-55-73-125-149-164-189-203-
      213-234-247-279-301-307-325-365-382-393-411-425
  SPIRIT OF THE ANNUALS, 6
  SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY, 52-182-255-294-312-351-368-375-428
  SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS, 10-20-36-56-77-108-122-137-155-169-
      184-198-217-236-251-267-285-297-316-332-349-364-379-397-409-430
  SKETCH BOOK, 52-101-183-215-293-343
  TOPOGRAPHER, THE, 5-18-61-153-201-310-414

  Abernethy, the late Mr., 397
  Academy, The Silent, 4
  Actor, How to roast, 287
  Ada, Lines to, 374
  Addison, Death of, 419
  AEolian Harp, Sonnet to, 404
  AEolophon, the, 52
  Al Amin at Chess, 36
  Album, Character of a good one, 355
  Albion, Origin of, 306
  Alison, Archibald, his Autograph, 145
  Ambiton, Simple, 340
  Ampthill House described, 353
  America, First English Colony in, 55
  Anatomical Subjects, 432
  Anatomy of Society, 249
  Ancestry, 224-425
  Andre, Major, Account of, 184
  Anglo-Saxon History, 301
  Anson, Lord, 144
  Antiquarian Scraps, 99
  Apsley House, Origin of, 192
  Arcana of Science for 1831, 312
  Arch Poetry, 79
  Architecture of Birds, 279
  Ariosto, Relics of, 193
  Arqua, Petrarch's House at, 1
  Arun, Sonnet to the, 227
  Arundel House, Strand, 67
  Ascot-place Grotto, 225
  Atherton, a Tale, 393
  Auberge on the Grimsel, 41
  Autocrat's Prayer, the, 236
  Autographs of Eminent Persons, 145-264

  Bacchanalian Song, 122
  Bad Company, 13
  Bail, Origin of, 61
  Baillie, Joanna, her Autograph, 145
  Bald Eagle, the, 387-406
  Ballot, the Greek, 19
  Bampton Lectures, White's, 426
  Bankrupts in 1829, 24
  Bathos and Pathos, 31
  Battle of the Cats, 251
  Batty's, Colonel, Views of Edinburgh, 300
  Beauty and Slander, by Harrington, 103
  Beer Houses, Number of, 263
  Beggar Woman of Locarno, 293
  Billington, Mrs., 364
  Birds, Architecture of, 279
    Changing colour, 250
    Economy of, 105
  Birth-day Prayer, 319
  Black Books, Ancient, 227
  Blackwood's Christmas Carol, 22
  Blue Beard, the Original, 391
  Blunders, Ludicrous, 272
  Boi, the Syracusan at Chess, 36
  Bonaparte and the Koran, 379
  Bondsman's Feast, a tale, 126
  Boroughs, Three, 369
  Borrowing Days, the, 213
  Bostock, Dr., his improvements in Ink, 182
  Boy, Story of a, 70
  Bramber, Borough of, 369
  Bray Church described, 209
  Brighton, 14
  Bristol Channel, Voyage up, 61
  Britannia, Origin of, 276
  British Institution, the, 158
  Brougham, Lord, his Autograph, 145
  Bruce at Turnbury, 16
  Bull-baiting in Suffolk, 246
    at Great Grimsby, 104
  Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 10
  Burial in the Desert, 169
  Burning Alive, 133
  Burns, the Poet, 134
  Byron, Lord, Moore's Life of,
    Augusta, Lines to, 81
    Character of, 14, 109
    Clare, Lord, 93
    Detached Thoughts, 92
    and Sir H. Davy, 91
    Diary of, 93
    and the Greeks, 95
    and Guiccioli, 86
    Journal in Switzerland, 26
    Memoirs of, 91
    Parsimony of, 90
    Portrait of, 96
    and Lady Byron, 29
    Letters to Mr. Moore, 84, 91
    Letter to Mr. Murray, 43
    Poetical Gems by, 44
    and Porson, 86
  Byron, Prophecy of, 31
    and Pope, 92
    at Pisa, 93
    and Shelley, 28
    Sensibility of, 81
    at Venice, 82, 83, 84
      with Mr. Moore, 89
      Execution at, 86
      Palace at, 113
    Visit to Arqua, 1

  Cabinet Atlas, the, 330
  Calculating Notes--Paganini, 364
  Calendar, Antiquities of, 23
    of the Church of England, 314
  Cambrian Superstitions, 206
  Canning, Mr., Character of, 118
  Canterbury, Lines on viewing, 180
  Care, by Constable, 285
  Castellan's Sermon on Francis I., 304
  Cats, Battle of the, 251
  Chair of Ariosto, 193
  Chalmers, Thomas, his Autograph, 145
  Charles I., Epitaph on, 192
  Charlotte, Princess, the late, 358
  Charter of William I., 112
  Charming Fellow, 432
  Chemistry, Popular, 173
    , Wonders of, 55
  Cheroot, the, 69
  Cheshire Enchanter, the, 98
  Chess, Anecdotes of, 36
  Chestnuts in Florence, 144
  Chichester Cross described, 17
  Childe Harold at Venice, 114
  Chinese Ingenuity, 303
  Cholera Morbus, the, 389
  Christian's Magazine, the, 378
  Christianity, Influence of, 302
  Christmas Carol, 22
  Christmas Tree in Germany, 154
  Cigar-smoking, Effects of, 349
  Clarence, Duke of, Origin of, 68
  Clonmel, the late Lord, 351
  Coach-company, a Sketch, 52
  Coals, Mechanical Power of, 45, 55
  Cobblers' Arms, Origin of, 372
  Cockcrow, Origin of, 24
  Cockfighting, Origin of, 23
  Coinage, the New, 356
  Combustion, Phenomena of, 175
  Comets and Women, 192
  Companion to the Almanac, 24
  Compunctious Visitings, 352
  Cooling Wine, Mistake in, 294
  Copper Works in Wales, 5
  Corfe Castle and Edward II., 291
    described, 242
  Corfe Castle, Visit to, 260
  Costa Ferme, Scene on, 56
  County Collections, 18
  Covent Garden and Strand Crosses, 66
  Cowley's House at Chertsey, 168
  Cowslips, a Sonnet, 387
  Cream, Why on Milk, 295
  Croesus, a Sketch, 373
  Cross the Prompter, 239
  Cross-dialling, 393
  Crotchet Castle, Letters from, 234
  Cruelty to Animals, 172
  Crystallization, Phenomena of, 174
  Cunningham, Allan, 135
    , his Autograph, 145
  Cuttle Fish, the, 423
  Czartoryski, Character of, 425

  Damned Author, 328
  Dancing Fish, 29
  Davy, the late Sir Humphry, 63
  Dawlish's Hole, an incident, 101
  Day, Ancient Divisions of, 61
  Dead Hand, the, 63
  Death, Reflections on, 314
  Death-beds of Great Men, 419
  Devil among the Printers, 112
  Dialling, 392
  Dignified Reproof, 431
  Dirge, 58, 140
  Disagreeables, 430
  Disappearance, Extraordinary, 304
  Ditty by Queen Elizabeth, 117
  Doncaster, Christ Church, 49
  Dot-and-carry-one-town, letters from, 236
  Dramatic Annual, the, 328
  Dream Girl, the, a Tale, 189
  Dreams by Whispering, 226
  Duel, the, a Serious Ballad, 8
  Duelling Customs, 135
  Duelling in France, 286
  Dunmow Flitch, Applicants for, 212
  Dunwich, Borough of, 369
  Dunstan's, St., Fleet-street, 99
  Dyers, the two, 48

  Early Rising, 36
  Echoes, Remarkable, 221
  Ei, the Word, 418
  Electioneering Advice, 352
  Electricity, Phenomena of, 175
  Elfin Triumphant Song, 217
  Elizabeth, Queen, her Portrait, 237
  Elizabeth, Queen, her Prayer Book, 379
  Elizabeth, Princess' Cottage at Windsor, 97
  Emperor's Rout, the, 43
  Enghien, (Due d'), murder of, 35
  English Language, the, 240
  Epigrams and Puns, 64
  Epitaphs, 31, 48, 64, 208, 220, 223, 224, 240, 256, 320, 361, 400, 416
  Equivoque, Royal, 158
  Esterhazy, Young Princess, 63
  Ettrick Shepherd, the, 134
  Executions, Public, 133
  Exeter Hall, Strand, 401

  Fairy Favours, a Sketch, 183, 215
  Fairy Song, 226
  Fairies, city of, 215
  Fairy Rings, 207
  Fame, Lines on, 285
  Family Poetry, 297
  Fanny, Lines to, 196
  Farewell to Spain, 419
  Fasting, Lines on, 256
  Fatherland, from the German, 149
  Ferrand at Chess, 36
  Festivals, Games and Amusements, 106
  Finsbury in 1282, 164
  Fitzherbert, Mrs., and George IV., 159
  Flint Castle described, 136
  Flowers in a room in Sickness, 156
  Fountain Clocks, Construction of, 294
  Four-and-twenty Fiddlers, Song, 210
  France, Character of, 315
  France, Kings of, 128
  Freemasonry in England, 365
  French and English, a Ballad, 7
  French Gentleman's Letter, 6
    Poetry for children, 391
  Friend, the Last, 111
  Frogmore, Hermitage at, 417
  Frogs of Aristophanes, Scene from, 218
  Funeral at Sea, 307

  Gad's Hill Robbery, 431
  Gambler, a Princely One, 192
  Gambling of Henry IV., 223
  Gamester's Daughter, the, 228
  Genlis, the late Madame, 156
  George III., Private Memoirs of, 159
  George IV.'s Gateway at Windsor Castle, 273
  "God Save the King" in Italy, 135
  Goes of Liquor, Origin of, 24
  Golden Bodkin, a Tale, 322
  Goodall, the Musician, 239
  Gower, Lord Levison, his Autograph, 145
  Gower, in Wales, described, 152, 311
  Grant, Mrs., her Autograph, 145
  Greek Ballot, 19
  Grief, Lines on, 285
  Grimsel, Auberge on the, 41
  Groat, Origin of, 336
  Grotto at Ascot Place, 225

  Halcyon Days, 48, 68, 147, 197
  Hall, Basil, his Autograph, 145
  Haller, Death of, 420
  Hanging Committee, 328
  Hardham's 37, 32
  Harpe, de la, Death of, 420
  Haunted House, by Mrs. Hemans, 239
  Hawkins, Sir John, Death of, 419
    's History of Music, 297
  Hawk, Tame, Anecdotes of, 70
  Haydon's Picture of Napoleon, 278
  Haydon, R.B., his Autograph, 264
  Heat, Phenomena of, 174
  Heiress of Bruges, Scene from, 75
  "Help Yourself," 315
  Hemans, Mrs., her Autograph, 145
  Henry VII., Wealth of, 427
  Herons and Heronries, 281
  Hervey, Death of, 419
  Hippodrome Games, 292
  Hobart Town, Panorama of, 265
  Holborn, Ancient Topography of, 162
  Holland, Lord, his Seat at Ampthill, 353
  Holyrood, Ancient Palace of, 161
  Homer, Controversy respecting, 118
  Homeric Poems, Origin of, 119
  Hope, Sonnet to, 342
  Hope, Thomas, Esq., Memoir of, 121
  Hour of Phantasy, the, 212
  House of Commons, 197-258
  Hood's Comic Annual for 1831, 7
  Hunt, Leigh, his Autograph, 264
    , Mr., M.P. for Preston, 217
  Hunting Customs, 261
  Huntingdon Jury, Remarkable, 399
  Hustings, Origin of, 352
  Hydrometer, Domestic use of, 351
  Hydrostatics and Pneumatics, 294

  Ice lighter than Water, 351
  Indians, Traditions of the, 55
  Industry, Fruits of, 390
  Infantry at Mess, 8
  Ink, Black-writing, Improved, 182-246
  Inkstand of Ariosto, 193
  Inn Rhymes, 208
  Irving, Washington, his Autograph, 145
  Italian at the King's Theatre, 297

  Jeffrey, F., his Autograph, 145
  Jerdan, Mr., his Autograph, 145
  Jews, the, before their dispersion, 247
  John, King, at Chess, 36
  Johnson, Dr., Posthumous Ode by, 160
  Jones, John, Poetry by, 108-172
  Joseph II., Emperor of Germany, 378

  Katerfelto, Who was he? 69-131-192
  Kenilworth, Ballet of, 315
  Kennett, Alderman, 223
  Kicking the World, 329
  Kilcolman Castle described, 233
  King (William IV.) Old plan for capturing, 379
  King's Secret, the, 330
  Kiss, a Literary one, 224
  Knave, Origin of, 191
  Knowledge for the People, 23-105-173-261

  Laconics, from "Maxwell," 13
  Ladies in Parliament, 256
  Last Sounds of Battle, 162
  Latimer, Death of, 419
  Law, Familiar, 314
  Law and Lawyers, 133
  Lawrence, the late Sir Thomas, 358
  Laying a Ghost, 219
  Leander, Female, 319
  Legacy, a curious one, 16
  Legacy of the Sword, 197
  L'Envoy, a Poem, 137
  Lengthening of the Days, 48
  Letter of a Country Squire, 319
  Letter-Bell, the, by Hazlitt, 186
  Liberalism and Music, 120
  Life, a Journey, 203
    Voyage, 204
  Lincoln, Grosthead, Bishop of, 379
  Lines from the Spanish, 252
    on viewing St. Leonard's, 396
    Rural, 404
    by Colbourne, 307
    written in a Churchyard, 291
  Lithography Ink, 267
  Locke's Birthplace, 290, 307
    Death of, 419
  Long, St. John, 59
  London Lyrics, 335
    in the Seventh Century, 302
  Longevity, 320
  Love of Pleasure, 249
    by Shakspeare, 103
    Lines on, by Watson, 284
  Louis XI. and the Virgin Mary, 303
  Loyal Bequest, 303
  Luxury, Laws for prohibiting, 191
  Lydford, Ancient Borough of, 245
  Lyttleton, Lord, Death of, 410

  Macaw of a Lady of Quality, Memoirs of, 316, 332
  Mackenzie, Henry, his Autograph, 264
    Death of, 79
  Magna Charta Island, 50
  Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice, 205-213
  Marriage Fees, 154
  Mavrovitch, the Pole, a tale, 198
  Maureen, a ballad, 169
  May, Old lines on, 320
  Mechanics, Phenomena of, 361
  Melancholy, by Drayton, 103
  Melancthon, Death of, 420
  Memory, Power of, 119
  Mercantile Life, 13
  Metropolitan Magazine, 316
  Middle Life, 13
  Milk, Preparations of, in Tartary, 140
  Miser's Grave, the, 410
  Mocha and its Coffee, 257
  Monmouthshire, Notes in, 201
  Montgomery, R., his Autograph, 264
  Monument, the London, 167
  Moore's Life of Byron, vol. ii. 14-81 to 96 (_see Byron_)
  More-ish Melody, 111
  Morland, the Painter, 167
  Moriscoe Girl, Sacrifice of, 75
  Moth, Last words of, 111
  Mount St. Michael described, 129-164-181-
  Munchausens, the Two, 409
  Muse in Livery, 172
  Musical Literature in North America, 77

  Napoleon, Picture of, 278
  National Debt, the, 352
  Nature Reviving, Stanzas, 115
  Necromancer, by Mrs. Hemans, 110
  Newspaper Duties, 25
  Niger, the River, 368-428
  Niobe, Lines on, 130
  Normandy, Mount St. Michael, 129-164

  Oaths, Royal, 368
  Oberlin, J.F., Anecdote of, 219
  Octogenarian Reminiscences, 239
  Oculist, the Unsuccessful, 336
  Orange, Prince of, 208
  Osmyn and Zambri, a tale, 420
  Osprey, the, 280
  Ostrich, the, 423
  Oysters, to open, when stale, 304

  Paganini, the Violinist, 344-432
  Paley, his Sermons, 203
  "Palmam qui meruit ferat," 9
  Pancras, Ancient State of, 227
  Pandora's Box, 128
  Paper, Extraordinarily long, 191
  Paris, Boulevards of, 412
    Bridges of, 412
    City of, 411
    Streets of, 413
  Parliaments, Ancient, 244-287-339
    of Batts, 272
    the new one dished, 400
    Origin of, 197-258-339
    Early, Reform of, 413
    Wages to Members, 418
  Parliamentary Scraps, 404
  Parr, Old, and Old People, 285
  Parrots, Anecdotes of, 116
  Patriotism, 208
  Paul and Virginia, Tomb of, 281
  Paul's Cross described, 373
  Paul Pry, Origin of, 169
  Peerage of Great Britain, 386
  Penitent's Return, the, 40
  Penn, Death of, 419
  Pennant, Origin of the, 144
  Penny, History of the, 60
  Peter the Great, Statue of, 296-342
  Petrarch's House at Arqua, 1
    and Dante, 35
  Physics, Wonders of, 45
  Picking your way, 9
  Picture, Curious Anecdote of, 80
  Pigs and Countryman, 9
  Pilgrim's Progress, the, 10
  Pitcairn's Island, Natives of, 375
  Pitt Diamond, the, 224
  Planting in Germany, 220
  Ploughing with Dogs, 372
  Pluralities, 352
  Poems by a King of Persia, 357
  Poet, an uneducated one, 108
  Poland, History of, 425
    Epitome of, 211-277-325
  Polish Patriot's Appeal, 116
    Revolution, Rise of, 321
  Political Changes, 287
  Political Economists, 118
  Porter, Jane, her Autograph, 145
  Porters, Antiquity of, 144
  Posterity, by Fitzjeffrey, 104
  Posthumous Honours, 240
  Preston, Lancaster, 32
  Princes, Lines on, 284
  Prisons in the Tower, 318
  Professional People, 13
  Proof, a convincing one, 144
  Prophecy, Ancient, 31
  Proverbs, a Lyric, 335
  Public Amusements, 133
  Punch and Judy, a Tale, 265
  Pursuit of Knowledge under Difficulties, 73

  Raining Trees, 46
  Raleigh, Death of, 419
  Ransoms, Account of, 147-340
  Recollections of a Wanderer, 101
  Reflection, Benefits of, 295
  Reform Bill, the, 208
  Rhine, Lines on the, 131
  Rich and Poor, 134
  Richelieu, Death of, 190
  Rides, Long, 181
  Riding, Unparalleled, 160
  Robber turned Bishop, 379
  Rode, the Violinist, 120
  Romance of History, 125
  Rosedale Abbey, Lines to, 210
  Royal Academy, the, 363
  Russian Burial Ground, 424

  St. George, Origin of, 23
  St. George's Chapel, Windsor, 305
    Hospital, 321
  St. John Long, Mr., 155
  St. New Year's Day, 154
  St. Paul's Cathedral, Interior of, 190
  Salt among the Greeks, 228
  Sanctuaries, Origin of, 303
  Sandy Harg, a Ballad, 271
  Sarum, Old, Borough of, 369
  Savings Banks, 263
  Saxon Beauty, 192
  Schoolmaster Abroad, 220
  Science, Progress of, 120
  Scott, Michael, the Wizard, 382
  Scott, Sir Walter, Portrait of, 20
  Scott and Cooper, the Novelists, 314
  Scraps, Amusing, 288
  Sea Serpent, the, 30
  Sea-side Time-killer, 330
  Selden, John, 15
  Self-advancement, Hints for, 404
  Sermons, by Sir Joshua Reynolds, 303
  Shadows, Property of, 45
  Shaftesbury, Water at, 367
  Shakspeare, Botany of, 423
  Shakspearean Procession, 330
  Shaving, Dexterous, 80
  Shelley, P.B., his Autograph, 145
  Shelley and Byron, 28
  Shetland Isles, Climate of the, 304
  Ship-building, 175
  Ship-launch--Reform, 336
  Shirt without a Seam, 384
  Shuter the Actor, Burial of, 352
  Siamese Twins, the, 352
  Siddons, the late Mrs., 408
  Silent Academy, the, 4
  Silk Manufacture, 208
  Shower Bath, the, 176
  Slave Ship, a Galley Yarn, 253
  Slavery, Ancient, in England, 163
  Slaughtering, Polite, 56
  Sleeper, Extraordinary, 159
  Sleeping in Church, 143
  Smith, Horace, 106
  Snow-white Virgin, the, 122-170
  Soap and Candle Duties, 25-263
  Sodor and Man, Bishop of, 378
  Somerset Custom, 142
  Song, a new one, 181
  Songs, 245-246
  Sonnet to the Arun, 227
    Cowslips, 387
    an AEolian Harp, 404
    M***, 181
    Hope, 342
  Soul, the, from Drayton, 285
  Sound, Phenomena of, 221
  South Sea Islander, Taste of, 191
  Southwark, Old House in, 337
  Spanish Diligence plundered, 149
  Spectator Newspaper, 112
  Spenser, Epitaph on, 432
    , the Poet, Residence of, 233
  Sports and Pastimes, Origin of, 261
  Spring, Lines on, by Lord Surrey, 285
  Squall at Sea, 128
  Stanzas, 156
  Steam, a Poem, 173
  Steam-Coaches, Effect of, 391
  Stebbing's Lives of the Italian Poets, 194
  Steel dearer than Gold, 191
  Sterne's Eliza, 275
    Epitaph on, 256
    Portrait of, 211
  Stockbrokers, 13
  Stoke Pogis, Revolution at, 7-58
  Stonehenge, 301
  Storace, Old, 239
  Strand Cross and Covent Garden, 65
  Stuart, Dugald, his Autograph, 145
  Summary of 1830--*327
  Sunday Amusements, 134
  Sunday Library, the, 203
  Sunset Thoughts, 322
  Superstitions, Coincident popular, 282-299
  Superstitions, English, 98
    , Popular, 355-402
  Supplies for a War, 384
  Swan River Colony, 178
  Swansea Bay described, 310
  Sustillo, the Caterpillar, 348
  Swimming, Facility of, 294
    , in Sea and River Water, 351

  Talleyrand, his Autograph, 264
  Tam O'Shanter, Memoir of, 99
  Tamerlane at Chess, 36
  Tawy, Vale of, in Wales, 5
  Tempe, Vale of, 288
  Tennant, W., his Autograph, 145
  Tenure, Singular, 372
  Theatres, Modern, 288
  Thickness, Miss, Epitaph on, 223
  Thomas, Bishop, his Marriage, 192
  Thurlow, Lord, 176
  Tillotson, Death of, 419
  Timepiece, Human, 47
  Time's Telescope for 1831, 173
  Time, Use of, 48
  Tintern Abbey and the Wye, 202
  Toggenburg, Knight of, a Ballad, 291
  Tower of London, 176
  Townson, Dr., his Sermons, 204
  Tree, Description of a beautiful one, 348
  Trial by Battle, 329
  Trinity Term ends, 367
  Truth, Lines on, 218
  Turkish Cemetery, Night in, 71
  Turkish Musical Gusto, 120
  Twenty Years, by T.H. Bayly, 332
  Tylwyth Teg's Dance, 207

  Understanding, by Spenser, 285
  United States of America, Music in, 78
  Unwelcome Truth, 13

  Valentine's Day, Origin of, 223
  Venetian History, Sketches of, 205
  Venice, Byron's Palace at, 113
  Ventriloquism Explained, 254
  Vernal Stanzas, 402
  Vestris, Madame, Lines on, 144
  Vicar of Bray, Origin of, 209
  Victory of the Cid, 51
  Vincennes, Castle of,
  Virginia Water, Boat-house at, 385
  Visit to Arqua, Recent, 3
  Voltaire and the King of Prussia, 240
  Vote for L1,000, 336

  Waldbach, Epitaph at, 220
  Wales, South, Travelling Notes in, 5-61-152-310-414
  Walker, Wonderful Robert, 73
  Walsingham, Lady of, 386
  War, by Gascoigne, 104
  Warriston, Laird of, murdered by his Wife, 220
  Watchmaker, Epitaph on, 224
  Water-King's Bride, the, 51
  Waterloo--Forget-me-not, 432
  Waterloo Sword, 432
  Watts, Alaric A., his Autograph, 264
  Waves, Deceptive Appearance of, 294
  Weather Glasses, Absurdity of, 295
  Weather at Paris, 263
  Weber and Der Frieschuetz, 137
  Welsh Pedigree, 272
  Wendover, Ancient Borough of, 292
  Wheatley, Mayor of Coventry, 379
  White-hart Silver, Origin of, 154
  Whitsuntide in Gloucester, 154
  Why and Because, the Plain, 23-105-173-261-361
  Wills of Shakspeare, Bonaparte, and Milton, 402
  Wilson's Ornithology, 387-
    Professor, his Autograph, 145
  Window the cause of a War, 15
  Windsor Castle, 273
  Windsor Castle, Tapestry, 387
    St. George's Chapel at, 305
    Princess Elizabeth's Cottage at, 97
  Wish, the Last, 68
  Wit and Jokes, 16
    Lines on, 152-284
    in Season, 249
  Witenagemotes, 272
  Wolsey, Cardinal, 336-420
  Woman, Compliment to, 51
  Word, a puzzling one, 245
  Wordsworth, W., his Autograph, 145
  Worse and Worse, 160
  Wrington, the Birthplace of Locke, 289
  Writing Ink, 182-246
  Wye, Banks of the, 202

  Yes, we shall meet again, 68

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGRAVINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_PORTRAIT OF THE LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR,_

ENGRAVED ON STEEL.

  Petrarch's House, at Arqua.
  Infantry at Mess.
  A Divided Duty.
  Picking your Way.
  Palmam Qui Meruit Ferat.
  Chichester Cross.
  Castle of Vincennes.
  Auberge on the Grimsel.
  Christ Church, Doncaster.
  Strand Cross, Covent Garden, &c. 1547.
  Strand from Arundel House, 1700.
  Princess Elizabeth's Cottage, Windsor.
  Byron's Palace at Venice.
  Mount St. Michael, Normandy.
  Flint Castle.
  Autographs.
  Holyrood, Ancient Palace of.
  Cowley's House at Chertsey.
  Swan River.
  Ariosto, Relics of.
  Bray Church.
  Grotto at Ascot Place.
  Kilcolman Castle.
  Corfe Castle.
  Mocha.
  Autographs.
  Windsor Castle--George the Fourth's Gateway.
  Locke's Birthplace.
  Peter the Great, Statue of.
  St. George's Chapel, Windsor.
  St. George's Hospital.
  Dramatic Annual,--Seven Cuts from.
  Old House, Southwark.
  Ampthill House.
  Boroughs--Dunwich, Sarum, Bramber.
  Boat House at Virginia Water.
  Dialling.
  Exeter Hall, Strand.
  Hermitage at Frogmore.
  Russian Burial-Ground.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror Of Literature, Amusement,
And Instruction, No. 496, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR, NO. 496 ***

***** This file should be named 13382.txt or 13382.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/8/13382/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, William Flis, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
