The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, No. 470, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction, No. 470
       Volume XVII, No. 470, Saturday, January 8, 1831

Author: Various

Release Date: September 18, 2004 [EBook #13495]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Victoria Woosley and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.











THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.


       *       *       *       *       *

VOL XVII, NO. 470.] SATURDAY, JANUARY 8, 1831. [PRICE 2d.

       *       *       *       *       *



[Illustration: CHICHESTER CROSS.]

Few places in Britain can boast of higher antiquity than the city of
Chichester. Its origin is supposed to date back beyond the invasion of
Britain by the Romans. It was destroyed towards the close of the fifth
century, by Ella, but rebuilt by his son, Cissa, the second king of
the South Saxons, who named it after himself, and made it the royal
residence and capital of his dominions.

Chichester, as may be expected, is a fertile field for antiquarian
research. Its cathedral, churches, and ecclesiastical buildings abound
with fine architecture; and its Cross is entitled to special mention.
It is thus minutely described in the _Beauties of England and Wales_:

The Cross stands in the centre of the city, at the intersection of the
four principal streets. According to the inscription upon it, this
Cross was built by Edward Story, who was translated to this see from
that of Carlisle, in 1475. It was repaired during the reign of Charles
II., and at the expense of the Duke of Richmond, in 1746; though we
are told that Bishop Story left an estate at Amberley, worth full
25_l._ per annum, to keep it in constant repair; but a few years
afterwards the mayor and corporation sold it, in order to purchase
another nearer home. The date of the erection of this structure is not
mentioned in the inscription; but, from the style and ornaments, it
must be referred to the time of Edward IV. This Cross is universally
acknowledged to be one of the most elegant buildings of the kind
existing in England. Its form is octangular, having a strong butment
at each angle, surmounted with pinnacles. On each of its faces is an
entrance through a pointed arch, ornamented with crockets and a
finial. Above this, on four of its sides, is a tablet, to commemorate
its reparation in the reign of Charles II. Above each tablet is a
dial, exhibiting the hour to each of the three principal streets; the
fourth being excluded from this advantage by standing at an angle. In
the centre is a large circular column, the basement of which forms a
seat: into this column is inserted a number of groinings, which,
spreading from the centre, form the roof beautifully moulded. The
central column appears to continue through the roof, and is supported
without by eight flying buttresses, which rest on the several corners
of the building. Till a few years since this Cross was used as a
market-place; but the increased population of the city requiring a
more extensive area for that purpose, a large and convenient
market-house was, about the year 1807, erected in the North-street; on
the completion of which, it was proposed to take down this Cross, then
considered as a nuisance. Fortunately, however, the city was exempted
from the reproach of such a proceeding by the public spirit of some of
the members of the corporation, who purchased several houses on the
north side of the Cross, in order to widen that part of the street, by
their demolition.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE TOPOGRAPHER


COUNTY COLLECTIONS.

(_For the Mirror._)


Kent.

  He that will not live long,
  Let him dwell at Murston, Tenham, or Tong.


_Queen Elizabeth's Gun at Dover._

  "O'er hill and dale I throw my ball,
  Breaker my name of mound and wall."

  Deal famed much vaunts of new turrets high,
  A place well known by Caesar's victory.

                                  Leland.

  Dover, Sandwich, and Winchelsea,
  Rumney and Rye the Five Ports be.


Hampshire--Sir Bevis of Southampton.

  Bevis conquered Ascupart
  And after slew the Boar,
  And then he crossed beyond the seas
  To combat with the Moor.


Westmoreland.

  I came to Lonsdale where I staid
  At hall, into a tavern made,
  Neat gates, white walls, nought was sparing,
  Pots brimful, no thought of caring.
  They eat, drink, laugh, are still mirth making--
  Nought they see, that's worth care taking.

                 _Drunken Barnaby's Journal._


Cheshire.

  Chester of Castria took the name,
  As if that Castria were the same.


SHROPSHIRE.

  "To all friends round the Wrekin."


LINCOLNSHIRE.--STAMFORD.

  Doctrinae studium, quod nunc viget ad vada Boum
  Tempore venture celebrabitur ad vada Saxi.
  Science that now o'er Oxford sheds her ray
  Shall bless fair Stamford at some future day.
                                         _Merlin._


STAFFORDSHIRE.

  Or Trent who like some earth-born giant spreads
  His thirsty arms along the indented meads.
                                       _Milton._

  And beauteous Trent that in himself enseams (fattens)
  Both thirty sorts of fish and thirty sundry streams.
                                       _Spenser._


BERKSHIRE.--ABINGDON.

  (_From Piers Plowman's MSS. 1400._)

  And there shall come a king and confess you religious,
  And beat you as the Bible telleth, for breaking of your rule,
  And then shall the Abbot of Abingdon and all his issue for ever
  Have a knock of a king, and incurable the wound.


WILTSHIRE.--SALISBURY CATHEDRAL,

  As many days as in one year there be,
  So many windows in this church you see,
  As many marble pillars here appear
  As there are hours throughout the fleeting year,
  As many gates as moons one here does view,
  Strange tale to tell, yet not more strange than true.

  A noble park near Sarum's stately town,
  In form a mount's clear top call'd Clarendon;
  There twenty groves, and each a mile in space,
  With grateful shades, at once protect the place.

  _Chippenham.--On a Stone._

  Hither extendeth Maud Heath's Gift,
  For where I stand is Chippenham Clift.


GLOUCESTERSHIRE.

  An owl shall build her nest upon the walls of Gloucester,
  And in her nest shall be brought forth an ass.

  The Severn sea shall discharge itself through seven mouths,
  And the river Usk shall burn seven months.
                                       _Merlin._


YORKSHIRE.

  Robin Hood in Barnesdale stood,
   An arrow to head drew he,
  "How far I can shoot," quoth he, "by the rood
    My merry men shall see."


SURREY.--ON THE MARKET HOUSE, FARNHAM.

  You who do like me, give money to end me,
  You who dislike me, give as much to mend me.
  And Mole that like a nousling mole doth make
  His way still underground till Thames he over-take.
                                      _Spenser._

  The chalky Wey that rolls a milky wave.
                                      _Pope._


SOMERSETSHIRE.

  What ear so empty is, that hath not heard the sound
  Of Tannton's fruitful Deane; not matched by any ground.
                                       _Drayton._

  "Stanton Drew,
  One mile from Pensford, and another from Chew."

  _Bristol Castle._

  The castle there and noble tower,
  Of all the towers of England is held the flower.

  _Redcliffe Church._

  Stay curious traveller, and pass not bye,
  Until this fetive (elegant) pile astound thine eye,
  That shoots aloft into the realms of day,
  The Record of the Builder's fame for aie--
  The pride of Bristowe and the Western Lande.
                                       _Chatterton._


WALES.--GLAMORGANSHIRE.

  When the hoarse waves of Severn are screaming aloud,
  And Penline's lofty castle involv'd in a cloud,
  If true, the old proverb, a shower of rain,
  Is brooding above, and will soon drench the plain.


PEMBROKESHIRE.

  Once to Rome thy steps incline.
  But visit twice St. David's shrine.

  When Percelly weareth a hat,
  All Pembrokeshire shall weet of that.


SCOTLAND.--STIRLINGSHIRE--BANNOCKBURN, 1314.

  "Maidens of England, sore may ye mourn,
  For your lemans ye've lost at Bannockburn"


ROXBURGH.

  "Some of his skill he taught to me,
  And, warrior, I could say to thee,
  The words that cleft Eildon Hills in three,
  And bridled the Tweed with a curb of stone."
                                     _Scott._


WESTERN ISLES.

  Seven years before that awful day,
    When time shall be no more,
  A watery deluge will o'ersweep
    Hibernia's mossy shore.
  The green clad Isla too shall sink,
    While with the great and good,
  Columba's happy isle shall rear
    Her towers above the flood.

This prophecy is said to be the reason why so many kings of Scotland,
Norway, and Ireland have selected Icombkill for the place of their
interment.


DUMBARTON.

  So cold the waters are of Lomond Lake,
  What once were sticks, they hardened stones will make.


PERTH.

  "Fear not till Birnam Wood
  Do come to Dunsinane"

       *       *       *       *       *



RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS


GREEK BALLOT.--VOTING AMONG THE ANCIENT GREEKS.


The manner of giving their suffrages (says Potter) was by holding up
their hands. This was the common method of voting among the citizens
in the civil government; but in some cases, particularly when they
deprived magistrates of their offices for mal-administration, they
gave their votes in private, lest the power and greatness of the
persons accused should lay a restraint upon them, and cause them to
act contrary to their judgments and inclinations.

The manner of voting privately was by casting pebbles into vessels or
urns. Before the use of pebbles, they voted with beans: the beans were
of two sorts, black and white. In the Senate of Five Hundred, when all
had done speaking, the business designed to be passed into a decree
was drawn up in writing by any of the prytanes, or other senators, and
repeated openly in the house; after which, leave being given by the
epistata, or prytanes, the senators proceeded to vote, which they did
privately, by casting beans in a vessel placed there for that purpose.
If the number of black beans was found to be the greatest, the
proposal was rejected; if white, it was enacted into a decree, then
agreed upon in the senate, and afterwards propounded to an assembly of
the people, that it might receive from them a farther ratification,
without which it could not be passed into a law, nor have any force or
obligatory power, after the end of that year, which was the time that
the senators, and almost all the other magistrates, laid down their
commissions.

In the reign of Cecrops, women were said to have been allowed voices
in the popular assembly; where Minerva contending with Neptune which
of the two should be declared Protector of Athens, and gaining the
women to her party, was reported by their voices, which were more
numerous than those of the men, to have obtained the victory.

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLARENCE AND ITS ROYAL DUKES.

_(To the Editor.)_


Clarentia, or Clarence, now Clare, a town in Suffolk, seated on a
creek of the river Stour, is of more antiquity than beauty; but has
long been celebrated for men of great fame, who have borne the titles
of earls and dukes. It has the remains of a noble castle, of great
strength and considerable extent and fortification (perhaps some of
your readers could favour you with a drawing and history of it); and
ruins of a collegiate church. It had once a monastery of canons, of
the order of St. Augustine, or of St. Benedict, founded in the year
1248, by Richard Clare, Earl of Gloucester. This house was a cell to
the Abbey of Becaherliven, in Normandy, but was made indigenous by
King Henry II., who gave it to the Abbey of St. Peter, at Westminster.
In after time, King John changed it into a college of a dean and
secular canons. At the suppression, its revenues were 324_l._ a
year.

Seated on the banks of Stour river is a priory of the Benedictine
order, translated thither from the castle, by Richard De Tonebridge,
Earl of Clare, about the year 1315. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
converted it into a collegiate church. Elizabeth, the wife of Lionell,
Duke of Clarence, was buried in the chancel of this priory, 1363; as
was also the duke.

The first duke was the third son of King Edward III. He created his
third son, Lionell of Antwerp, Duke of Clarence, in 1362. His first
wife was Elizabeth of Clare, daughter of William De Burgh, Earl of
Ulster; she died in 1363. His second wife was Violante, daughter of
the Duke of Milan. He died in Italy, 1370.

Clarencieux, the second king-at-arms, so called by Lionell, who first
held it. King Henry IV. created his second son, Thomas of Lancaster,
to the earldom of Albemarle and duchy of Clarence. He was slain in
Anjou, in 1421.

The third duke was the second son of Richard of Plantagenet, Duke of
York, George Duke of Clarence, in Suffolk. He was accused of high
treason, and was secretly suffocated in a butt of Malmsley, or sack
wine, in a place called Bowyer Tower, in the Tower of London, 1478, by
order of his brother, King Edward IV.

The fourth duke. There was an interregnum of 311 years before another
Duke of Clarence. George III. created his third son, William Henry, to
the duchy of Clarence, August 16, 1789. The only Duke of Clarence who
ever was raised to the throne is King William IV. of England.

CARACTACUS.

       *       *       *       *       *



SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


SIR WALTER SCOTT.

(_From the first of "Living Literary Characters," in the New Monthly
Magazine._)


It would be superfluous to continue the list of his prose works: they
are numerous; but they are in all people's hands, and censure or
praise would come equally late. He has triumphed over every difficulty
of subject, place, or time--exhibited characters humble and high,
cowardly and brave, selfish and generous, vulgar and polished, and is
at home in them all. I was present one evening, when Coleridge, in a
long and eloquent harangue, accused the author of Waverley of treason
against Nature, in not drawing his characters after the fashion of
Shakspeare, but in a manner of his own. This, without being meant, was
the highest praise Scott could well receive. Perhaps the finest
compliment ever paid him, was at the time of the late coronation, I
think. The streets were crowded so densely, that he could not make his
way from Charing Cross down to Rose's, in Abingdon-street, though he
elbowed ever so stoutly. He applied for help to a sergeant of the
Scotch Greys, whose regiment lined the streets. "Countryman," said the
soldier, "I am sorry I cannot help you," and made no exertion. Scott
whispered his name--the blood rushed to the soldier's brow--he raised
his bridle-hand, and exclaimed, "Then, by G-d, sir, you shall go
down--Corporal Gordon, here--see this gentleman safely to
Abingdon-street, come what will!" It is needless to say how well the
order was obeyed.

I have related how I travelled to Edinburgh to see Scott, and how
curiously my wishes were fulfilled; years rolled on, and when he came
to London to be knighted, I was not so undistinguished as to be
unknown to him by name, or to be thought unworthy of his acquaintance.
I was given to understand, from what his own Ailie Gourlay calls a
sure hand, that a call from me was expected, and that I would be well
received. I went to his lodgings, in Piccadilly, with much of the same
palpitation of heart which Boswell experienced when introduced to
Johnson. I was welcomed with both hands, and such kind, and
complimentary words, that confusion and fear alike forsook me. When I
saw him in Edinburgh, he was in the very pith and flush of life--even
in my opinion a thought more fat than bard beseems; when I looked on
him now, thirteen years had not passed over him and left no mark
behind: his hair was growing thin and grey; the stamp of years and
study was on his brow: he told me he had suffered much lately from
ill-health, and that he once doubted of recovery. His eldest son, a
tall, handsome youth--now a major in the army--was with him. From that
time, till he left London, I was frequently in his company. He spoke
of my pursuits and prospects in life with interest and with
feeling--of my little attempts in verse and prose with a knowledge
that he had read them carefully--offered to help me to such
information as I should require, and even mentioned a subject in which
he thought I could appear to advantage. "If you try your hand on a
story," he observed, "I would advise you to prepare a kind of
skeleton, and when you have pleased yourself with the line of
narrative, you may then leisurely clothe it with flesh and blood."
Some years afterwards, I reminded him of this advice. "Did you follow
it?" he inquired. "I tried," I said; "but I had not gone far on the
road till some confounded Will-o-wisp came in and dazzled my sight, so
that I deviated from the path, and never found it again."--"It is the
same way with myself," said he, smiling; "I form my plan, and then I
deviate."--"Ay, ay," I replied, "I understand--we both deviate--- but
you deviate into excellence, and I into absurdity."

I have seen many distinguished poets, Burns, Byron, Southey,
Wordsworth, Campbell, Rogers, Wilson, Crabbe, and Coleridge; but, with
the exception of Burns, Scott, for personal vigour, surpasses them
all. Burns was, indeed, a powerful man, and Wilson is celebrated for
feats of strength and agility; I think, however, the stalworth frame,
the long nervous arms, and well-knit joints of Scott, are worthy of
the best days of the Border, and would have gained him distinction at
the foray which followed the feast of spurs. On one occasion he talked
of his ancestry, Sir Thomas Lawrence, I think, was present. One of his
forefathers, if my memory is just, sided with the Parliament in the
Civil War, and the family estate suffered curtailment in consequence.
To make amends, however, his son, resolving not to commit the error of
his father, joined the Pretender, and with his brother was engaged in
that unfortunate adventure which ended in a skirmish and captivity at
Preston, in 1715. It was the fashion of those times for all persons of
the rank of gentlemen to wear scarlet waistcoats--a ball had struck
one of the brothers, and carried a part of this dress into his body;
it was also the practice to strip the captives. Thus wounded, and
nearly naked, having only a shirt on and an old sack about him, the
ancestor of the great poet was sitting along with his brother and a
hundred and fifty unfortunate gentlemen, in a granary at Preston. The
wounded man fell sick, as the story goes, and vomited the scarlet
which the ball had forced into the wound. "L----d, Wattie!" cried his
brother, "if you have got a wardrobe in your wame, I wish you would
bring me a pair of breeks, for I have meikle need of them." The wound
healed; I know not whether he was one of those fortunate men who
mastered the guard at Newgate, and escaped to the continent.

The mystery which hung so long over the authorship of the Waverley
Novels, was cleared up by a misfortune which all the world deplores,
and which would have crushed any other spirit save that of Scott. This
stroke of evil fortune did not, perhaps, come quite unexpected; it
was, however, unavoidable, and it arose from no mismanagement or
miscalculation of his own, unless I may consider--which I do not--his
embarking in the hazards of a printing-house, a piece of
miscalculation. It is said, that he received warnings: the paper of
Constable, the bookseller, or, to speak plainer, long money-bills were
much in circulation: one of them, for a large sum, made its appearance
in the Bank of Scotland, with Scott's name upon it, and a secretary
sent for Sir Walter. "Do you know," said he, "that Constable has many
such bills abroad--Sir Walter, I warn you."--"Well," answered Sir
Walter, "it is, perhaps, as you say, and I thank you; but," raising
his voice, "Archie Constable was a good friend to me when friends were
rarer than now, and I will not see him balked for the sake of a few
thousand pounds." The amount of the sum for which Scott, on the
failure of Constable, became responsible, I have heard various
accounts of--varying from fifty to seventy thousand pounds. Some
generous and wealthy person sent him a blank check, properly signed,
upon the bank, desiring him to fill in the sum, and relieve himself;
but he returned it, with proper acknowledgments. He took, as it were,
the debt upon himself, as a loan, the whole payable, with interest, in
ten years; and to work he went, with head, and heart, and hand, to
amend his broken fortunes. I had several letters from him during these
disastrous days: the language was cheerful, and there were no
allusions to what had happened. It is true, there was no occasion for
him to mention these occurrences to me: all that he said about them
was--"I miss my daughter, Mrs. Lockhart, who used to sing to me; I
have some need of her now." No general, after a bloody and disastrous
battle, ever set about preparing himself for a more successful contest
than did this distinguished man. Work succeeded work with unheard of
rapidity; the chief of which was, "The Life of Napoleon Bonaparte,"
in nine volumes--a production of singular power, and an almost perfect
work, with the exception of the parts which treat of the French
Revolution, and the captivity of the great prisoner. I had the
curiosity, on seeing one of the reviews praising Hazlitt's description
of the Battle of the Pyramid's, to turn to the account of Scott. I
need not say which was best: Scott's was like the sounding of a
trumpet. The present cheap and truly elegant edition of the works of
the author of "Waverley" has, with its deservedly unrivalled sale,
relieved the poet from his difficulties, and the cloud which hung so
long over the towers of Abbotsford has given place to sunshine.

Of Abbotsford itself, the best description ever given, at least the
briefest, was "A Romance in stone and lime." It would require a volume
to describe all the curiosities, ancient and modern, living and dead,
which are here gathered together;--I say living, because a menagerie
might be formed out of birds and beasts, sent as presents from distant
lands. A friend told me he was at Abbotsford one evening, when a
servant announced, "A present from"--I forget what chieftain in the
North.--"Bring it in," said the poet. The sound of strange feet were
soon heard, and in came two beautiful Shetland ponies, with long manes
and uncut tails, and so small that they might have been sent to
Elfland, to the Queen of the Fairies herself. One poor Scotsman, to
show his gratitude for some kindness Scott, as sheriff, had shown him,
sent two kangaroos from New Holland; and Washington Irving lately told
me, that some Spaniard or other, having caught two young wild
Andalusian boars, consulted him how he might have them sent to the
author of "The Vision of Don Roderick."

This distinguished poet and novelist is now some sixty years
old--hale, fresh, and vigorous, with his imagination as bright, and
his conceptions as clear and graphic, as ever. I have now before me a
dozen or fifteen volumes of his poetry, including his latest--"Halidon
Hill"--one of the most heroically-touching poems of modern times--and
somewhere about eighty volumes of his prose: his letters, were they
collected, would amount to fifty volumes more. Some authors, though
not in this land, have been even more prolific; but their progeny were
ill-formed at their birth, and could never walk alone; whereas the
mental offspring of our illustrious countryman came healthy and
vigorous into the world, and promise long to continue. To vary the
metaphor--the tree of some other men's fancy bears fruit at the rate
of a pint of apples to a peck of crabs; whereas the tree of the great
magician bears the sweetest fruit--large and red-cheeked--fair to look
upon, and right pleasant to the taste. I shall conclude with the words
of Sir Walter, which no man can contradict, and which many can attest:
"I never refused a literary person of merit such services in smoothing
his way to the public as were in my power; and I had the
advantage--rather an uncommon one with our irritable race--to enjoy
general favour, without incurring permanent ill-will, so far as is
known to me, among any of my contemporaries."

       *       *       *       *       *


A CHRISTMAS CAROL.--IN HONOUR OF MAGA. (BLACKWOOD.)

SUNG BY THE CONTRIBUTORS.


Noo--hearken till me--and I'll beat Matthews or Yates a' to sticks wi'
my impersonations.

          TICKLER.

  When Kit North is dead,
    What will Maga do, sir?
  She must go to bed,
    And like him die too, sir!
      Fal de ral, de ral,
        Iram coram dago;
      Fal de ral, de ral,
        Here's success to Maga.

         SHEPHERD.

  When death has them flat,
    I'll stitch on my weepers,
  Put crape around my bat,
    And a napkin to my peepers!
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

          NORTH.

  Your words go to my heart,
    I hear the death-owl flying,
  I feel death's fatal dart--
    By jingo, I am dying!
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

   COLONEL O'SHAUGHNESSY.

  See him, how he lies
    Flat as any flounder!
  Blow me! smoke his eyes--
    Death ne'er closed eyes sounder!
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

         DELTA.

  Yet he can't be dead,
    For he is immortal,
  And to receive his head
    Earth would not ope its portal!
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

       O'DOHERTY.

  Kit will never die;
    That I take for _sartain_!
  Death "is all my eye"--
    An't it, Betty Martin?
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

    MODERN PYTHAGOREAN.

  Suppose we feel his arm--
    Zounds' I never felt a
  Human pulse more firm:
    What's your opinion, Delta?
      Fal de ral, de ral, &c

      CHARLES LAMB.

  Kit, I hope you're well,
    Up, and join our ditty;
  To lose such a fine old fel-
    Low would be a pity!
        Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

         NORTH.

  Let's resume our booze,
    And tipple while we're able;
  I've had a bit of a snooze,
    And feel quite comfortable!
        Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

         MULLION.

  Be he who he may,
    Sultan, Czar, or Aga,
  Let him soak his clay
    To the health of Kit and Maga!
        Fal de ral, de ral, &c.

       OPIUM-EATER.

  Search all the world around,
    From Greenland to Malaga,
  And nowhere will be found
    A magazine like Maga!
        Fal de ral, de ral,
          Iram coram dago;
        Fal de ral, de ral,
          Here's success to Maga!

                        _Blackwood--Noctes._

       *       *       *       *       *



NOTES OF A READER.

KNOWLEDGE FOR THE PEOPLE; OR, THE PLAIN WHY AND BECAUSE.

PART III.--_Origins and Antiquities._


This contains the _Why and Because_ of the Curiosities of the
Calendar; the Customs and Ceremonies of Special Days; and a few of the
Origins and Antiquities of Social Life. We quote a page of articles,
perhaps, the longest in the Number:--


_Cock-fighting._

Why was throwing at cocks formerly customary on Shrove Tuesday?

Because the crowing of a cock once prevented our Saxon ancestors from
massacreing their conquerors, another part of our ancestors, the
Danes, on the morning of a Shrove Tuesday, while asleep in their beds.

This is the account generally received, although two lines in an
epigram "On a Cock at Rochester," by the witty Sir Charles Sedley,
imply that the cock suffered this annual barbarity by way of
punishment for St. Peter's crime, in denying his Lord and Master--

  "Mayst thou be punish'd for St. Peter's crime,
  And on Shove Tuesday perish in thy prime."

A writer in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ also says--"The barbarous
practice of throwing at a cock tied to a stake on Shrovetide, I think
I have read, has an allusion to the indignities offered by the Jews to
the Saviour of the World before his crucifixion."--_Ellis's Notes to
Brand._

Why was cock-fighting a popular sport in Greece?

Because of its origin from the Athenians, on the following occasion:
When Themistocles was marching his army against the Persians, he, by
the way, espying two cocks fighting, caused his army to halt, and
addressed them as follows--"Behold! these do not fight for their
household gods, for the monuments of their ancestors, nor for glory,
nor for liberty, nor for the safety of their children, but only
because the one will not give way to the other."--This so encouraged
the Grecians, that they fought strenuously, and obtained the victory
over the Persians; upon which, cock-fighting was, by a particular law,
ordered to be annually celebrated by the Athenians.

Caesar mentions the English cocks in his Commentaries; but the earliest
notice of cock-fighting in England, is by Fitzstephen the monk, who
died in 1191.


_St. George._

Why is St. George the patron saint of England?

Because, when Robert, Duke of Normandy, the son of William the
Conqueror, was fighting against the Turks, and laying siege to the
famous city of Antioch, which was expected to be relieved by the
Saracens, St. George appeared with an innumerable army, coming down
from the hills, all clad in white, with a red cross on his banner, to
reinforce the Christians. This so terrified the infidels that they
fled, and left the Christians in possession of the town.--_Butler._

Why is St. George usually painted on horseback, and tilting at a
dragon under his feet?

Because the representation is emblematical of his faith and fortitude,
by which he conquered the devil, called the dragon in the
Apocalypse.--_Butler._

Why was the Order of the Garter instituted?

Because of the victory obtained over the French at the battle of
Cressy, when Edward ordered his garter to be displayed as a signal of
battle; to commemorate which, he made a garter the principal ornament
of an order, and a symbol of the indissoluble union of the knights.
The order is under the patronage or protection of St. George, whence
he figures in its insignia. Such is the account of Camden, Fern, and
others. The common story of the order being instituted in honour of a
garter of the Countess of Salisbury, which she dropped in dancing, and
which was picked up by King Edward, has been denounced as fabulous by
our best antiquaries.


_Cock-crow._

Why was it formerly supposed that cocks crowed all Christmas-eve?

Because the weather is then usually cloudy and dark (whence "the dark
days before Christmas,") and cocks, during such weather, often crow
nearly all day and all night. Shakspeare alludes to this superstition
in Hamlet--

  Some say that even 'gainst that hallow'd season,
  At which our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
  The Bird of Dawning croweth all night long.
  The nights are wholesome, and no mildew falls;
  No planet strikes, nor spirits walk abroad:
  No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
  So gracious and so hallowed is the time.

The ancient Christians divided the night into four watches, called the
evening, midnight, and two morning cock-crowings. Their connexion with
the belief in walking spirits will be remembered--

  The cock crows, and the morn prows on,
  When 'tis decreed I must be gone."--_Butler._

                             --The tale
  Of horrid apparition, tall and ghastly,
  That walks at dead of night, or takes his stand
  O'er some new-open'd grave; and, strange to tell,
  Evanishes at crowing of the cock--_Blair._

Who can ever forget the night-watches proclaimed by the cock in that
scene in Comus, where the two brothers, in search of their sister, are
benighted in a forest?--

                         --Might we but hear
  The folded flocks, penned in their wattled cotes,
  Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops,
  Or whistle from the lodge, or village cock
  Count the night-watches to his feathery dames,
  'Twould be some solace yet, some little cheering,
  In this close dungeon of innumerous boughs.

Dr. Forster observes--"There is this remarkable circumstance about the
crowing of cocks--they seem to keep night-watches, or to have general
crowing-matches, at certain periods--as, soon after twelve, at two,
and again at day-break. These are the Alectrephones mentioned by St.
John. To us, these cock-crowings do not appear quite so regular in
their times of occurrence, though they actually observe certain
periods, when not interrupted by the changes of the weather, which
generally produce a great deal of crowing. Indeed, the song of all
birds is much influenced by the state of the air." Dr. F. also
mentions, "that cocks began to crow during the darkness of the eclipse
of the sun, Sept. 4, 1820; and it seems that _crepusculum_ (or
twilight) is the sort of light in which they crow most."


_Goes of Liquor._

Why did tavern-keepers originally call portions of liquor "goes?"

Because of the following incident, which, though unimportant in
itself, convinces us how much custom is influenced by the most
trifling occurrences:--The tavern called the Queen's Head, in
Duke's-court, Bow-street, was once kept by a facetious individual of
the name of Jupp. Two celebrated characters, Annesley Spay and Bob
Todrington, a sporting man, meeting one evening at the above place,
went to the bar, and each asked for half a quartern of spirits, with a
little cold water. In the course of time, they drank four-and-twenty,
when Spay said to the other, "Now we'll go."--"O no," replied he,
"we'll have another, and then go."--This did not satisfy the gay
fellows, and they continued drinking on till three in the morning,
when both agreed to GO; so that under the idea of going, they made a
long stay. Such was the origin of drinking, or calling for, _goes_.


Why was the celebrated cabinet council of Charles II. called the
Cabal?

Because the initials of the names of the five councillors formed that
word, thus--

  Clifford,
  Arlington,
  Buckingham
  Ashley,
  Lauderdale.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMPANION TO THE ALMANAC.


The volume for the present year appears to bring into play all the
advantages of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. The
majority of the papers are of permanent value,--as the Division of the
Day--a Table of the difference between London and Country Time--the
continuation of the "Natural History of the Weather," commenced in
last year's _Companion_--Chronological Table of Political Treaties,
from 1326--a Literary Chronology of Contemporaneous Authors from the
earliest times, on the plan of last year's Regal Table--Tables for
calculating the Heights of Mountains by the Barometer--and
illustrative papers on Life Assurance, the Irish Poor, and East India
Trade.

The condensations of the official documents of the year follow; and
from these we select two or three examples:


_Bankruptcy Analysis, from November 1, 1829, to November 1, 1830._

Agricultural Implement Maker, 1; Anchorsmiths, 3; Apothecaries, 7;
Auctioneers, 10; Bakers, 15; Bankers, 3; Barge-master, 1;
Basket-maker, 1; Blacksmiths, 2; Bleacher, 1; Boarding-house Keepers,
9; Boarding-school Keeper, 1; Boat-builder, 1; Bombasin Manufacturer,
1; Bone Merchant, 1; Bookbinders, 3; Booksellers, 20; Boot and
Shoemakers, 14; Brassfounders, 4; Brewers, 17; Bricklayers, 5;
Brickmakers, 4; Brokers, 10; Brush Manufacturer, 1; Builders, 38;
Butchers, 8; Cabinet Makers, 9; Calico Printers, 3; Canvass
Manufacturer, 1; Cap Manufacturer, 1; Carpenters, 12; Carpet
Manufacturer, 1; Carriers, 4; Carvers and Gilders, 2; Cattle Dealers,
13; Cement Maker, 1; Cheesemongers, 12; China Dealers, 2; Chemists and
Druggists, 16; Clothes' Salesman 1; Clothiers, 9; Cloth Merchants, 8;
Coach Builders, 10; Coach Proprietors, 9; Coal Merchants, 28;
Coffeehouse Keeper, 1; Colour Maker, 1; Commission Agents, 7;
Confectioners, 3; Cook, 1; Cork Merchants, 2; Corn Merchants, 36;
Cotton Manufacturers, 16; Curriers, 8; Cutlers, 3; Dairyman, 1;
Dealers, 20; Drapers, 35; Drysalter, 1; Dyers, 12; Earthenware
Manufacturers, 4; Edge-tool Maker, 1; Engineers, 5; Factors, 4;
Farmers, 15; Farrier, 1; Feather Merchants, 3; Fellmongers, 2;
Fishmongers, 2: Flannel Manufacturers, 2; Flax-dressers, &c., 2; Fruit
Salesman 1; Furriers, 3; Gardener, 1; Gingham Manufacturers, 2; Glass
Cutters, 2; Glass Dealers, 3; Glove Manufacturers, 2; Goldsmiths, 2;
Grazier, 1; Grocers, 98; Gunmakers, 4; Haberdashers, 4; Hardwareman,
1; Hat Manufacturers, 9; Hop Merchants, 2; Horse Dealers, 10; Hosiers,
9; Innkeepers, 40; Ironfounders, 5; Iron Masters, 4; Iron Merchants,
4; Ironmongers, 19; Jewellers, 7; Joiners, 7; Lace Dealer, 1; Lace
Manufacturers, 3; Lapidary 1; Leather Cutters, 2; Leather Dressers, 2;
Lime Burners, 5; Linendrapers, 62; Linen Manufacturers, 2; Livery
Stable Keepers, 9; Looking Glass Manufacturer, 1; Machine Makers, 2;
Maltsters, 9; Manchester Warehousemen, 2; Manufacturers, 10;
Manufacturing Chemist, 1; Master Mariners, 10; Mast Maker, 1; Mattress
Maker, 1; Mealman, 1; Mercers, 16; Merchants, 71; Millers, 22;
Milliners, 7; Miner, 1; Money Scriveners, 21; MusicSellers, 5;
Nurserymen, 4; Oil and Colourman, 8; Painters, 6; Paper Hanger, 1;
Paper Manufacturers, 8; Pawnbrokers, 2; Perfumers, 4; Picture Dealers,
3; Pill Box Maker, 1; Plasterer, 1; Plumbers, 12; Porter Dealers, 2;
Potter, 1; Poulterer, 1; Printers, 4; Provision Brokers, 2; Ribbon
Manufacturers, 6; Rope Manufacturer, 1; Sack Maker, 1; Saddlers, 6;
Sail Cloth Makers, 2; Sail Makers, 4; Salesmen, 3; Scavenger, 1;
Schoolmasters, 6; Seedsmen, 2; Ship Chandlers, 3; Ship Owners, 5;
Shipwrights, 8; Shopkeepers, 11; Silk Manufacturers, 6; Silk
Throwsters, 2; Silversmiths, 2; Slate Merchants, 2; Smiths, 2; Soap
Maker, 1; Stationers, 7; Statuaries, 2; Steam Boiler Manufacturers, 2;
Stock Brokers, 2; Stocking Manufacturer, 1; Stonemasons, 8; Stuff
Merchants, 7; Sugar Refiner, 1; Surgeons, 13; Surveyor, 1; Tailors,
25; Tallow Chandler, 1; Tanners, 7; Tavern Keepers, 3; Timber
Merchants, 18; Tinmen, 3; Tobacconists, 4; Toymen, 3; Turners, 2;
Umbrella Manufacturer, 1; Underwriter, 1; Upholsterers, 16; Veneer
Cutter, 1; Victuallers, 88; Warehousemen, 15; Watch and Clock Makers,
6; Wax Chandler 1; Wheelwright, 1; White Lead Manufacturer, 1;
Whitesmith, 1; Whitster, 1; Wine and Spirit Merchants, 50; Woollen
Drapers, 18; Woolstaplers, 5; Worsted Manufacturers, 6.--Total, 1467.

This is but a gloomy page in the commercial annals.


_Duties on Soap and Candles._

The amount of the duty on Candles has been, for the year ending 5th of
Jan. 1826, 491,236_l._; 1827, 471,994_l._; 1828, 492,622_l._; 1829,
503,779_l._; 1830, 495,138_l._

The rate of duty on the above articles is--On hard soap, 3d. per lb.;
soft soap, 13/4d.; candles, tallow, 1d. per lb.; wax and spermaceti,
31/2d. These duties are payable by law one week after the accounts are
made up; but as the accounts for the country include the operations of
six or seven weeks alternately, the period allowed for payment depends
upon the locality of the traders, as those resident where the
collector attends latest upon the round have a proportionally longer
credit; the time allowed for payment may be stated generally at from
fourteen to twenty-eight days. Within the limits of the chief office
the duties on candles are paid weekly; but those on soap have, by
custom, been extended to fourteen days after the account has been made
up.


_Duties on Newspapers._

Amount of Stamp Duties on Newspapers and Advertisements in England and
Scotland, during the five years ending January 5, 1830:

_Year_       |      NEWSPAPERS.     |     ADVERTISEMENTS.   |
_ending_     +-----------+----------+-----------------------+
_Jan. 5.     |  England  | Scotland |  England. | Scotland. |
             |     L.    |    L.    |     L.    |    L.     |
1826         |  425,154  |  24,419  |  144,751  |  18,708   |
1827         |  429,662  |  22,013  |  135,687  |  17,779   |
1828         |  428,629  |  29,929  |  133,978  |  18,400   |
1829         |  439,798  |  33,556  |  136,368  |  18,939   |
1830         |  438,667  |  42,301  |  136,052  |  17,592   |

In Ireland the total number of Newspaper Stamps issued has been, in
the years ending 5th Jan. 1827, 3,473,014; 1828, 3,545,846; 1829,
3,790,272; and 1830, 3,953,550.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE SELECTOR;

AND

LITERARY NOTICES OF

_NEW WORKS_.


MOORE'S LIFE OF BYRON. VOL. II.


It is our intention to condense a sheet of extracts from the above
volume, upon the plan adopted by us on the appearance of the previous
portion of the work. Our publishing arrangements will not, however,
advantageously allow the appearance of this sheet until next Saturday
week. In the meantime, a few extracts, _per se_, may gratify the
curiosity of the reader, and not interfere with the interest of our
proposed Supplement.


_Extracts from Lord Byron's Journal._

"Diodati, near Geneva, Sept. 19th, 1816.

"Rose at five. Crossed the mountains to Montbovon on horseback, and on
mules, and, by dint of scrambling, on foot also; the whole route
beautiful as a dream, and now to me almost as indistinct. I am so
tired;--for, though healthy, I have not the strength I possessed but a
few years ago. At Montbovon we breakfasted; afterwards, on a steep
ascent, dismounted; tumbled down; cut a finger open; the baggage also
got loose and fell down a ravine, till stopped by a large tree;
recovered baggage; horse tired and drooping; mounted mule. At the
approach of the summit of Dent Jument[1] dismounted again with
Hobhouse and all the party. Arrived at a lake in the very bosom of the
mountains; left our quadrupeds with a shepherd, and ascended farther;
came to some snow in patches, upon which my forehead's perspiration
fell like rain, making the same dints as in a sieve; the chill of the
wind and the snow turned me giddy, but I scrambled on and upwards.
Hobhouse went to the highest pinnacle; I did not, but paused within a
few yards (at an opening of the cliff.) In coming down, the guide
tumbled three times; I fell a laughing, and tumbled too--the descent
luckily soft, though steep and slippery; Hobhouse also fell, but
nobody hurt. The whole of the mountains superb. A shepherd on a very
steep and high cliff playing upon his _pipe_; very different from
_Arcadia_, where I saw the pastors with a long musket instead of a
crook, and pistols in their girdles. Our Swiss shepherd's pipe was
sweet, and his tune agreeable. I saw a cow strayed; am told that they
often break their necks on and over the crags. Descended to Montbovon;
pretty scraggy village, with a wild river and a wooden bridge.
Hobhouse went to fish--caught one. Our carriage not come; our horses,
mules, &c. knocked up; ourselves fatigued.

    [1] Dent de Jaman.

"The view from the highest points of to-day's journey comprised on one
side the greatest part of Lake Leman; on the other, the valleys and
mountain of the Canton of Fribourg, and an immense plain, with the
Lakes of Neuchatel and Morat, and all which the borders of the Lake of
Geneva inherit; we had both sides of the Jura before us in one point
of view, with Alps in plenty. In passing a ravine, the guide
recommended strenuously a quickening of pace, as the stones fall with
great rapidity and occasional damage; the advice is excellent, but,
like most good advice, impracticable, the road being so rough that
neither mules, nor mankind, nor horses, can make any violent progress.
Passed without fractures or menace thereof.

"The music of the cows' bells (for their wealth, like the patriarchs',
is cattle,) in the pastures, which reach to a height far above any
mountains in Britain, and the shepherds shouting to us from crag to
crag, and playing on their reeds where the steeps appeared almost
inaccessible, with the surrounding scenery, realized all that I have
ever heard or imagined of a pastoral existence;--much more so than
Greece or Asia Minor, for there we are a little too much of the sabre
and musket order--and if there is a crook in one hand, you are sure to
see a gun in the other;--but this was pure and unmixed--solitary,
savage, and patriarchal. As we went, they played the 'Ranz des Vaches'
and other airs by way of farewell. I have lately repeopled my mind
with nature.

"Sept. 20th.

"Up at six; off at eight. The whole of this day's journey at an
average of between from 2,700 to 3,000 feet above the level of the
sea. This valley, the longest, narrowest, and considered the finest of
the Alps, little traversed by travellers. Saw the bridge of La Roche.
The bed of the river very low and deep, between immense rocks, and
rapid as anger;--a man and mule said to have tumbled over without
damage. The people looked free, and happy, and _rich_ (which last
implies neither of the former;) the cows superb; a bull nearly leapt
into the char-a-banc--'agreeable companion in a post-chaise;' goats
and sheep very thriving. A mountain with enormous glaciers to the
right--the Klitzgerberg; further on, the Hockthorn--nice names--so
soft;--_Stockhorn_, I believe, very lofty and scraggy, patched with
snow only; no glaciers on it, but some good epaulettes of clouds.

"Passed the boundaries, out of Vaud and into Berne canton; French
exchanged for bad German; the district famous for cheese, liberty,
property, and no taxes. Hobhouse went to fish--caught none. Strolled
to the river--saw boy and kid--kid followed him like a dog--kid could
not get over a fence, and bleated piteously--tried myself to help kid,
but nearly overset both self and kid into the river. Arrived here
about six in the evening. Nine o'clock--going to bed; not tired
to-day, but hope to sleep, nevertheless."

"Sept. 22nd.

"Left Thoun in a boat, which carried us the length of the lake in
three hours. The lake small, but the banks fine. Rocks down to the
water's edge. Landed at Newhause--passed Interlachen--entered upon a
range of scenes beyond all description, or previous conception. Passed
a rock: inscription--two brothers--one murdered the other; just the
place for it. After a variety of windings came to an enormous rock.
Arrived at the foot of the mountain (the Jungfrau, that is, the
Maiden)--glaciers--torrents: one of these torrents _nine hundred feet_
in height of visible descent. Lodged at the curate's. Set out to see
the valley--heard an avalanche fall, like thunder--glaciers
enormous--storm came on, thunder, lightning, hail--all in perfection,
and beautiful. I was on horseback; guide wanted to carry my cane; I
was going to give it him, when I recollected that it was a
sword-stick, and I thought the lightning might be attracted towards
him; kept it myself; a good deal encumbered with it, as it was too
heavy for a whip, and the horse was stupid, and stood with every
other peal. Got in, not very wet, the cloak being stanch. Hobhouse
wet through; Hobhouse took refuge in cottage; sent man, umbrella, and
cloak, (from the curate's when I arrived) after him. Swiss curate's
house very good indeed--much better than most English vicarages. It is
immediately opposite the torrent I spoke of. The torrent is in shape
curving over the rock, like the _tail_ of a white horse streaming in
the wind, such as it might be conceived would be that of the 'pale
horse' on which Death is mounted in the Apocalypse.[2] It is neither
mist nor water, but a something between both; its immense height (nine
hundred feet) gives it a wave or curve, a spreading here, or
condensation there, wonderful and indescribable. I think, upon the
whole, that this day has been better than any of this present
excursion.

    [2] It is interesting to observe the use to which he
    afterwards converted these hasty memorandums in his sublime
    drama of  Manfred:--

      It is not noon--the sunbow's rays still arch
      The torrent with the many hues of heaven,
      And roll the sheeted silver's waving column,
      O'er the crag's headlong perpendicular,
      And fling its lines of foaming light along,
      _And to and fro, like the pale courser's tail,
      The Giant steed, to be bestrode by Death,
      As told in the Apocalypse._


"Sept. 23rd.

"Before ascending the mountain, went to the torrent (seven in the
morning) again; the sun upon it, forming a _rainbow_ of the lower part
of all colours, but principally purple and gold; the bow moving as you
move; I never saw anything like this: it is only in the sunshine.
Ascended the Wengen mountain; at noon reached a valley on the summit;
left the horses, took off my coat, and went to the summit, seven
thousand feet (English feet) above the level of the _sea_, and about
five thousand above the valley we left in the morning. On one side,
our view comprised the Jungfrau, with all her glaciers; then the Dent
d'Argent, shining like truth; then the Little Giant (the Kleine
Eigher;) and the Great Giant (the Grosse Eigher,) and last, not least,
the Wetterhorn. The height of the Jungfrau is 13,000 feet above the
sea, 11,000 above the valley: she is the highest of this range. Heard
the avalanches falling every five minutes nearly. From whence we
stood, on the Wengen Alp, we had all these in view on one side; on the
other, the clouds rose from the opposite valley, curling up
perpendicular precipices like the foam of the ocean of hell, during a
spring tide--it was white and sulphury, and immeasurably deep in
appearance.[3] The side we ascended was, of course, not of so
precipitous a nature; but on arriving at the summit, we looked down
upon the other side upon a boiling sea of cloud, dashing against the
crags on which we stood (these crags on one side quite perpendicular.)
Staid a quarter of an hour--begun to descend--quite clear from cloud
on that side of the mountain. In passing the masses of snow, I made a
snowball and pelted Hobhouse with it.

    [3] Ye _avalanches_, whom a breath draws down
        In mountainous o'erwhelming, come and crush me!
        _I hear ye momently above, beneath,
        Crash with a frequent conflict_
         *       *       *       *       *
        The mists boil up around the glaciers; _clouds_
        _Rise curling_ fast beneath me, white and sulphury,
        _Like foam from the roused ocean of deep hell!_
                                               MANFRED.

    [4]          O'er the savage sea,
        The glassy ocean of the mountain ice
        We skim its rugged breakers, which put on
        The aspect of a tumbling _tempest's_ foam
        _Frozen in a moment_.
                                               MANFRED.

"Got down to our horses again; ate something; remounted; heard the
avalanches still: came to a morass; Hobhouse dismounted to get over
well; I tried to pass my horse over; the horse sunk up to the chin,
and of course he and I were in the mud together; bemired, but not
hurt; laughed, and rode on. Arrived at the Grindenwald; dined, mounted
again, and rode to the higher glacier--like _a frozen hurricane_.[4]
Starlight, beautiful, but a devil of a path! Never mind, got safe in;
a little lightning, but the whole of the day as fine in point of
weather as the day on which Paradise was made. Passed _whole woods of
withered pines, all withered_; trunks stripped and lifeless, branches
lifeless; done by a single winter."[5]


   [5]              Like these _blasted pines,
       Wrecks of a single winter, barkless, branchless_
                                               MANFRED.


_Shelley and Byron,_

It appears, first met at Geneva:--

There was no want of disposition towards acquaintance on either side,
and an intimacy almost immediately sprung up between them. Among the
tastes common to both, that for boating was not the least strong; and
in this beautiful region they had more than ordinary temptations to
indulge in it. Every evening, during their residence under the same
roof at Secheron, they embarked, accompanied by the ladies and
Polidori, on the Lake; and to the feelings and fancies inspired by
these excursions, which were not unfrequently prolonged into the hour
of moonlight, we are indebted for some of those enchanting stanzas[6]
in which the poet has given way to his passionate love of Nature so
fervidly.

    [6] Childe Harold, Canto 3.

  "There breathes a living fragrance from the shore
  Of flowers yet fresh with childhood; on the ear
  Drips the light drop of the suspended oar.
         *       *       *       *       *
  At intervals, some bird from out the brakes
  Starts into voice a moment, then is still
  There seems a floating whisper on the hill,
  But that is fancy,--for the starlight dews
  All silently their tears of love instil,
  Weeping themselves away."

A person who was of these parties has thus described to me one of
their evenings. 'When the _bise_ or northeast wind blows, the waters
of the Lake are driven towards the town, and, with the stream of the
Rhone, which sets strongly in the same direction, combine to make a
very rapid current towards the harbour. Carelessly, one evening, we
had yielded to its course, till we found ourselves almost driven on
the piles; and it required all our rowers' strength to master the
tide. The waves were high and inspiriting,--we were all animated by
our contest with the elements. 'I will sing you an Albanian song,'
cried Lord Byron; 'now be sentimental, and give me all your
attention.' It was a strange, wild howl that he gave forth; but such
as, he declared, was an exact imitation of the savage Albanian mode,
laughing, the while, at our disappointment, who had expected a wild
Eastern melody.

Sometimes the party landed, for a walk upon the shore, and, on such
occasions, Lord Byron would loiter behind the rest, lazily trailing
his sword-stick along, and moulding, as he went, his thronging
thoughts into shape. Often too, when in the boat, he would lean
abstractedly over he side, and surrender himself up, in silence, to
the same absorbing task.

The conversation of Mr. Shelley, from the extent of his poetic reading
and the strange, mystic speculations into which his system of
philosophy led him, was of a nature strongly to arrest and interest
the attention of Lord Byron, and to turn him away from worldly
associations and topics into more abstract and untrodden ways of
thought. As far as contrast, indeed, is an enlivening ingredient of
such intercourse, it would be difficult to find two persons more
formed to whet each other's faculties by discussion, as on few points
of common interest between them did their opinions agree; and that
this difference had its root deep in the conformation of their
respective minds needs but a glance through the rich, glittering
labyrinth of Mr. Shelley's pages to assure us.


_Letter of Lord to Lady Byron._

"I have to acknowledge the receipt of 'Ada's hair,' which is very soft
and pretty, and nearly as dark already as mine was at twelve years
old, if I may judge from what I recollect of some in Augusta's
possession, taken at that age. But it don't curl--perhaps from its
being let grow. I also thank you for the inscription of the date and
name, and I will tell you why;--I believe that they are the only two
or three words of your hand-writing in my possession. For your letters
I returned, and except the two words, or rather the one word,
'household,' written twice in an old account book, I have no other. I
burnt your last note, for two reasons:--firstly, it was written in a
style not very agreeable; and, secondly, I wish to take your word
without documents, which are the worldly resources of suspicious
people. I suppose that this note will reach you somewhere about Ada's
birthday--the 10th of December, I believe. She will then be six; so
that in about twelve more I shall have some chance of meeting her;
perhaps sooner, if I am obliged to go to England by business or
otherwise. Recollect, however, one thing, either in distance or
nearness;--every day which keeps us asunder should, after so long a
period, rather soften our mutual feelings, which must always have one
rallying-point as long as our child exists, which I presume we both
hope will be long after either of her parents. The time which has
elapsed since the separation has been considerably more than the whole
brief period of our union, and the not much longer one of our prior
acquaintance. We both made a bitter mistake; but now it is over, and
irrevocably so. For, at thirty-three on my part, and a few years less
on yours, though it is no very extended period of life, still it is
one when the habits and thought are generally so formed as to admit of
no modification; and as we could not agree when younger, we should
with difficulty do so now. I say all this, because I own to you, that,
notwithstanding everything, I considered our re-union as not
impossible for more than a year after the separation; but then I gave
up the hope entirely and for ever. But this very impossibility of
reunion seems to me at least a reason why, on all the few points of
discussion which can arise between us, we should preserve the
courtesies of life, and as much of its kindness as people who are
never to meet may preserve perhaps more easily than nearer
connexions. For my own part, I am violent, but not malignant; for only
fresh provocations can awaken my resentments. To you, who are colder
and more concentrated, I would just hint, that you may sometimes
mistake the depth of a cold anger for dignity, and a worse feeling for
duty. I assure you, that I bear you _now_ (whatever I may have done)
no resentment whatever. Remember, that _if you have injured me_ in
aught, this forgiveness is something; and that, if I have _injured
you_, it is something more still, if it be true as the moralists say,
that the most offending are the least forgiving. Whether the offence
has been solely on my side, or reciprocal, or on yours chiefly, I have
ceased to reflect upon any but two things,--viz. that you are the
mother of my child, and that we shall never meet again. I think if you
also consider the two corresponding points with reference to myself,
it will be better for all three."

       *       *       *       *       *



THE NATURALIST.


DANCING FISH--SEA-SERPENT, &c.


In a paper on "Oceanic Dangers," in the _United Service Journal_ is
the following:--

There is a species of grampus from two to three tons weight, and about
sixteen feet in length, that amuses itself with jumping, or rather
springing its ponderous body entirely out of the water, in a vertical
position, and falling upon its back; this effort of so large a fish is
almost incredible, and informs us how surprisingly great the power of
muscle must be in this class of animal. I have seen them spring out of
the water within ten yards of the ship's side, generally in the
evening, after having swam all the former part of the day in the
ship's _wake_, or on either quarter. When several of these fish take
it into their heads to dance a "hornpipe," as the sailors have termed
their gambols, at the distance of half a mile they, especially at or
just after sun-down, may easily be mistaken for the sharp points of
rocks sticking up out of the water, and the splashing and foam they
make and produce have the appearance of the action of the waves upon
rocks. An officer of the navy informed me, that after sunset, when
near the equator, he was not a little alarmed and surprised (because
quite unexpected) at the cry of "rocks on the starboard bow:" looking
forward through the dubious light (if the expression may be admitted,)
he indistinctly saw objects which he and all on board took to be the
pinnacles of several rocks of a black and white colour: in a short
time, however he discovered this formidable danger to be nothing more
than a company of dancing grampuses with white bellies: as one
disappeared, another rose, so that there were at least five or six
constantly above the surface!

The uncertainty attending the visual organ during the continuance of
the _aurora_ and of the _twilight_, must have been noticed by all
those person's who have frequented the ocean. Most sailors have the
power of eye-sight strengthened from constant practice, and from
having an unobstructed view so generally before them; yet I have known
an officer, who was famous for his quickness of sight, declare that in
the evening and morning he found it difficult to retain sight for more
than a second or two at a time, of a strange sail; at night, even with
an inverting glass, his practised eye could retain the object more
steadily.

The public were amused for some time, a few years ago, by the tales of
brother Jonathan respecting the huge sea-serpent. Without at all
disputing the existence of creatures of that nature in the ocean, I
have little doubt that a sight I witnessed in a voyage to the West
Indies, was precisely such as some of the Americans had construed into
a "sea-serpent a mile in length," agreeing, as it did, with one or two
of the accounts given. This was nothing more than a tribe of black
porpoises in one line, extending fully a quarter of a mile, fast
asleep! The appearance certainly was a little singular, not unlike a
raft of puncheons, or a ridge of rocks; but the moment it was seen,
some one exclaimed, (I believe the captain)--"here is a solution of
Jonathan's enigma"--and the resemblance to his "sea-serpent" was at
once striking.

Ice, sometimes, when a-wash with the surface of the sea may be
mistaken for breakers; and that which is called "black ice" has, both
by Capt. Parry and Mr. Weddell, been taken for rocks until a close
approach convinced them of the contrary; and, I dare say, others have
been in like manner deceived, especially near Newfoundland.

A _scole_ of or indeed, a single, devil fish (_Lophius_) when deep in
the water, may appear like a shoal; and I think, that of all the
various appearances of strange things seen at sea, this monstrous
animal is more likely to deceive the judgment into a belief of a
submarine danger being where none actually exists, than any other. I
have watched one of these extraordinary creatures, as it passed slowly
along, occupying a space two-thirds of the length of the ship (a
32-gun frigate;) its shape was nearly circular, of a dark green
colour, spotted with white and light green shades, like the _ray_, and
some other flat-fish.

Mr. Kriukof gave a curious description to Capt. Kotzebue of a marine
serpent which pursued him off Behring's island: it was red and
enormously long, the head resembling that of the sea-lion, at the same
time two disproportionately large eyes gave it a frightful appearance.
Mr. Kriukof's situation seems to have been almost as perilous above
the surface of the sea, as Lieutenant Hardy's Spanish diver's was,
with the _tinterero_ underneath!

In the History of Greenland, (which, by the by, may with propriety be
called Parrynese,) I think there is a well authenticated account of a
large sea-serpent seen upon the coast of that vast insular land in
Hudson's sea.

Sea-Devil.--Extract from the log-book of the ship Douglas.--"Sailed
May 3rd from Curacoa. May 6th, at three P.M. in lat. 35 long. 68.40,
made, as we supposed, a vessel bottom up, five or six miles
distant--proceeded within forty feet of the object, which appeared in
the form of a turtle--its height above water ten or twelve feet; in
length twenty-five or thirty feet, and in breadth twelve feet, with
oars or flappers, one on each side; twelve or fifteen feet in length,
one-third of the way from his tail forward, and one on each side near
his tail five feet long. The tail twenty to twenty-five feet
long,--had a large lion face with large eyes. The shell or body looked
like a clinker-built boat of twenty-five or thirty tons, bottom up,
and the seams of the laps newly paid. There were some large branches
on him. This animal was standing south-east, and in the course of
Bermuda, and his velocity about two knots per hour. A vessel running
foul of this monster might be much injured."--_New York Paper_, May 22.

Spawn of fish, minute _mollusca_, the small classes of _squilla_ and
_cancer_, are known to voyagers as causing a discolouration of the sea
in particular places. Patches and lines of these are often seen within
the tropics, of a brown colour, and sometimes of a yellow, and of a
red shade, floating upon the surface of the ocean, which, to those
unused to such sights, are considered as indications of danger
beneath. I met with two patches of this description lately in the
Torrid Zone, but the captain being familiar with such instances,
sailed through them without apprehension. The first consisted of
myriads of small orbicular _medusae_, about the size of a pea, of a
purple hue; the other patch of a reddish-brown colour, was produced by
small _mollusca_, the size of a needle, and about a _line_ in length.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE GATHERER.

    A snapper up of unconsidered trifles.
                                       SHAKSPEARE.


CURIOUS SIGN.


The following is on a violin maker's sign-board, at Limerick:--"New
Villins mad here and old ones rippard, also new heads, ribs, backs,
and bellys mad on the shortest notice. N.B. Choes mended, &c.

"Pat O'Shegnassy, painter."

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANCIENT PROPHECY.


The author of "_The Blasynge of Armes_,"[7] at the end of Dame Julian
Berners's celebrated Treatise on Hawking, Hunting, and Fishing, has
informed us that "Tharmes of the Kynge of Fraunce were certaynly sent
by an angel from heven, that is to saye, thre floures in manere of
swerdes in a feld of azure, the whyche certer armes were given to the
forsayd Kynge of Fraunce in sygne of everlastynge trowble, and that he
and his successours alway with batayle and swerdes sholde be
punysshyd."


   [7] This book was printed at St. Albans in the year 1486, and
   afterwards reprinted by Wynkyn de Worde, in 1496.

       *       *       *       *       *


BATHOS AND PATHOS.

(_To the Editor._)


Perceiving that you sometimes admit curious and eccentric epitaphs
into your very amusing and instructive periodical, if the enclosed is
worthy a place, it at least has this merit, if no other, that it is a
_literal_ copy, from a tombstone in St. Edmund's churchyard, Sarum:--

_In Memory of 3 Children of Joseph and Arabella Maton, who all died in
their Infancy, 1770._

1.

  Innocence Embellishes Divinely Compleat
  To Prescience Coegent Now Sublimely Great
  In the Benign, Perfecting, Vivifying State.

2.

  So Heavenly Guardian Occupy the Skies
  The Pre-Existent God, Omnipotent Allwise
  He can Surpassingly Immortalize thy Theme
  And Permanent thy Soul Celestial Supreme.

3.

  When Gracious Refulgence, bids the Grave Resign
  The Creators Nursing Protection be Thine
  Thus each Perspiring AEther will Joyfully Rise
  Transcendantly Good Supereminently Wise.

W.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LETTER B.

  "Or like a lamb, whose dam away is fet,
  He treble _baas_ for help, but none can get."
                                        SIDNEY.


Its pronunciation is supposed to resemble the bleating of a sheep;
upon which account the Egyptians represented the sound of this letter
by the figure of that animal. It is also one of those letters which
the eastern grammarians call _labial_, because the principal organs
employed in its pronunciation are the lips. With the ancients, B as a
numeral stood for 300. When a line was drawn above it, it stood for
3,000, and with a kind of accent below it, for 200.

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


A DOUBLE.

(_To the Editor._)


I read your story of the cherry-coloured cat. The clergyman with whom
I was educated astonished me when a child, by saying, when at his
living at ----, he preached in a cherry-coloured gown and a
_rose_-coloured wig (white.)

AN OLD ONE.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROPHECY OF LORD BYRON.


In his journal, under the date of January 13, 1821, Lord Byron writes:
"Dined--news come--the powers mean to war with the people. The
intelligence seems positive--let it be so--they will be beaten in the
end. The _King-times_ are fast finishing. There will be blood shed
like water, and tears like mist; but the people will conquer in the
end. I shall not live to see it--but I foresee it."

       *       *       *       *       *


HARDHAM'S 37


Snuff-takers generally, especially the patrons of Hardham's 37 will
read the following record of benevolence with some gratification:--"In
1772, Mr. John Hardham, a tobacconist, in London, a native of
Chichester, left by his will the interest of all his estates to the
guardians of the poor, 'to ease the inhabitants in their poor-rates
for ever.' This valuable legacy amounting to 653_l._ per annum was
subject to the life of the housekeeper of the testator, so that it was
not till 1786 that it reverted to the city."--This is even better than
the plan for snuff-takers paying off the national debt.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESTON, LANCASTER.


Preston is a market-town, borough, and parish; situated on the river
Ribble, in the hundred of Amounderness, county palatine of Lancaster.
It was incorporated by Henry II., in 1160; and the privileges and free
customs granted by this and subsequent royal grants were confirmed by
Charter of 36th Charles II. The body corporate consists of a mayor,
recorder, seven aldermen, and seventeen capital burgesses, who,
together, form the common council of the borough. The mayor, two
town-bailiffs, and two sergeants are elected annually, upon the Friday
preceding the festival of St. Wilfrid, who was formerly lord of this
town; and they are invested, on the 12th of October following, by a
jury of twenty-four guild burgesses. The members of the council, with
the exception of the mayor, retain their seats for life, or during the
pleasure of a majority, and vacancies are supplied by the remaining
members. The town sends two representatives to parliament, and affords
the nearest practical example of universal suffrage in the
kingdom--every male inhabitant, whether housekeeper or lodger, who has
resided six months in the town, and who has not, during the last
twelve months, been chargeable to any township as a pauper, having a
right to vote for two candidates at elections. This principle was
established by a decision of the House of Commons, on an appeal, in
the year 1766, and has ever since been acted upon. The burgesses are
entitled, by the charter of Henry II., to have a GUILD MERCHANT, with
the usual franchises annexed, of safe transit through the kingdom,
exemption from toll, pontage, and stallage; liberty to buy and sell
peaceably; and power to hold a guild for the renewal of freedom to the
burgesses, the confirming of by-laws, and other purposes. This
privilege is still made the occasion of great festivity. For a long
time after their first institution, the guilds were held at irregular
periods, but they have now, for more than a century, been uniformly
celebrated every twentieth year, commencing on the Monday next after
the Decollation of St. John, which generally happens in the last week
of August; the last was held in 1822, and commenced on the 22nd of
September. The amusements, which are of great variety, continue for a
fortnight; but, for civic purposes, the guild books are open for one
entire month. The corporation are obliged to hold this carnival, on
pain of forfeiting their elective franchises, and their rights as
burgesses. The _guild_ appears to be of the nature of the ancient
frank-pledge: it is of Saxon origin, and derived from the word _gile_,
signifying money, by which certain fraternities enter into an
association, and stipulate with each other to punish crimes, make
losses good, and acts of restitution proportioned to offences;--for
which purposes, they raised sums of money among themselves, forming a
common stock; they likewise endowed chantries for priests to perform
orisons for the defunct. Fraternities and guilds were, therefore, in
use, long before any formal licenses were granted to them; though, at
this day, they are a company combined together, with orders and laws
made by themselves, under sanction of royal authority. The
several trades of Preston are incorporated; twenty-five chartered
companies go in procession on the guild festival.

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


EPIGRAM.


  Bob scrubs his head, in search of wit,
  And calls his follies phrenzy fit;
  But Bob forgets, with all his wit,
  Poeta nascitur, non _fit_!

P.T.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMPLETION OF VOL. XVI.

WITH THE PRESENT NUMBER

A SUPPLEMENTARY NUMBER,

With a Portrait of the Queen, and a Memoir of her Majesty; with
Title-page, Preface, and Index to Vol. XVI.

       *       *       *       *       *

[***] Books are flocking fast around us. Among them are Mr. Boaden's
Life of Mrs. Jordan--the Romance of History--Vols. 13 and 14 of
Lardner's Cyclopaedia--Dr. Dibdin's Sunday Library--Vol 1 of the
Cabinet Library--and three other volumes of the periodical libraries.
Our preference of Moore's Byron is, we hope, borne out by its
paramount interest.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic;
and by all Newsmen and Booksellers._








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, No. 470, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, ***

***** This file should be named 13495.txt or 13495.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/9/13495/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Victoria Woosley and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
