The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 9, Saturday, December
29, 1849, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries, No. 9, Saturday, December 29, 1849
       A Medium Of Inter-Communication For Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, Etc.


Author: Various

Release Date: September 24, 2004 [EBook #13521]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 9, ***




Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team and The Internet Library of Early Journals,





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 9.] SATURDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1849 [Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       * {129}

CONTENTS

Our Progress

NOTES:--
  Sir E. Dering's Household Book, by Rev. Lambert B. Larking. 130
  Berkeley's Theory of Vision, by Rev. J.H. Todd. 131
  Bishop Barnaby. 131
  Mathematical Archaeology. 132
  Song in Style of Suckling, &c. 133
  Gothic Architecture. 134
  Dr. Burney's Musical Works, by E.F. Rimbault. 135
  Ancient Alms' Basins, by Dr. Bell. 135
  Minor Notes:--Prince Madoc--St. Barnabas--Register
    of Cromwell's Baptism--The Times--Rowland
    Monoux--Wassail Song--Portrait of Charles I.--Autograph
    Mottoes of Richard Duke of Gloucester
    and Henry Duke of Buckingham. 136
  Notes in answer to Queries:--Lord Erksine's Brooms--Scarborough
    Warning--Gray's Elegy--Coffee, the Lacedaemonian Black Broth. 138

QUERIES:--
  The Last of the Villains, by E. Smirke. 139
  The Dore of Holy Scripture. 139
  Turner's MS. History of Westminster. 140
  Talisman of Charlemagne. 140
  Dick Shore, Isle of Dogs, &c. 141
  Minor Queries:--The Strand Maypole--To Fettle--Greek
    Verse--Dr. Dee's Petition--Vondel's Lucifer--Discurs
    Modest--Ptolemy of Alexandria--Vanbrugh's
    London Improvements--Becket's Grace-Cup--Sir
    Herbert's Office-Book. 142

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted. 143
  Notices to Correspondents. 143
  Advertisements. 144

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PROGRESS

We have this week been called upon to take a step which neither our best
friends nor our own hopes could have anticipated. Having failed in our
endeavours to supply by other means the increasing demand for complete
sets of our "NOTES AND QUERIES," we have been compelled to reprint the
first four numbers.

It is with no slight feelings of pride and satisfaction that we record
the fact of a large impression of a work like the present not having
been sufficient to meet the demand,--a work devoted not to the
witcheries of poetry or to the charms of romance, but to the
illustration of matters of graver import, such as obscure points of
national history, doubtful questions of literature and bibliography, the
discussion of questionable etymologies, and the elucidation of old world
customs and observances.

What Mr. Kemble lately said so well with reference to archaeology, our
experience justifies us in applying to other literary inquiries:--

    "On every side there is evidence of a generous and earnest
    co-operation among those who have devoted themselves to special
    pursuits; and not only does this tend of itself to widen the
    general basis, but it supplies the individual thinker with an
    ever widening foundation for his own special study."

And whence arises this "earnest co-operation?" Is it too much to hope
that it springs from an increased reverence for the Truth, from an
intenser craving after a knowledge of it--whether such Truth regards an
event on which a throne depended, or the etymology of some household
word now familiar only to

    "Hard-handed men who work in Athens here?"

We feel that the kind and earnest men who honour our "NOTES AND QUERIES"
with their correspondence, hold with Bacon, that

    "Truth, which only doth judge itself, teacheth that the inquiry
    of Truth, which is the love-making or wooing of it--the
    knowledge of Truth, which is the presence of it--and the belief
    of Truth, which is the enjoying of it--is the sovereign good of
    human nature."

We believe that it is under the impulse of such feelings that they have
flocked to our columns--that the sentiment has found its echo in the
breast of the public, and hence that success which has attended our
humble efforts. The cause is so great, that we may well be pardoned if
we boast that we have had both hand and heart in it. {130}

And so, with all the earnestness and heartiness which befit this happy
season, when

  "No spirit stirs abroad;
  The nights are wholesome; when no planet strikes,
  No fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm,
  So hallow'd and so gracious is the time,"

do we greet all our friends, whether contributors or readers, with the
good old English wish,

A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR!

       *       *       *       *       *

SIR E. DERING'S HOUSEHOLD BOOK.

The muniment chests of our old established families are seldom without
their quota of "household books." Goodly collections of these often turn
up, with records of the expenditure and the "doings" of the household,
through a period of two or more centuries. These documents are of
incalculable value in giving us a complete insight into the domestic
habits of our ancestors. Many a note is _there_, well calculated to
illustrate the pages of the dramatist or the biographer, and even the
accuracy of the historian's statements may often be tested by some of
the details which find their way into these accounts; as for the more
peculiar province of the antiquary, there is always a rich store of
materials. Every change of costume is _there_; the introduction of new
commodities, new luxuries, and new fashions, the varying prices of the
passing age. Dress in all its minute details, modes of travelling,
entertainments, public and private amusements, all, with their cost, are
there: and last, though not least, touches of individual character ever
and anon present themselves with the force of undisguised and undeniable
truth. Follow the man through his pecuniary transactions with his wife
and children, his household, his tenantry, nay, with himself, and you
have more of his real character than the biographer is usually able to
furnish. In this view, a man's "household book" becomes an impartial
autobiography.

I would venture to suggest that a corner of your paper might sometimes
be profitably reserved for "notes" from these household books; there can
be little doubt that your numerous readers would soon furnish you with
abundant contributions of most interesting matter.

While suggesting the idea, there happens to lie open before me the
account-book of the first Sir Edward Dering, commencing with the day on
which he came of age, when, though his father was still living, he felt
himself an independent man.

One of his first steps, however, was to qualify this independence by
marriage. If family tradition be correct, he was as heedless and
impetuous in this the first important step of his life, as he seems to
have been in his public career. The lady was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
Nicholas Tufton, afterwards created Earl of Thanet.

In almost the first page of his account-book he enters all the charges
of this marriage, the different dresses he provided, his wedding
presents, &c. As to his bride, the first pleasing intelligence which
greeted the young knight, after passing his pledge to take her for
"richer for poorer," was, that the latter alternative was his. Sir
Nicholas had jockied the youth out of the promised "trousseau," and
handed over his daughter to Sir Edward, with nothing but a few shillings
in her purse. She came unfurnished with even decent apparel, and her new
lord had to supply her forthwith with necessary clothing. In a
subsequent page, when he comes to detail the purchases which he was, in
consequence, obliged to make for his bride, he gives full vent to his
feelings on this niggardly conduct of the father, and, in recording the
costs of his own outfit, his very first words have a smack of bitterness
in them, which is somewhat ludicrous--

  "Medio de donte leporum
  Surgit amari aliquid."

He seems to sigh over his own folly and vanity in preparing a gallant
bridal for one who met it so unbecomingly.

"1619.

"My DESPERATE quarter! the 3d quarter from Michaelmas
unto New Year's Day.

5 yards quarter of scarlett coloured satten for a
   doublett, and to line my cassocke, at 16s. per yard,  4L.  4s.
5 yards halfe of fine scarlett, at 55s. per yard, to
   make hose cassocke and cloake [sic]                  14L.
7 yards dim of blacke rich velvett, att 24s. per yard,   9L.
22 ounces of blacke galloune lace                        2L. 15s.
Taffaty to line the doublett                                 17s.
5 [sic] grosse of buttons, at 8s. the grosse             1L.  4s.
pinkinge and racing the doublett, and lininge of ye
   copell                                                     8s.
ffor embrioderinge doublett, copell, and scarfe,         2L. 10s.
5 dozen of small buttons                                      1s.  8d.
Stickinge and sowing silke                                   14s.
ffor cuttinge ye scallops                                     2s.
holland to line the hose                                      5s.  6d.
Dutch bays for the hose                                       4s.  6d.
Pocketts to ye hose                                               10d.
2 dozen of checker riband pointes                            12s.
drawinge ye peeces in ye suite and cloake                     5s.
canvas and stiffninge to ye doublett                          3s.  6d.
ffor makinge ye doublett and hose                            18s.
making ye copell                                         1L.  8s.
making ye cloake                                              9s.

Sum of this suite                                       40L.  2s."

I must not occupy more of your space this week by extending these
extracts. If likely to supply useful "notes" to your readers, they shall
have, in some future number, the remainder of the bridegroom's wardrobe.
In whatever niggardly array the bride came to her lord's arms, he, at
{131} least, was pranked and decked in all the apparel of a young
gallant, an exquisite of the first water, for this was only one of
several rich suits which he provided for his marriage outfit; and then
follows a list of costly gloves and presents, and all the lavish outlay
of this his "desperate quarter."

In some future number, too, if acceptable to your readers, you shall be
furnished with a list of other and better objects of expenditure from
this household book; for Sir Edward, albeit, as Clarendon depicts him,
the victim of his own vanity, was worthy of better fame than is yet been
his lot to acquire.

He was a most accomplished scholar and a learned antiquary. He had his
foibles, it is true, but they were redeemed by qualities of high and
enduring excellence. The eloquence of his parliamentary speeches has
elicited the admiration of Southey; to praise them therefore now were
superfluous. The noble library which he formed at Surrenden, and the
invaluable collection of charters which he amassed there, during his
unhappily brief career, testify to his ardour in literary pursuits. The
library and a large part of the MSS. are unhappily dispersed. Of the
former, all that remains to tell of what it once was, are a few
scattered notices among the family records, and the titles of books,
with their cost, as they are entered in the weekly accounts of our
"household book." Of the latter there yet remain a few thousand charters
and rolls, some of them of great interest, with exquisite seals
attached. I shall be able occasionally to send you a few "notes" on
these heads, from the "household book," and, in contemplating the
remains of this unrivalled collection of its day, I can well bespeak the
sympathy of every true-hearted "Chartist" and Bibliographer, in the
lament which has often been mine--"Quanta fuisti cum tantae sint
reliquiae!"

LAMBERT B. LARKING.

Ryarsh Vicarage, Dec. 12. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

BERKELEY'S THEORY OF VISION VINDICATED.

In reply to the query of "B.G." (p. 107. of your 7th No.), I beg to say
that Bishop Berkeley's _Theory of Vision Vindicated_ does not occur
either in the 4to. or 8vo. editions of his collected works; but there is
a copy of it in the library of Trinity College, Dublin, from which I
transcribe the full title as follows:--

    "The Theory of Vision, or Visual Language, shewing the immediate
    Presence and Providence of a Deity, vindicated and explained. By
    the author of Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher.

    "Acts, xvii. 28.

    "_In Him we live, and move, and have our being_.

    "Lond. Printed for J. Tonson in the Strand.

    "MDCCXXXIII."

Some other of the author's tracts have also been omitted in his
collected works; but, as I am now answering "a _Query_," and not making
"a _Note_," I shall reserve what I might say of them for another
opportunity. The memory of Berkeley is dear to every member of this
University; and therefore I hope you will permit me to say one word, in
defence of his character, against Dugald Stewart's charge of having been
"provoked," by Lord Shaftesbury's _Characteristics_, "to a harshness
equally unwonted and unwarranted."

Mr. Stewart can scarcely suppose to have seen the book upon which he
pronounces this most "unwarranted" criticism. The tract was not written
in reply to the _Characteristics_, but was an answer to an anonymous
letter published in the _Daily Post-Boy_ of September 9th, 1732, which
letter Berkeley has reprinted at the end of his pamphlet. The only
allusion to the writer of this letter which bears the slightest tinge of
severity occurs at the commencement of the tract. Those who will take
the trouble of perusing the anonymous letter, will see that it was
richly deserved; and I think it can scarcely, with any justice, be
censured as unbecomingly harsh, or in any degree unwarranted. The
passage is as follows:--

    [After mentioning that an ill state of health had prevented his
    noticing this letter sooner, the author adds,] "This would have
    altogether excused me from a controversy upon points either
    personal or purely speculative, or from entering the lists of
    the declaimers, whom I leave to the triumph of their own
    passions. And indeed, to one of this character, who contradicts
    himself and misrepresents me, what answer can be made more than
    to desire his readers not to take his word for what I say, but
    to use their own eyes, read, examine, and judge for themselves?
    And to their common sense I appeal."

The remainder of the tract is occupied with a philosophical discussion
of the subject of debate, in a style as cool and as free from harshness
as Dugald Stewart could desire, and containing, as far as I can see,
nothing inconsistent with the character of him, who was described by his
contemporaries as the possessor of "every virtue under heaven."

JAMES H. TODD.

Trin. Coll. Dublin, Dec. 20. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

BISHOP BARNABY.

Mr. Editor,--Allow me, in addition to the Note inserted in your 4th
Number, in answer to the Query of LEGOUR, by your correspondent (and I
believe my friend) J.G., to give the following extract from Forby's
_Vocabulary of East Anglia_:--

    "Bishop Barnabee-s. The pretty insect more generally called the
    Lady-bird, or May-bug. It is one of those highly favoured among
    God's harmless creatures which superstition protects from wanton
    injury. Some obscurity seems to hang over this popular name
    {132} of it. It has certainly no more relation to the companion
    of St. Paul than to drunken Barnaby, though some have supposed
    it has. It is sometimes called _Bishop Benebee_, which may
    possibly have been intended to mean the _blessed bee_; sometimes
    _Bishop Benetree_, of which it seems not possible to make any
    thing. The name has most probably been derived from the
    _Barn-Bishop_; whether in scorn of that silly and profane
    mockery, or in pious commemoration of it, must depend on the
    time of its adoption, before or since the Reformation; and it is
    not worth inquiring. The two words are transposed, and _bee_
    annexed as being perhaps thought more seemly in such a
    connection than fly-bug or beetle. The dignified ecclesiastics
    in ancient times wore brilliant mixtures of colours in their
    habits. Bishops had scarlet and black, as this insect has on its
    wing-covers. Some remains of the finery of the gravest
    personages still exist on our academical robes of ceremony.
    There is something inconsistent with the popish episcopal
    character in the childish rhyme with which _Bishop Barnabee_ is
    thrown up and dismissed when he happens to light on any one's
    hand. Unluckily the words are not recollected, nor at present
    recoverable; but the purport of them is to admonish him to fly
    home, and take care of his wife and children, for that his house
    in on fire. Perhaps, indeed, the rhyme has been fabricated long
    since the name by some one who did not think of such niceties."

G.A.C.


Sir,--In the explanation of the term Bishop Barnaby, given by J.G., the
prefix "Bishop" seems yet to need elucidation. Why should it not have
arisen from the insect's garb? The full dress gown of the Oxford
D.D.--scarlet with black velvet sleeves--might easily have suggested the
idea of naming the little insect "Dr. Burn bug," and the transition is
easy to "Dr. Burnabee," or "Bishop Burnaby." These little insects, in
the winter, congregate by thousands in barns for their long slumber till
the reappearance of genial weather, and it is not impossible that, from
this circumstance, the country people may have designated them "Barn
bug," or "Barn bee."

L.B.L.


Sir,--I cannot inform LEGOUR why the lady-bird (the seven-spotted,
_Coccinella Septempunctata_, is the most common) is called in some
places "Bishop Barnaby." This little insect is sometimes erroneously
accused of destroying turnips and peas in its larva state; but, in
truth, both in the larva and perfect state it feeds exclusively on
aphides. I do not know that it visits dairies, and Tusser's "Bishop that
burneth," may allude to something else; still there appears some popular
connection of the _Coccinellidae_ with _cows_ as well as burning, for in
the West Riding of Yorkshire they are called _Cush Cow Ladies_; and in
the North Riding one of the children's rhymes anent them runs:--

   "Dowdy-cow, dowdy-cow, ride away heame,
    Thy[1] house is burnt, and thy bairns are tean,
    And if thou means to save thy bairns
    Take thy wings and flee away!"

The most mischievous urchins are afraid to hurt the dowdy-cow, believing
if they did evil would inevitably befall them. It is tenderly placed on
the palm of the hand--of a girl, if possible--and the above rhyme
recited thrice, during which it usually spreads its wings, and at the
last word flies away. A collection of nursery rhymes relating to insects
would, I think, be useful.

W.G.M.J. BARKER.

[Footnote 1: _Thy_ is pronounced as _thee_.]


    [We have received many other communications respecting the
    epithet of this insect--so great a favourite with children.
    ALICUI and several other correspondents incline to L.B.L.'s
    opinion that it takes its name from a fancied resemblance of its
    bright wing-cases to the episcopal cope or chasuble. J.T.
    reminds us that St. Barnabas has been distinguished of old by
    the title of _bright_, as in the old proverbial distich intended
    to mark the day of his festival according to the Old Style (21st
    June):--

                       "Barnaby bright!
      The longest day and the shortest night."

    While F.E. furnishes us with another and happier version of the
    Norfolk popular rhyme:--

      "Bishop, Bishop Barnabee,
       Tell me when _my_ wedding be;
       If it be to-morrow day,
       Take your wings and fly away!
       _Fly to the east, fly to the west_,
       _Fly to them that I love best_!"

    The name which this pretty insect bears in the various languages
    of Europe is clearly mythic. In this, as in other cases, the
    Virgin has supplanted Freya; so that _Freyjuhaena_ and
    _Frouehenge_ have been changed into _Marienvoglein_, which
    corresponds with _Our Lady's Bird_. There, can, therefore, be
    little doubt that the esteem with which the lady-bird, or Our
    Lady's cow, is still regarded, is a relic of the ancient cult.]

       *       *       *       *       *

MATHEMATICAL ARCHAEOLOGY.

Sir,--I cannot gather from your "Notes" that scientific archaeology is
included in your plan, nor yet, on the other hand, any indications of
its exclusion. Science, however, and especially mathematical science,
has its archaeology; and many doubtful points of great importance are
amongst the "vexed questions" that can only be cleared up by
_documentary evidence_. That evidence is more likely to be found mixed
up amongst the masses of papers belonging to systematic collectors than
amongst the papers of mere mathematicians--amongst men who never destroy
a paper because they have no present use for it, or because the subject
does not come within the range of their researches, than amongst men who
value nothing but a "new theorem" or "an improved solution."

As a general rule I have always habituated myself to preserve every
scrap of paper of any remote (and indeed recent) period, that had the
appearance of being written by a literary man, whether I {133} knew the
hand, or understood the circumstance to which it referred, or not. Such
papers, whether we understand them or not, have a _possible value_ to
others; and indeed, as my collections have always been at the service of
my friends, very few indeed have been left in my hands, and those,
probably, of no material value.

I wish this system were generally adopted. Papers, occasionally of great
historical importance, and very often of archaeological interest, would
thus be preserved, and, what is more, _used_, as they would thus
generally find their way into the right hands.

There are, I fancy, few classes of papers that would be so little likely
to interest archaeologists in general, as those relating to mathematics;
and yet such are not unlikely to fall in their way, often and largely,
if they would take the trouble to secure them. I will give an example or
two, indicating the kind of papers which are desiderata to the
mathematical historian.

1. A letter from Dr. Robert Simson, the editor of Euclid and the
restorer of the Porisms, to John Nourse of the Strand, is missing from
an otherwise unbroken series, extending from 1 Jan. 1751 to near the
close of Simson's life. The missing letter, as is gathered from a
subsequent one, is Feb. 5. 1753. A mere letter of business from an
author to his publisher might not be thought of much interest; but it
need not be _here_ enforced how much of consistency and clearness is
often conferred upon a series of circumstances by matter which such a
letter might contain. This letter, too, contains a problem, the nature
of which it would be interesting to know. It would seem that the letter
passed into the hands of Dodson, editor of the _Mathematical
Repository_; but what became of Dodson's papers I could never discover.
The uses, however, to which such an unpromising series of letters have
been rendered subservient may be seen in the _Philosophical Magazine_,
under the title of "Geometry and Geometers," Nos. ii. iii. and iv. The
letters themselves are in the hands of Mr. Maynard, Earl's Court,
Leicester Square.

2. Thomas Simpson (a name venerated by every geometer) was one of the
scientific men consulted by the committee appointed to decide upon the
plans for Blackfriars Bridge, in 1759 and 1760.

    "It is probable," says Dr. Hutton, in his Life of Simpson,
    prefixed to the _Select Exercises_, 1792, "that this reference
    to him gave occasion to his turning his thoughts more seriously
    to this subject, so as to form the design of composing a regular
    treatise upon it: for his family have often informed me that he
    laboured hard upon this work for some time before his death, and
    was very anxious to have completed it, frequently remarking to
    them that this work, when published, would procure him more
    credit than any of his former publications. But he lived not to
    put the finishing hand to it. Whatever he wrote upon this
    subject probably fell, together with all his other remaining
    papers, into the hands of Major Henry Watson, of the Engineers,
    in the service of the India Company, being in all a large chest
    full of papers. This gentleman had been a pupil of Mr.
    Simpson's, and had lodged in his house. After Mr. Simpson's
    death Mr. Watson prevailed upon the widow to let him have the
    papers, promising either to give her a sum of money for them, or
    else to print and publish them for her benefit. But nothing of
    the kind was ever done; this gentleman always declaring, when
    urged on this point by myself and others, that no use could be
    made of any of the papers, owing to the very imperfect state in
    which he said they were left. _And yet he persisted in his
    refusal to give them up again._"

In 1780 Colonel Watson was recalled to India, and took out with him one
of the most remarkable English mathematicians of that day, Reuben
Burrow. This gentleman had been assistant to Dr. Maskelyne at the Royal
Observatory; and to his care was, in fact, committed the celebrated
Schehallien experiments and observations. He died in India, and, I
believe, all his papers which reached England, as well as several of his
letters, are in my possession. This, however, is no further of
consequence in the present matter, than to give authority to a remark I
am about to quote from one of his letters to his most intimate friend,
Isaac Dalby. In this he says:--"Colonel Watson has out here a work of
Simpson's on bridges, very _complete_ and _original_."

It was no doubt by his dread of the sleepless watch of Hutton, that so
unscrupulous a person as Colonel Watson is proved to be, was deterred
from publishing Simpson's work as his own.

The desideratum here is, of course, to find what became of Colonel
Watson's papers; and then to ascertain whether this and what other
writings of Simpson's are amongst them. A _really good_ work on the
mathematical theory of bridges, if such is ever to exist, has yet to be
published. It is, at the same time, very likely that his great
originality, and his wonderful sagacity in all his investigations, would
not fail him in this; and possibly a better work on the subject was
composed ninety years ago than has yet seen the light--involving,
perhaps, the germs of a totally new and more effective method of
investigation.

I have, I fear, already trespassed too far upon your space for a single
letter; and will, therefore, defer my notice of a few other desiderata
till a future day.

T.S.D.

Shooter's Hill, Dec. 15. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

SONG IN THE STYLE OF SUCKLING--THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.

The song in your second number, furnished by a correspondent, and
considered to be in the style {134} of Suckling, is of a class common
enough in the time of Charles I. George Wither, rather than Suckling, I
consider as the head of a race of poets peculiar to that age, as "Shall
I wasting in Despair" may be regarded as the type of this class of
poems. The present instance I do not think of very high merit, and
certainly not good enough for Suckling. Such as it is, however, with a
few unimportant variations, it may be found at page 101. of the 1st vol.
of _The Hive, a Collection of the most celebrated Songs_. My copy is the
2nd edit. London, 1724.

I will, with your permission, take this opportunity of setting Mr. Dyce
right with regard to a passage in the _Two Noble Kinsmen_, in which he
is only less wrong than all his predecessors. It is to be found in the
second scene of the fourth act, and is as follows:--

     "Here Love himself sits smiling:
  Just such another wanton Ganymede
  Set Jove afire with," &c.

One editor proposed to amend this by inserting the normative "he" after
"Ganymede;" and another by omitting "with" after "afire." Mr. Dyce saw
that both these must be wrong, as a comparison between two wanton
Ganymedes, one of which sat in the coutenance of Arcite, could never
have been intended;--another, something, if not Ganymede, was wanted,
and he, therefore, has this note:--"The construction and meaning are,
'With just such another _smile_ (which is understood from the preceding
'smiling') wanton Ganymede set Jove afire." When there is a choice of
nouns to make intelligible sense, how can that one be understood which
is not expressed? It _might_ be "with just such another _Love_;" but, as
I shall shortly show, no conjecture on the subject is needed. The older
editors were so fond of mending passages, that they did not take
ordinary pains to understand them; and in this instance they have been
so successful in sticking the epithet "wanton" to Ganymede, that even
Mr. Dyce, with his clear sight, did not see that the very word he wanted
was the next word before him. It puts one in mind of a man looking for
his spectacles who has them already across his nose. "Wanton" is a noun
as well as an adjective; and, to prevent it from being mistaken for an
epithet applied to Ganymede, it will in future be necessary to place
after it a _comma_, when the passage will read thus:--

     "Here Love himself sits smiling.
  Just such another wanton," (as the aforesaid smiling Love) "Ganymede
  Set Jove afire with," &c.

The third act of the same play commences thus:--

  "The duke has lost Hippolita; each took
  A several land."

Mr. Dyce suspects that for "land" we should read "laund," an old form of
lawn. "Land" being either wrong, or having a sense not understood now,
we must fall back on the general sense of the passage. When people go a
hunting, and don't keep together, it is very probable that they may take
a several "direction." Now _hand_ means "direction," as we say "to the
right" or "left hand." It is not, therefore, probable, that we should
read "a several hand?"

SAMUEL HICKSON

       *       *       *       *       *

"GOTHIC" ARCHITECTURE

It would require more space than you could allot to the subject, to
explain, at much length, "the origin, as well as the date, of the
introduction of the term '_Gothic_,' as applied to pointed styles of
ecclesiastical architecture," required by R. Vincent, of Winchester, in
your Fourth Number. There can be no doubt that the term was used at
first contemptuously, and in derision, by those who were ambitious to
imitate and revive the Grecian orders of architecture, after the revival
of classical literature. But, without citing many authorities, such as
Christopher Wren, and others, who lent their aid in depreciating the old
mediaeval style, which they termed Gothic, as synonymous with every thing
that was barbarous and rude, it may be sufficient to refer to the
celebrated Treatise of Sir Henry Wotton, entitled _The Elements of
Architecture_, 4to., printed in London so early as 1624. This work was
so popular, that it was translated into Latin, and annexed to the works
of Vitruvius, as well as to Freart's _Parallel of the Ancient
Architecture with the Modern_. Dufresnoy, also, who divided his time
between poetry and painting, and whose work on the latter art was
rendered popular in this country by Dryden's translation, uses the term
"_Gothique_" in a bad sense. But it was a strange misapplication of the
term to use it for the pointed style, in contradistinction to the
circular, formerly called Saxon, now Norman, Romanesque, &c. These
latter styles, like Lombardic, Italian, and the Byzantine, of course
belong more to the Gothic period than the light and elegant structures
of the pointed order which succeeded them. Felibien, the French author
of the _Lives of Architects_, divides Gothic architecture into two
distinct kinds--the _massive_ and the _light_; and as the latter
superseded the former, the term Gothic, which had been originally
applied to both kinds, seems to have been restricted improperly to the
latter only. As there is now, happily, no fear of the word being
understood in a bad sense, there seems to be no longer any objection to
the use of it in a good one, whatever terms may be used to discriminate
all the varieties of the style observable either at home or abroad.

J.I.

Trinity College, Oxford.

       *       *       *       *       * {135}

DR. BURNEY'S MUSICAL WORKS.

Mr. Editor,--On pp. 63. and 78. of your columns inquiry is made for
Burney's _Treatise on Music_ (not his _History_). Before correspondents
trouble you with their wants, I think they should be certain that the
books they inquire for have existence. Dr. Burney never published, or
wrote, a _Treatise on Music_. His only works on the subject (the
_General History of Music_ excepted) are the following:--

    "The Present State of Music in France and Italy. 8vo. 1771.

    "The Present State of Music in Germany, the Netherlands, and
    United Provinces. 2 vols. 8vo. 1775.

    "An Account of the Musical Performances in Westminster Abbey,
    and the Pantheon, &c. in Commemoration of Handel. 4to. 1785.

    "A Plan for the Formation of a Musical Academy, 8vo. n. d."

As your "NOTES AND QUERIES" will become a standard book of reference,
strict accuracy on all points is the grand desideratum.

EDW. F. RIMBAULT.

P.S. I might, perhaps, have included in the above list the _Life of
Metastasio_, which, although not generally classed among musical works,
forms an admirable supplement to the _General History of Music_.

E.F.R.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANCIENT INSCRIBED DISHES.

Judging from the various notices in your Nos. 3, 5, and 6, the dishes
and inscriptions mentioned therein by CLERICUS, L.S.B., &c., pp. 44. 73.
87., are likely to cause as much speculation here as they have some time
experienced on the continent. They were there principally figured and
discussed in the _Curiositaten_, a miscellaneous periodical, conducted
from about 1818 to 1825, by Vulpius, brother-in-law of Goethe, librarian
to the Grand Duke of Saxe Weimar. Herr v. Strombeck, Judge of the
Supreme Court of Appeal at Wolfenbuettel, first noticed them from a
specimen belonging to the church of a suppressed convent at Sterterheim
near Brunswick, and they were subsequently pounced upon by Joseph v.
Hammer (now v. Purgstall), the learned orientalist of Vienna, as one of
the principal proofs which he adduced in his _Mysterium Baphometis
Revelatum_ in one of the numbers of the _Fundgruben (Mines) des
Orients_, for the monstrous impieties and impurities which he, Nicolai,
and others, falsely attributed to the Templars. Comments upon these
dishes occur in other works of a recent period, but having left my
portfolio, concerning them, with other papers, on the continent, I give
these hasty notices entirely from memory. They are by no means uncommon
now in England, as the notices of your correspondents prove. A paper on
three varieties of them at Hull was read in 1829, to the Hull Literary
and Philosophical Society. In Nash's _Worcestershire_ one is depicted
full size, and a reduced copy given about this period in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_, and Nash first calls them "Offertory Dishes."
The Germans call them Taufbecken, or baptismal basins; but I believe the
English denomination more correct, as I have a distinct recollection of
seeing, in a Catholic convent at Danzig, a similar one placed on Good
Friday before the tomb of the interred image of the Saviour, for the
oblations for which it was not too large. Another of them is kept upon
the altar of Boroughbridge Church (N. Riding of Yorkshire), but sadly
worn down by scrubbing to keep it bright, and the attempt at a copy of
the Inscription in a Harrowgate Guide is felicitously ludicrous: it is
there taken as a relic of the Roman Isurium on the same spot. Three
others were observed some years ago in a neglected nook of the sacristy
of York Cathedral. At the last meeting of the Institute at Salisbury, a
number of these were exhibited in St. John's House there, but I believe
without any notice taken of them in its Proceedings; and another was
shown to the Archaeological Society, at their last Chester Congress, by
Colonel Biddulph, at Chirk Castle; when more were mentioned by the
visitors as in their possession, anxious as your correspondents to know
the import of the inscriptions. They are sometimes seen exposed in the
shops of Wardour Street, and in other curiosity shops of the metropolis.

On their sunken centres all have religious types: the most common is the
temptation of Eve; the next in frequency, the Annunciation; the Spies
sent by Joshua returning with an immense bunch of grapes suspended
betwixt them, is not unfrequent; but non-scriptural subjects, as the
Martyrdom of St. Sebastian, mentioned by L.S.B., is a variety I have not
before observed.

The inscriptions vary, and are sometimes double in two concentral rings.
The most usual is that alluded to by your correspondents, and though
obviously German, neither old nor obsolete; having been viewed even by
native decipherers, through the mist of a preconceived hypothesis, have
never yet been by them satisfactorily accounted for. It is always
repeated four times, evidently from the same slightly curved die; when,
however, the enlarged circumference of the circle required more than
this fourfold repetition to go round it, the die was set on again for as
much of a fifth impression as was necessary: this was seldom more than
four or five letters, which, as pleonastic or intercalary, are to be
carefully rejected in reading the rest; their introduction has confused
many expositors.

The readings of some of your correspondents who understand German is
pretty near the truth. {136} I have before said that the centre type of
Eve's Temptation is the most common, and to it the words especially
refer, and seem at the place of their manufacture (most probably
Nuremburg) to have been used for other centres without any regard to its
fitness. The letters, as I can safely aver from some very perfect
specimens, are

    DER SELEN INFRID WART;

in modern German "_der Seelen Infried wort_." To the German scholar the
two latter words only require explanation. _Infrid_ for Unfried,
discord, disturbance, any thing in opposition to Frieden or peace. The
Frid-stools at Beverley, Ripon, and Hexham, still bear the old theotise
stamp. _Wart_, or _ward_, may be either the past tense of _werden_, to
be (our was), or an old form of _waehren_, to endure, to last: our
English _wear_ is the same word. The sense is pretty much the same in
both readings alluding to Eve. In the first:

  (By her) the soul's disturbance came (was).

By the second:

  (Through her) the soul's disturbance continues.

I may here observe that the words ICH WART are particularly distinct on
a helmet, pictured in the Journal of the British Archaeological
Association, which the Secretary, Mr. Planche, in such matters the
highest authority, regards as a tilting helmet. It may there have been
in the original ICH WARTE, meaning I bide (my time).

But the centres and this inscription are the least difficulty. A second,
frequently met with, is by far more puzzling. I could not give your
readers any idea of it without a drawing: however it is found
imperfectly depicted on the plates I have before mentioned in Nash's
_Worcestershire_, and the _Gentleman's Magazine_, and I think I
recollect also a very rude copy in a volume of Hearne's _Miscellaneous
Works_, which I examined in the Gottingen Library, but whether belonging
to the work or a MS. addition I cannot now call to mind. The fanciful
and flowery form of its letters gives great scope to the imagination in
assigning them their particular position in the alphabet, and the
difficulty of reading them is enhanced by the doubts of German
archaeologists whether they are initials or component parts of a
sentence. Herr Joseph v. Hammer Purgstall, however, in his version
RECORD DE SCI GNSI, or in full _Recordamini de sancta Gnosi_, deduces
thence his principal proof of Gnostic heresy amongst the calumniated
Templars, in which I am sorry to say he has been too servilely followed
in England: e.g. by Mr. Godfrey Higgins, in his posthumous _Anaclypsis_
(p. 830 note), as well as by E.G. Addison, _The Temple Church_ (p. 57),
and by Mr. R.W. Billings more especially, who tacks to his account of
this building an "Essay on the symbolical Evidences of the Temple
Church, where the Templars are proved Gnostic Idolators, as alleged by
Edward Clarkson, Esq." Had the learnedly hypothetic Austrian seen the
engravings of the Crypt at Canterbury Cathedral (_Archaeologia_, viii. p.
74.), and Ledwick's remarks on it in conjunction with the carvings at
Glendalloch (_History of Ireland_, p. 174.), or those of Grymbald's
Crypt at Oxford, he might have been expected to have attributed their
monstrosities to his order, with as little hesitation and as thorough a
contempt of chronology, or proved connection, as he has the curious and
innocent sculptures of the church at Schoengrabern in Bohemia (vide
_Curiositaeten_, vol. viii. p. 501.).

WILLIAM BELL, Phil. Dr.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Prince Modoc._--At p. 57., "ANGLO-CAMBRIAN" refers to the report of the
Proceedings of the British Association at Swansea, in Aug. 1848,
extracted from the _Athenaeum_ newspaper. In the course of a discussion
which took place on Prof. Elton's address, it was observed (if I
recollect rightly) by the learned Dr. Latham, that a vocabulary of the
so-called Welsh-Indian dialect has been formed, and that it contains _no
trace_ of any Celtic root.

J.M.T.
December 10. 1849.


_St. Barnabas._--About the time of the Reformation, it was strongly
debated whether the festival days of St. Paul and St. Barnabas should be
admitted into the calendar; and, in the 2d Book of K. Edward, the
conversion of St. Paul is put down in _black_, and St. Barnabas is
_omitted altogether_! No wonder, therefore, if, in Suffolk, liberties
were taken with the name of St. Barnabas, and it was transferred to
doggerel rhyme, to be repeated by children.

J.I.


_Register of Cromwell's Baptism._--The communication of your
correspondent C.W.G. at p. 103. of your last number, induces me to offer
you the inclosed copy from the _Register_ of All Saints' Church,
Huntingdon, of the birth and baptism of Oliver Cromwell:--

    "Anno Domini 1599 Oliverus filius Roberti Cromwell generosi et
    Elisabethae huxoris ejus Natus vicesimo quinto die Aprilis et
    Baptisatus vicesimo nono ejusdem mensis."

Then follow the words "England's plague for many years," written in a
different hand.

R.O.


_The Times._--A correspondent (NASO) informs us of the following fact in
the history of this widely circulated and influential journal; namely,
that it is stated in that the paper of the 12th of March, 1788, that it
was printed "Logographically!" We wish our correspondent had furnished
us with the precise words of this very curious statement. {137}


_Roland Monoux._--I have in my possession a brass monumental plate,
said to have been taken from some church in Middlesex, and bearing
the following lines, engraved in _black letter_:--

  "Behold what droupinge Dethe maye doe, consume
      y'e corse to duste,
   What Dethe maie not shall lyue for aye, in spite of
      Dethe his luste;
   Thoughe Rouland Monoux shrowdeth here, yet
      Rouland Monoux lives,
   His helpynge hand to nedys want, a fame for ever
      geves;
   Hys worde and dede was ever one, his credyth never
      quaylde,
   His zeall' to Christ was stronge, tyll' dethe w'th latest
      panges asaylde.
   Twyse thre and one he Children had, two sones, one
      kepes his name,
   And dowghters fyve for home he carde, y't lyve in
      honest fame.
   What booteth more, as he be kynde dyd come of
      Jentyll race,
   So Rouland Monoux good Desertes this grave can
      not Deface."

I should be obliged to any of your readers for some account of this
Rouland Monoux, and when he died. I may also add; that I should be very
willing to restore the brass to its original site, did I know the spot
from whence it has been sacrilegiously torn.

M.


_Wessel Cup Hymn._--The following Wassail Song is taken from a little
chap-book printed at Manchester, called _A Selection of Christmas
Hymns_. it is obviously a corrupted version of a much older song:--

  "Here we come a wesseling,
     Among the leaves so green,
  Here we come a wandering,
     So fair to be seen.

  "_Cho._--Love and joy come to you,
     And to your wessel too,
  And God send you a happy new year,
         A new year,
  And God send you a happy new year.

  "Our wessel cup is made of the rosemary tree,
  So is your beer of the best barley.

  "We are not daily beggars,
    That beg from door to door,
  But we are neighbours' children,
    Whom you have seen before.

  "Call up the butler of this house,
     Put on his golden ring,
  Let him bring us up a glass of beer,
     And the better we shall sing.

  "We have got a little purse,
     Made of stretching leather skin,
  We want a little of your money,
     To line it well within.

  "Bring us out a table,
     And spread it with a cloth,
  Bring us out a mouldy cheese,
     And some of your Christmas loaf.

  "God bless the master of this house,
     Likewise the mistress too,
  And all the little children,
     That round the table go.

  "Good master and mistress,
     While you'r sitting by the fire,
  Pray think of us poor children,
     Who are wand'ring in the mire.

  "_Cho._--Love and joy come to you,
     And to your wessel to,
  And God send you a happy new year,
            A new year,
  And God send you a happy new year.

  Our wessel cup is made of the rosemary tree,
  So is your beer of the best barley."

It is a song of the season which well deserves to be preserved. Its
insertion will at least have that effect, and may be the means of our
discovering an earlier and purer text.

AMBROSE MERTON.


_Portrait of Charles I._--In Sir Henry Ellis's _Original Letters_, 2d
series, vol. iii. p. 254., amongst the prefatory matter to the reign of
Charles I., there is a notice of a sermon, entitled "The Subject's
Sorrow, or Lamentations upon the Death of Britaine's Josiah, King
Charles."

Sir Henry Ellis says it is expressly stated, in this Sermon, that the
King himself desired "that unto his Golden Manual might be prefixed his
representation, kneeling; contemning a temporal crown, holding our
blessed Saviour's crown of thorns, and aspiring unto an eternal crown of
happiness."

Note _b_. upon this passage is as follows:--

    "This very portrait of King Charles the First, engraved by
    Marshall, adorned the original edition of the [Greek: Eikon
    Basilikae]. 8vo. 1648. _The same portrait, as large as life, in
    oil painting, was afterwards put up in many of our churches._"

When I was a boy, such a portrait, in oil painting, hung upon the south
wall of the body of St. Michael's Church, Cambridge, between the pulpit
and a small door to the west, leading into the south aisle.

Out of the window of the chamber in which the King was kneeling was
represented a storm at sea, and the ship being driven by it upon some
rocks.

A few years ago, upon visiting Cambridge, I went purposely to St.
Michael's Church to see this picture, which had been so familiar to me
in my boyhood. The clerk told me it had been taken down, and was in the
vestry. In the vestry I found it, on its side, on the floor against the
wall. {138}

You are probably aware that this St. Michael's Church was nearly
destroyed by fire not many weeks since; that a committee is established
to arrange its restoration.

Would it not be worth while that some inquiry should be made about the
fate of this picture?

R.O.

Dec. 17. 1849.

P.S.--I may add, that there was affixed to the bottom of the frame of
the picture a board, on which was painted, in conformably large
letters--

  "LORD, remember David and all his trouble."

  _Psalm_ cxxxii. 1.

The italics in part of the Note above quoted are mine.


_Autograph Mottoes of Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Henry Duke of
Buckingham._--In the volume of the Cottonian MSS. marked Vespasian F.
XIII., at fol. 53., is a slip of parchment, upon which is written by the
hands of Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Henry Duke of Buckingham, the
following couplet:--

  "Loyaulte me lie
   Richard Gloucestre

  "Souente me souene
   Harre Bokingh'a'm."

A fac-simile is engraved in _Autographs of Royal, Noble, Learned, and
Remarkable Personages in English History_, engraved by C.J. Smith, and
edited by Mr. John Gough Nichols, 1829, 4to., where the editor suggests
that this slip of parchment was "perhaps a deceitful toy," or it may
have been attached to some present offered by the Duke of Gloucester to
his royal nephew Edward the Fifth. The meaning of Gloucester's motto is
perfectly free from misapprehension; but he asserts his fidelity to the
crown, which he soon so flagrantly outraged--"Loyalty binds me." In the
work above mentioned, the motto of Buckingham is interpreted by these
words, in modern French:--"Souvent me souviens." This does not appear to
me perfectly satisfactory; and I have to request the opinions of such as
are conversant with old manuscripts, whether the true meaning, or even
the true reading, of the Duke of Buckingham's motto has as yet been
ascertained?

H.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES IN ANSWER TO QUERIES.

_Lord Erskine's Brooms._--"G.B." informs us, that the anecdote about
Lord Erskine's brooms, and the apprehension of his servant for selling
them without a licence, will be found in his Life by Lord Campbell
(_Lives of the Chancellors_, vol. vi. p. 618.). Erskine himself attended
the sessions to plead the man's cause, and contended that the brooms
were agricultural produce, or, as he jocosely observed, "came under the
_sweeping_ clause." The _when_ is about 1807, and the _where_ an estate
in Sussex, which proved rather an unprofitable speculation to its owner,
as it produced nothing but birch trees, and those but stunted ones. To
which information "W.J." adds, that about the same period Lord Erskine
printed, for private circulation, _An Appeal in favour of the
agricultural Services of Rooks_; a production probably scarce now, but
full of humanity, and very characteristic.

_Scarborough Warning._--In a postscript to a letter written from court
on the 19th January, 1603, by Toby Matthew, Bishop of Durham, to Hutton,
Archbishop of York, I find the term _Scarborough warning_. Can any of
the correspondents of your valuable paper inform me of the origin and
prevalence of this saying? The postscript is--

    "When I was in the middest of this discourse, I received a
    message from my lord chamberlaine, that it was his majesty's
    pleasure that I should preach before him upon Sunday next; which
    _Scarborough warning_ did not perplex me, but so puzzled me, as
    no mervail if somewhat be pretermitted, which otherwise I might
    have better remembered."

Quoted in Caldwell's _Conferences_, p. 166.

W.M.C.


    [NARES tells us, that Ray, on the authority of Fuller, states
    that this saying took its origin from "Thomas Stafford, who, in
    the reign of Mary, A.D. 1557, with a small company, seized on
    Scarborough Castle (utterly destitute of provision for
    resistance), before the townsmen had the least notice of their
    approach;" but shows that it was probably much older, as, in a
    ballad written by J. Heywood on the taking of that place by
    Stafford, the following more probable origin is given to the
    proverb:--

      "This term _Scarborow warning_ grew (some say),
         By hasty hanging for rank robbery theare.
       Who that was met, but suspect in that way,
         Straight he was trust up, whatever he were."

    This implies that Scarborough imitated the Halifax gibbet law.
    Is any thing known of such a privilege being claimed or
    exercised by the men of Scarborough? We should be glad to hear
    from any local antiquary upon this point.]


_Gray's Elegy._--In answer to your correspondent, J.F.M. (p. 101.), who
asks for information respecting the competition for the best translation
of Gray's _Elegy_, in which Dr. Sparke was a candidate, I would beg to
refer him to the satirical poem attributed to Mr. T.J. Matthias,
formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, entitled _The Pursuits of
Literature_, in which a ludicrous account is given of the affair. It
does not appear who offered the prize, but Mr. Nares, the editor of _The
British Critic_, was the judge, and the place of meeting "The Musical
Room in {139} Hanover Square," which was decorated for the occasion with
appropriate scenery--at least so says _The Critic_. He thus describes
the solemnity (p. 174 8th edit. 1798):--

  "Lo, learned clerks in sable stole,
  Graceful in years, pant eager for the goal.
  Old Norbury starts, and, with the _seventh-form_ boys,
  In weeds of Greek the church-yard's peace annoys,
  With classic Weston, Charley Coote and Tew,
  In dismal dance about the mournful yew.
  But first in notes Sicilian placed on high,
  Bates sounds the soft precluding symphony;
  And in sad cadence, as the bands condense,
  The curfew tolls the knell of _parting sense_."

The distribution of prizes is thus recorded, Dr. Norbury being
apparently the "conqueror:"--

  "Nares rising paused; then gave, the contest done,
  To Weston, Taylor's Hymns and Alciphron,
  And Rochester's Address to lemans loose;
  To Tew, Parr's Sermon and the game of goose;
  To Coote the foolscap, as the best relief
  A dean could hope; last to the hoary chief
  He filled a cup; then placed on Norbury's back
  The Sunday suit of customary black.
  The gabbling ceased; with fixed and serious look
  Gray glanced from high, and owned his rival, COOK."

W.
Lincoln's Inn, Dec. 17.


_Coffee, the Lacedaemonian Black Broth._--Your correspondent "R.O."
inquires what modern author suggests the probability of coffee being the
black broth of the Lacedaemonians? The suggestion, I think, originated
with George Sandys, the translator of Ovid's _Metamorphoses_. Sandys
travelled in the Turkish empire in 1610. He first published his _Notes_
in 1615. The following is from the 6th edit. 1652, p. 52.:--

    "Although they be destitute of taverns, yet have they their
    coffa-houses, which something resemble them. Their sit they,
    chatting most of the day, and sip of a drink called coffa (of
    the berry that it is made of), in little _China_ dishes, as hot
    as they can suffer it; black as soot, and tasting not much
    unlike it (why not that black broth which was in use among the
    Lacedaemonians?) which helpeth, as they say, digestion, and
    procureth alacrity," &c.

Burton also (_Anatomy of Melancholy_) describes it as "like that black
drink which was in use among the Lacedaemonians, and perhaps the same."

E.B. PRICE.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES.

THE LAST OF THE VILLAINS.

It would be an interesting fact if we could ascertain the last bondsman
by blood--_nativus de sanguine_--who lived in this country. The
beginning of the seventeenth century is the period usually referred to
as the date of the extinction of personal villenage. In the celebrated
argument in the case of the negro Somerset (_State Trials_, vol. xx. p.
41), an instance as late as 1617-18 is cited as the latest in our law
books. (See Noy's _Reports_, p. 27.) It is probably the latest recorded
_claim_, but it is observable that the claim failed, and that the
supposed villain was adjudged to be a free man. I can supply the names
of three who were living near Brighton in the year 1617, and whose
thraldom does not appear to have been disputed. Norden, from whose
unpublished _Survey of certain Crown Manors_ I have extracted the
following notice, adverts to the fact, but seems to think that the times
were rather unfavourable to any attempt by the lord of the manor to put
his rights in force.

    "There are three bondmen of bloude belonginge unto this manor,
    never known to be anie way mannumissed, namely, Thomas Goringe,
    William and John Goringe. Thomas Goringe dwells at Amberley,
    William at Piddinghow, and John Goringe at Rottingdean. What
    goods they have the Jurie know not. All poor men. Thomas hath
    the reversion of a cotage now in the tenure of William Jefferye.
    But mee thinks this kinde of advantage is nowe out of season;
    yet, were they men of ability, they might be, upon some
    consideration, infraunchized." (_Survey of the Manor of Falmer,
    Sussex_.)

I shall be glad to know whether any more recent instance can be pointed
out.

E. SMIRKE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DORE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.

In Herbert's edition of Ames's _Typographical Antiquities_, 1785, vol.
i. p. 492., is noticed _The Dore of Holy Scripture_, 12mo., printed by
John Gowghe in 1536; and, at p. 494., a reprint of the same work is
mentioned in 1540, by the same printer, and a description of a copy
given from one then in the possession of Herbert himself. In the preface
prefixed by the printer, he calls the work "the prologue of the fyrste
translatoure of the byble out of latyn in to Englyshe;" and at the end
of the work is this note:--"Perused by doctor Taylor and doctor Barons,
Master Ceton and Master Tornor." As I am much interested in the subject
to which this publication refers, may I ask for information on three
points?--1. What evidence is there of this edition of 1536, beyond the
statement in Ames? 2. What has become of the copy of the edition of
1540, formerly belonging to Herbert? and, 3. Who are the persons who
_peruse_ and revise the latter edition? There is not copy of either
edition, as far as I can trace, in the British Museum, in the Bodleian,
or at Lambeth.

I may add to these queries the following remarks:--

1. Ames asserted that _The Dore of Holy Scripture_ was among the books
prohibited to be read {140} by the injunctions of Henry the Eighth, and
refers, as his authority, to Foxe's _Acts and Monument_, ed. 1562, p.
574. Herbert, in a note, questions the fact, and raises a doubt as to
the existence of the passage in Foxe, since it is not in the edition of
1641. I have, however, the first edition now before me of 1563 (_not_
1562), and at p. 574., among "the names of certen bokes whiche after
this injunction [namely, of 1539], or some other in the said kinges
dayes were prohybited," occurs, "Item, _the doore of holy scripture_.
made by Jhon. Gowghe."

2. This work was again printed by Crowley in 1550, 12mo., under a
different title, namely, _The Pathway to Perfect Knowledge_; and in the
preface, he falsely ascribes it to John Wycliffe, and adds, "the
original wherof is in an olde English Bible, betwixt the Olde Testament
and the Newe, which Bible remaineth now in the Kyng his Majesties
chamber." This Bible appears to be the identical manuscript copy of the
later Wycliffe version of the Scriptures, now preserved in the
University Library, Cambridge, and marked Mm 2. 15. A copy of Crowley's
edition is in the British Museum, but the orthography and language of
the tract are modernised.

F.M.
B.M., Dec. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

TURNER'S MS. HISTORY OF WESTMINSTER--CRUCIFIX OF EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.

On April 6. 1708, Henry Turner was elected, by the vestry, organist of
St. Margaret's, Westminster, in the room of the famous "Father Smith"
(Bernard Schmidt). As regards his musical capabilities, Hawkins does not
assign him a niche in his _Temple of Worthies_, although he names some
of his predecessors and successors in that office. One merit we must
accord him, that of true antiquarian love and zeal in all matters
regarding "this renowned city." "Great materials are said to have been
collected for a full description (of Westminster), by a parish-clerk of
St. Margaret's. I presume this is Henry Turner, mentioned in Widmore's
_Account of the Writers of the History of Westminster Abbey_.... His
book was only a survey of the city of Westminster, purposely omitting
the history of the (collegiate) church."--Gough, _Brit. Top._ vol. i. p.
761. Lond. 1780. "The man's natural parts were very good; he was also
very diligent in making enquiries relating to his subject, and he had
collected a great deal."--Widmore's _Acc. of Writers of the Hist. of
Westm. Abbey_, pp. 6, 7. Lond. 1751. As regards his personal history, I
alighted on some curious notes on a fly-leaf of a transcript of a
register: "Henry Turner, borne at Yearely, Derbyshire, 12. July, 1679:
married Eliz. Sabin, of Clement Danes, in St. Margrts. Westmr. Feb. 26.
1701. by Dr. Onley."

In 1697 it was discovered that some valuable MS. records belonging to
the parish, and taken out of the Tower of London, had been lost by their
keeper. This history in its time appears to have suffered the same fate.
However, there is this entry in the _Harleian MSS._ 7045. fol. 361.:
"From the learned Dr. Kennet, Dean of Peterborough's Collection. MSS.
MS. H. On Aug. 2. 1708, at Windsor, I read over the _History of the
Parish of St. Margaret's, Westminster_, drawn up in MS. by one of the
parish clerks." Some interesting extracts follow. Compare _Aysc. Add.
MSS. Brit. Mus._ 4163. fol. 5. Bishop Kennet resided in St. James's
Street, in this parish, and died there on Dec. 19. 1728. I have applied
in vain for any account of this MS. to the librarians of Windsor Castle
and Eton College.

Can any of your readers give a clue to its recovery? Are any aware that
this survey, which would be valuable now, still exists? There is an
instance, as early as the fifteenth century, of the union of the offices
of lay-clerk and organist in St. Margaret's, in the person of one
Metyngham, and H. Turner also held them at the same time; since, on July
28th, 1713, he was elected parish-clerk by the vestry, in "consideration
of the experience they had of fitness and diligence in executing the
office of deputy-clerk of this parish for several years last past;" and
he did not resign the place of organist until 2nd October, 1718.

May I make another Query?--The gold chain and crucifix, laid in the
grave of K. Edward the Confessor, were removed by Charles Taylor, and
given into the hands of King James II. On the reverse of the same cross
was pictured a Benedictine monk, in his habit, and on each side of him
these capital Roman letter,--

On the right limb thus:     and on the left thus:
           (A)                       P.
    Z.      A.     X             A.      C.
            A                        H.

_Antiq. of St. Peter's_, vol. ii. App. n. iij, Ed. 1722.

What does the inscription mean? Is the former portion to be understood
"[Greek: A. O. Zoae agion Christos]"? What is the import of the latter?

MACKENZIE WALCOTT, M.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TALISMAN OF CHARLEMAGNE.

Many years back, "Prince" Louis Napoleon was stated to be in possesion
of the talisman of Charlemagne;--"a small nut, in a gold filigree
envelopment, found round the neck of that monarch on the opening of his
tomb, and given by the town of Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle) to Buonaparte,
and by him to his favourite Hortense, _ci-de-vant_ Queen of Holland, at
whose death it descended to her son," the present President of the
French Republic. {141}

The Germans have a curious legend connected with this talisman. It was
framed by some of the magi in the train of the ambassadors of
Aaroun-al-Raschid to the mighty Emperor of the West, at the instance of
his spouse Fastrada, with the virtue that her husband should be always
fascinated towards the person or thing on which it was. The constant
love of Charles to this his spouse was the consequence; but, as it was
not taken from her finger after death, the affection of the emperor was
continued unchanging to the corpse, which he would on no account allow
to be interred, even when it became offensive. His confessor, having
some knowledge of the occult sciences, at last drew off the amulet from
the inanimate body, which was then permitted to be buried; but he
retained possession of it himself, and thence became Charles's chief
favourite and prime minister, till he had been promoted to the highest
ecclesiastical dignity, as Archbishop of Mainz and Chancellor of the
Empire. At this pitch of power, whether he thought he could rise no
higher, or scruples of conscience were awakened by the hierarchical vow,
he would hold the heathen charm no longer, and he threw it into a lake
not far from his metropolitan seat, where the town of Ingethuem now
stands. The regard and affection of the monarch were immediately
diverted from the monk, and all men, to the country surrounding the
lake; and he determined on building there a magnificent palace for his
constant residence, and robbed all the ancient royal and imperial
residences, even to the distance of Ravenna, in Italy, to adorn it. Here
he subsequently resided and died: but it seems the charm had a passive
as well as an active power; his throes of death were long and violent;
and though dissolution seemed every moment impending, still he lingered
in ceaseless agony, till the Archbishop, who was called to his bed-side
to administer the last sacred rites, perceiving the cause, caused the
lake to be dragged, and, silently restoring the talisman to the person
of the dying monarch, his struggling soul parted quietly away. The grave
was opened by the third Otto in 997, and possibly the town of Aachen may
have been thought the proper depository of the powerful drug, to be by
them surrendered to one who was believed by many, as he believed himself
to be, a second Charlemagne.

So much for the introduction to the following Queries:--1. Can any of
your readers say whether this amulet is still in possession of the
President of the French Republic? 2. If so, might not the believers in
the doctrines of Sympathy attribute the votes of the six millions who,
in Dec. 1848, voted in favour of his election, to the sympathetic
influence of his "nut in gold filigree," and be justified in looking
upon those who voted for his rivals as no true Franks? It was originally
concocted for a Frankish monarch of pure blood, and may be supposed to
exercise its potency only on those of genuine descent and untainted
lineage.

WILLIAM BELL, Phil. Dr.

       *       *       *       *       *

DICK SHORE--ISLE OF DOGS--KATHERINE PEGG.

I entirely concur in the opinion of your able correspondent, Mr. P.
Cunningham, that Pepys's _Diary_ is well deserving all the illustrative
light which may be reflected upon it from your useful pages. In
submitting the following Query, however, my object is to glean a scrap
of information on a point connected with the neglected topography of the
east end of London, taking Pepys for my text. In the _Diary_, the entry
for January 15th, 1660-61, contains this passage:--

    "We took barge and went to Blackwall, and viewed the Dock and
    the new west Dock which is newly made there, and a brave new
    merchantman which is to launched shortly, and they say to be
    called the Royal Oake. Hence we walked to _Dick Shoare_, and
    thence to the Towre, and so home."--Vol. i. p. 178. new Ed.

I shall be glad to learn from any of your readers what part of the
northern bank of the river, between Blackwall and the Tower, was called
_Dick Shore_. It is not marked on any of the old maps of London I have
been able to consult; but it was probably beyond the most easterly point
generally shown within their limits. The modern maps present no trace of
the locality in question.

The dock-yard visited by Pepys was long one of the most considerable
private ship-building establishments in England. For may years it was
conducted by Mr. Perry, and subsequently, under the firm of Wigram and
Green, the property having been purchased by the late Sir Robert Wigram,
Bart. The extensive premises are still applied to the same use; but they
have been divided to form two distinct yards, conducted by separate
firms.

The origin of the name (Isle of Dogs), given to the marshy tract of land
lying within the bold curve of the Thames between Blackwall and
Limehouse, is still undetermined. The common story is, that it receives
its name from the king's hounds having been kept there during the
residence of the royal family at Greenwich. This tradition is wholly
unsupported; nor is it very probable that the king's hounds would be
kennelled in this ungenial and inconvenient place, while they could be
kept on the Kentish side of the river, in the vicinity of Greenwich
Castle, then occupying the site of the present Observatory.

The denominations "isle" and "island" appear to have been bestowed on
many places not geographically entitled to them. The Isle of Dogs,
before the construction of the canal which now crosses its isthmus, was
in fact a peninsula. Pepys {142} spent a night in the "isle of Doggs,"
as appears by his entry for July 24th, 1665, and again, on the 31st of
the same month, he was compelled to wait in the "unlucky Isle of Doggs,
in a chill place, the morning cool and wind fresh, above two if not
three hours, to his great discontent."

To the account of Katherine Pegg, given by your correspondents, pp. 90,
91, may be added, that, besides Charles Fitz-Charles, Earl of Plymouth,
she had, by Charles II., a daughter, who died in her infancy. Mrs. Pegg
was one of the _three_ wives of Sir Edward Greene, of Sampford (not
Samford), near Thaxted, Essex, created a baronet 26th July, 1660 (within
two months of the Restoration), to whom she seems to have been not
unfitly matched; for it is recorded of him that, "by his extravagancy
and love of gambling, he entirely ruined his estate, and his large
inheritance passed from his family." He had issue two daughters, who
married.--See Burke's _Extinct Baronetage_.

I do not think that Katherine Pegg, whose son by the King was born in
1657, was "the pretty woman newly come called Pegg," saluted by Pepys,
7th May, 1668, as Mr. Cunningham surmises.

J.T. HAMMACK.

December.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_The Strand Maypole._--"E.F.R." inquires what was the ultimate fate of
the "tall Maypole" which "once o'erlooked the Strand"? It was taken down
about the year 1717, when it was found to measure a hundred feet. It was
obtained by Sir Isaac Newton, and borne on a carriage, for timber, to
Wanstead, in Essex, the seat of the Earl of Tylney, where, under the
direction of the Reverend Mr. Pound Breton, it was placed in the Park,
for the erection of a telescope, the largest then in the world,
presented by a French gentleman to the Royal Society.


_To Fettle._--What is the derivation of the verb "to fettle?" In the
North it means to amend--to repair--to put a thing, which is out of
order, into such a state as to effectuate, or to be effectual for, its
original, or a given purpose; e.g. a cart out of order is sent to the
wheelwright's to be fettled. It has been suggested that the word is a
verbalised corruption of the word "effectual." Bailey, in his
_Dictionary_, has designated it as a north country word: but it is
evident that he misunderstood its entire meaning; for he has merely "to
fettle _to_," and seems to have been ignorant of the use of the word
"fettle" as a verb active. To revert to my former example of its use--An
injured cart is fettled by the wheel-wright; the wheelwright fettles the
injured cart.

L.C.R.


_Greek Verse._--Can any of your readers inform me who is the author of
the line--

"[Greek: Pollai men thnaetois glottai, mia d' athanatoisi]?"

C.


_Dr. Dee's petition to James I._--"E.F.R." states that he has lately
discovered, in the lining of an ancient trunk, two or three curious
broadsides, one of which purports to be Dr. Dee's petition to James I.,
1604, against the report raised against him, namely, "That he is or hath
bin a Conjurer and Caller, or Invocator of Divels." He would be glad to
know whether this curious broadside has been printed in any memoir of
Dr. Dee.


_Vondel's Lucifer._--"F." desires to be informed whether the tragedy or
dramatic poem _Lucifer_, of the Dutch poet Vondel, which has been said
to bear some analogy to _Paradise Lost_, has ever been translated? and
if not, why not? The French writer, Alfred de Vigny, in _Stella_, calls
Vondel (Wundel in his spelling) "ce vieux Shakspeare de la Hollande."


_Discurs Modest._--In Bishop Andrewes' _Reply_ to the _Apology_ of
Bellarmine, chap. i. p. 7, ed. 4to. London, 1610, certain jesuits in
prison are reported to have confessed, _Rem transubstantiationis patres
ne attigisse quidem_; as authority for which is quoted _Discurs Modest_,
p. 13. From this work apparently the passage is copied by Jeremy Taylor,
_Real Presence_, sect. 12. Sec. 16; _Dissuasive_, part i. chap. 1. Sec. 5, and
part 2. book 2. sect. 3. 3: also by Cosin on _Transubstantiation_, chap.
6. Sec. 17. Can any of your readers favour me with a clue to the _Modest
Discourse_?

A.T.


_Ptolemy of Alexandria._--"QUERY" wishes to be informed what works of
Ptolemy of Alexandria are to be met with in an English translation.


_Vanbrugh's London Improvements._--In the _London Journal_ of March
16th, 1722-23, there is the following paragraph:--

    "We are informed that Sir John Vanbrugh, in his scheme for new
    paving the cities of London and Westminster, among other things,
    proposes a tax on all gentlemen's coaches, to stop all channels
    in the street, and to carry all the water off by drains and
    common sewers under ground."

Sir John Vanbrugh was chiefly known as an architect of noblemen's and
gentlemen's mansions. Can any of your readers supply me with a reference
to any detailed plan, from Sir John, for the general improvement of the
metropolis?

B.M.


_Becket's Grace-Cup._--The inscription round the neck of this so-called
cup, of which a representation is given in No. 1. of Mr. Scott's
_Antiquarian Gleanings_, is thus printed by him--GOD FERARE--: to which
he adds, in explanation, "probably the name of the goldsmith." {143} At
the foot of an earlier print of this relic, the inscription is given
thus--FERARE GOD--and till the appearance of Mr. Scott's version, I had
considered the former word as an accidental error of the engraver,
instead of FEARE; which would present a moral motto, suiting the SOBRII
ESTOTE round the lid.--As Mr. Nichols, in his recent interesting work on
_Pilgrimages to Walsingham and Canterbury_, noticing the misnomer of the
cup (p. 229, n.), indicates its date to be of "the early part of the
sixteenth century," perhaps some one of your well-informed readers could
state if any artist-goldsmith of that era, and of that name, be known.

ALICUI.


_Sir Henry Herbert's Office-Book._--I should be glad to know if any of
your readers can tell me the "whereabouts" of Sir Henry Herbert's
Office-Book, a MS. frequently referred to by Malone, Chalmers, and
Collier. Sir Henry Herbert was Master of the Revels to King James the
First, and the two succeeding kings, and the said MS. contains an
account of almost every piece exhibited at any of the theatres from
August, 1623, to the commencement of the rebellion in 1641. Malone, in
his _Historical Account of the English Stage_ (edit. Boswell, iii. 57.),
says, in a note--

    "For the use of this very curious and valuable manuscript I am
    indebted to Francis Ingram, of Ribbisford, near Bewdley, in
    Worcestershire, Esq., Deputy Remembrancer in the Court of the
    Exchequer. It has lately been found in the same old chest which
    contained the manuscript _Memoirs of Lord Herbert of Cherbury_,
    from which Mr. Walpole, about twenty years ago, printed the life
    of that nobleman, who was elder brother to Sir Henry Herbert."

In another place, Malone adds:--

    "This valuable manuscript, having lain for a considerable time
    in a damp place, is unfortunately damaged, and in a very
    mouldering condition; however, no material part of it appears to
    have perished."

Such being the case, it becomes more than ever desirable that this
interesting volume should be sought after, and the _whole_ of its
contents put on record before its total decay. Surely, if its depositary
is known, and accessible, it is well worth the attention of the
_Shakespeare Society_, or some other learned body instituted for the
preservation of documents of this nature.

A biographical account of the various persons that have held the
appointment of "Master of the Revels," with such particulars of the
stage as would necessarily fall in, would form a valuable _Prolegomena_
to the publication of Sir Henry's Office-Book. We have, it is true, much
information upon this subject, but in a very scattered form.

I have now before me a list of the "Masters of the Revells," with the
dates of their patents, which I beg to transcribe. It is of more than
ordinary value, being in the handwriting of Sir Henry Herbert himself,
and copied at the back of the worthy knight's "Petition to Charles the
Second against the Grant to Killegrew and Davenant to form Two Companies
of Players."

"_Masters of ye Revells_.

"Sir Richard Guilford    - not on record.
Sir Thomas Cawerden      - [1544] 36 Henry VIII.
Sir Thomas Beneger       - not on record.
Sir John Fortescue       - not on record.
Edmund Tilney, Esq.      - July 24 [1578] 21 Eliz.
Sir George Buck          - June 23 [1603] I Jac.
Sir John Astley          - [1612] 10 Jac. I.
Benjamin Johnson         - [1617] 15 Jac. I.
Sir Henry Herbert, and}
Simon Thelwall, Esq.  }  - Aug. 21 [1629] 5 Car. I."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos_.)

1. DR. BROOK TAYLOR'S PERSPECTIVE. 1st edit. 1715.

2. DR. AUSTIN'S CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE FIRST SIX BOOKS OF EUCLID.
(Date not known.)

3. DR. ABRAHAM ROBERTSON ON RATIO AND PROPORTION. Oxford. 1804.

4. LAWSON'S DISSERTATION ON THE ANALYSIS OF THE ANTIENTS. Edited by
Fryer, and printed in Bristol, 1809.--[The particular copy wanted is
interleaved with thick paper and MS. alterations by the Editor. It was
surreptitiously obtained from its owner; but the books of the person who
had it are dispersed.]

Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS

It will be seen by our leading article that having been unable to
procure by any other means sufficient copies of our early numbers, to
supply perfect sets to all who applied for them, we have reprinted Nos.
1. 2. 3. and 4., so that our subscribers have now an opportunity of
completing their sets.

Our correspondent who inquired respecting the _Life and Diary of Haydon
the Painter_, is informed that its publication is suspended for the
present.

We have to explain to correspondents who inquire as to the mode of
procuring "NOTES AND QUERIES," that every bookseller and newsman will
supply it _if ordered_, and that gentlemen residing in the country may
be supplied regularly with the Stamped Edition, by giving their orders
direct to the publisher, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street, accompanied
by a Post Office order for a Quarter (4s. 4d.).

A neat Case for holding Numbers of "NOTES AND QUERIES" until the
completion of each volume, is now ready, price 1s. 6d., and may be had,
by _Order_, of all Booksellers and Newsmen.

We are again compelled to omit many Notes, Queries, and Answers to
Queries, as well as Answers to Correspondents.

       *       *       *       *       * {144}

[Illustration: A pilgrim in a field.]

This day is published, price 6s.,

THE PILGRIMAGES OF WALSINGHAM and CANTERBURY: by DESIDERIUS ERASMUS.
Being his Colloquy on Pilgrimage, translated and illustrated with Notes,
by JOHN GOUGH NICHOLS, F.S.A.; together with the Colloquy on Rash Vows,
and the Characters of Archbishop Warham and Dean Collet, by the same
Author.

"This entertaining little volume will afford to many a reader not only
much information on the subject of Pilgrimages, but also numerous
illustrations of the feelings and habits of the times."--_Athenaeum._

"We can conceive no more perfect translation than Mr. Nichols has given;
most delicately does he express the quiet eloquence and quieter irony of
the original; while his Notes--which occupy about three-fourths of the
handsome volume--are full of the most curious, learned, and interesting
matter."--_Weekly News._

"In the Appendix, Mr. Nichols gives a very interesting dissertation on
pilgrimages in general, and furnishes us with much curious information
relative to Walsingham, and a judicious summary of facts and
circumstances connected with the murder of Archbishop Becket."--
_Salisbury Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE.

The Obituary of the Gentleman's Magazine is generally allowed to be one
of its most valuable features, and unremitting attention is devoted to
the task of making it as complete and comprehensive as possible. It
records the decease of all persons of station in society or of
individual merit, and biographical memoirs are given (amounting every
year to more than three hundred) of eminent characters, whether
statesmen, senators, officers in the public service, members of the
learned professions, men of science, authors, artists, &c. &c. The
Magazine for January will contain, among others, Memoirs of Her Majesty
the Queen Dowager; Sir John Dashwood King, Bart.; Sir Thomas Lethbridge,
Bart.; Rear-Adm. Sir S.J.B. Pechell, Bart.; Admiral Sir J. Hawkins
Whitshed; General Sir George Anson; General Sir John Vandeleur;
Lieut.-Col. John Browne; Charles Lyell, Esq.; John Musters, Esq.; Louis
Hayes Petit, Esq.; Wm. Cooke Taylor, L.L.D.; Mr. Kenney, the dramatist;
Charles Edw. Horn, the composer, &c. &c.

The Number for January will be embellished with two Plates of the Roman
Pavements recently found at Cirencester.

NICHOLS AND SON, 25. Parliament Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vols. I. and II. 8vo., price 28s., cloth.

THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND; from the TIME of the CONQUEST. By Edward Foss,
F.S.A.

"A work in which a subject of great historical importance is treated
with the care, diligence, and learning it deserves; in which Mr. Foss
has brought to light many points previously unknown, corrected many
errors, and shown such ample knowledge of his subject as to conduct it
successfully through all the intricacies of a difficult investigation,
and such taste and judgment as will enable him to quit, when occasion
requires, the dry details of a professional inquiry, and to impart to
his work, as he proceeds, the grace and dignity of a philosophical
history."--_Gent. Mag._

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustrated with numerous woodcuts, 8vo. 10s. 6d.

THE PRIMEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK.

By J.J.A. WORSAAE, M.R.S.A., of Copenhagen.

Translated and applied to the Illustration of similar remains in
England; by WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden
Society.

JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford, and 377. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CLERICAL LIBRARY OF THEOLOGICAL AND GENERAL LITERATURE, for Town and
Country, Clergy and Laity, and Reading Rooms, conducted by JAMES
DARLING, 22. Little Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. Annual
Subscription, one guinea or upwards, according to the number of books
taken out at one time. No entrance fee. Preparing for publication, by
subscription, A New Catalogue of the Library; Vol. I. to contain
Authors, with Biographies, and a complete Analysis of their Works; Vol.
II., A Scientific Arrangement of Subjects. To be published in 24 Monthly
Parts, super royal 8vo., at 2s. 6d. each. A Prospectus of the Library,
and Catalogue, sent free on receipt of two postage stamps.

"Such a Catalogue as Mr. Darling projects would be, if scientifically
formed, of European value."--_Christian Remembrancer_, Oct. 1849. See
also _Notes and Queries_, No. 8.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly ready, 8vo., with etched Frontispiece, by Wehnert, and Eight
Engravings,

SABRINAE COROLLA: A Volume of Classical Translations with original
Compositions contributed by Gentlemen educated at Shrewsbury School.

Among the Contributors are the Head Masters of Shrewsbury, Stamford,
Repton and Birmingham Schools; Andrew Lawson, Esq., late M.P.; the Rev.
R. Shilleto, Cambridge; the Rev. T.S. Evans, Rugby; J. Riddell, Esq.,
Fellow of Baliol College, Oxford; the Rev. E.M. Cope, H.J. Hodgson,
Esq., H.A.J. Munro, Esq., W.G. Clark, Esq., Fellows of Trinity College,
Cambridge, and many other distinguished Scholars from both Universities.

This Work is edited by three of the principal Contributors.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

At WASHBOURNE'S, 18. New Bridge Street.

MOORE'S PICTORIAL BOOK OF BALLADS, including some of the BORDER
MINSTRELSY, many very curious and rare, with Appendix, Glossary, Notes,
&c. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth; and 12s. half-bound morocco.

PERCY'S RELIQUES OF ANCIENT ENGLISH POETRY. 3 vols. small 8vo., with
richly-illuminated Title-pages, 15s. cloth gilt; 18s. half-bound
morocco; antique morocco, 1l. 11s. 6d.

Also, to match in size, price, &c.,

ELLIS'S SPECIMENS OF THE EARLY ENGLISH POETS. 3 vols.

"Washbourne's Edition of Percy and Ellis are tempting
books."--_Gentleman's Magazine._

THE BOOK OF FAMILY CRESTS AND MOTTOES, with 4000 Engravings of Crests.
The Fifth Edition. 2 vols. small 8vo. 21s. It is used for reference at
Herald's College. "No wonder this book sells."--_Spectator._

BUTLER'S HUDIBRAS. Illustrated by 60 Engraved Portraits, and 35
Woodcuts. Edited by Dr. NASH, and including such of Dr. Gray's
Annotations as are worthy of record. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 21s.; or without
the Portraits, 10s. 6d.

WALTON'S LIVES OF DONNE, WOTTON, HOOKER, HERBERT, AND SANDERSON. With
MAJOR'S Illustrations, and edited by MAJOR and NICHOL. Small 8vo. 9s.
cloth; or 12s. morocco.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. new Street Square, at No. 5. new
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 29. 1849.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries, No. 9, Saturday,
December 29, 1849, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES, NO. 9, ***

***** This file should be named 13521.txt or 13521.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/5/2/13521/

Produced by Jon Ingram, David King, the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team and The Internet Library of Early Journals,


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
