The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles (1 of 6): The Historie of
England (2 of 8), by Raphael Holinshed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Chronicles (1 of 6): The Historie of England (2 of 8)
       The Second Booke Of The Historie Of England

Author: Raphael Holinshed

Release Date: August 31, 2005 [EBook #13624]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIE OF ENGLAND ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Lesley Halamek and the Online Distributed





THE SECOND BOOKE

OF THE

HISTORIE OF ENGLAND.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Of Brute and his descent, how he slue his father in hunting, his
banishment, his letter to king Pandrasus, against whom he wageth battell,
taketh him prisoner, and concludeth peace vpon conditions._

THE FIRST CHAPTER.


Hitherto haue we spoken of the inhabitants of this Ile before the comming
of Brute, although some will needs haue it, that he was the first which
inhabited the same with his people descended of the Troians, some few
giants onelie excepted whom he vtterlie destroied, and left not one of
them aliue through the whole Ile. But as we shall not doubt of Brutes
comming hither, so may we assuredly thinke, that he found the Ile peopled
either with the generation of those which Albion the giant had placed
here, or some other kind of people whom he did subdue, and so reigned as
well ouer them as ouer those which he brought with him.

[Sidenote: _Humfr. Lhoyd_.]
This Brutus, or Brytus [for this letter (Y) hath of ancient time had the
sounds both of V and I] (as the author of the booke which Geffrey of
Monmouth translated dooth affirme) was the sonne of Siluius, the sonne of
Ascanius, the sonne of Aeneas the Troian, begotten of his wife Creusa, &
borne in Troie, before the citie was destroied. But as other doo take it,
[Sidenote: _Harding. Alex. Neuil. W. Har._]
the author of that booke (whatsoeuer he was) and such other as follow
him, are deceiued onelie in this point, mistaking the matter, in that
Posthumus the sonne of Aeneas (begotten of his wife Lauinia, and borne
after his fathers deceasse in Italie) was called Ascanius, who had issue
a sonne named Iulius, who (as these other doo coniecture) was the father
of Brute, that noble chieftaine and aduenturous leader of those people,
which being descended (for the more part in the fourth generation)
from those Troians that escaped with life, when that roiall citie was
destroied by the Greekes, got possession of this woorthie and most famous
Ile.

To this opinion Giouan Villani a Florentine in his vniuersall historie,
speaking of Aeneas and his ofspring kings in Italie, seemeth to agree,
where he saith: "Siluius (the sonne of Aeneas by his wife Lauinia) fell
in loue with a neece of his mother Lauinia, and by hir had a sonne, of
whom she died in trauell, and therefore was called Brutus, who after
as he grew in some stature, and hunting in a forrest slue his father
vnwares, and therevpon for feare of his grandfather Siluius Posthumus he
fled the countrie, and with a retinue of such as followed him, passing
through diuers seas, at length he arriued in the Ile of Britaine."

Concerning therefore our Brute, whether his father Iulius was sonne to
Ascanius the sonne of Aeneas by his wife Creusa, or sonne to Posthumus
called also Ascanius, and sonne to Aeneas by his wife Lauinia, we will
not further stand. But this, we find, that when he came to the age of 15.
yeeres, so that he was now able to ride abrode with his father into
the forrests and chases, he fortuned (either by mishap, or by Gods
[Sidenote: Brute killeth his father.]
prouidence) to strike his father with an arrow, in shooting at a deere,
of which wound he also died. His grandfather (whether the same was
Posthumus, or his elder brother) hearing of this great misfortune that
had chanced to his sonne Siluius, liued not long after, but died for
verie greefe and sorow (as is supposed) which he conceiued thereof. And
the young gentleman, immediatlie after he had slaine his father (in maner
before alledged) was banished his countrie, and therevpon got him into
Grecia, where trauelling the countrie, he lighted by chance among some of
the Troian ofspring, and associating himselfe with them, grew by meanes
of the linage (whereof he was descended) in proces of time into great
reputation among them: chieflie by reason there were yet diuers of the
[Sidenote: Pausanias.]
Troian race, and that of great authoritie in that countrie. For Pyrrhus
the sonne of Achilles, hauing no issue by his wife Hermione, maried
Andromache, late wife vnto Hector: and by hir had three sonnes, Molossus,
Pileus, and Pergamus, who in their time grew to be of great power in
those places and countries, and their ofspring likewise: whereby Brutus
or Brytus wanted no friendship. For euen at his first comming thither,
diuers of the Troians that remained in seruitude, being desirous of
libertie, by flocks resorted vnto him. And amongst other, Assaracus was
one, whom Brute intertained, receiuing at his hands the possession of
sundrie forts and places of defense, before that the king of those
parties could haue vnderstanding or knowledge of any such thing. Herewith
also such as were readie to make the aduenture with him, repaired to him
on ech side, wherevpon he first placed garisons in those townes which
had bene thus deliuered vnto him, and afterwards with Assaracus and the
residue of the multitude he withdrew into the mountains neere adioining.
And thus being made strong with such assistance, by consultation had with
them that were of most authoritie about him, wrote vnto the king of that
countrie called Pandrasus, in forme as followeth.

_A letter of Brute to Pandrasus, as I find it set downe in Galfride
Monumetensis._

"Brute leader of the remnant of the Troian people, to Pandrasus king of
the Greekes, sendeth greeting. Bicause it hath beene thought a thing
vnworthie, that the people descended of the noble linage of Dardanus
should be otherwise dealt with than the honour of their nobilitie dooth
require: they haue withdrawne themselues within the close couert of the
woods. For they haue chosen rather (after the maner of wild beasts) to
liue on flesh and herbs in libertie, than furnished with all the riches
in the world to continue vnder the yoke of seruile thraldome. But if this
their dooing offend thy mightie highnesse, they are not to be blamed, but
rather in this behalfe to be pardoned, sith euerie captiue prisoner
is desirous to be restored vnto his former estate and dignitie. You
therefore pitieng their case, vouchsafe to grant them their abridged
libertie, and suffer them to remaine in quiet within these woods which
they haue got into their possession: if not so, yet giue them licence to
depart forth of this countrie into some other parts."

The sight of these letters, and request in them conteined, made Pandrasus
at the first somewhat amazed, howbeit deliberating further of the matter,
and considering their small number, he made no great account of them, but
[Sidenote: Pandrasus prepareth an armie to supress the Troian ofspring.]
determined out of hand to suppresse them by force, before they should
grow to a greater multitude. And to bring his intention the better to
[Sidenote: Sparatinum.]
passe, he passed by a towne called Sparatinum, & marching toward the
woods where he thoght to haue found his enimies, he was suddenlie
assalted by Brute, who with three thousand men came foorth of the woods,
and fiercelie setting vpon his enimies, made great slaughter of them,
so that they were vtterlie discomfited, & sought by flight to saue
[Sidenote: Peraduenture Achelous.]
themselues in passing a riuer neere hand called Akalon. Brute with his
men following fast upon the aduersaries, caused them to plunge into the
water at aduenture, so that manie of them were drowned. Howbeit Antigonus
[Sidenote: Antigonus, the brother of Pandrasus.]
the brother of Pandrasus did what he could to stay the Grecians from
fleeing, and calling them backe againe did get some of them togither,
placed them in order, and began a new field: but it nothing auailed, for
the Troians, preasing vpon him, tooke him prisoner, slue and scattred
his companie, and ceased not till they had rid the fields of all their
aduersaries.

[Sidenote: Brute entreth into Sparatinum.]
This doone, Brute entering the towne, furnished it with six hundred able
souldiours, and afterwards went backe to the residue of his people that
were incamped in the woods, where he was receiued with vnspeakeable ioy
for this prosperous atchiued enterprise. But although this euill successe
at the first beginning sore troubled Pandrasus, as well for the losse of
the field, as for the taking of his brother, yet was he rather kindled
in desire to seeke reuenge, than otherwise discouraged. And therefore
assembling his people againe togither that were scattered here and there,
he came the next day before the towne of Sparatinum, where he thought to
haue found Brute inclosed togither with the prisoners, and therfore he
shewed his whole endeuour by hard siege and fierce assaults to force them
within to yeeld.

To conclude, so long he continued the siege, till victuals began to waxe
scant within, so that there was no way but to yeeld, if present succour
came not to remoue the siege: wherevpon they signified their necessitie
vnto Brute, who for that he had not power sufficient to fight with the
enimies in open field, he ment to giue them a camisado in the night
season, and so ordered his businesse, that inforsing a prisoner (named
Anacletus whome he had taken in the last battell) to serue his turne, by
constreining him to take an oth (which he durst not for conscience sake
breake) he found means to encounter with his enimies vpon the aduantage,
that he did not onelie ouerthrowe their whole power, but also tooke
[Sidenote: Pandrasus taken prisoner.]
Pandrasus prisoner, whereby all the trouble was ended: and shortlie after
a perfect peace concluded, vpon these conditions following.

[Sidenote: The conditions of the agreement betwixt Brute & Pandrasus.]
First, that Pandrasus should giue his daughter Innogen vnto Brute in
mariage, with a competent summe of gold and siluer for hir dowrie.

Secondlie, to furnish him and his people with a nauie of ships, and to
store the same with victuals and all other necessaries.

Thirdlie, that Brute with his people should haue licence to depart the
countrie, to seeke aduentures whither so euer it should please them to
direct their course, without let, impeachment, or trouble to be offered
anie waies by the Greeks.

To all these conditions (bicause they touched not the prerogatiue of his
kingdome) Pandrasus did willinglie agree, and likewise performed.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Brute and his wife Innogen arriue in Leogitia, they aske counsell of an
oracle where they shall inhabit, he meeteth with a remnant of Troians on
the coasts neere the shooting downe of the Pyrenine hills into the sea._

THE SECOND CHAPTER.


Al things being thus brought to passe according to Brutes desire, wind
also and wether seruing the purpose, he with his wife Innogen and his
people imbarked, and hoising vp sailes departed from the coasts of
Grecia. Now after two daies and a nights sailing, they arriued at
Leogitia (in some old written bookes of the British historie noted downe
Lergetia) an Iland, where they consulted with an oracle. Brute himselfe
kneeling before the idoll, and holding in his right hand a boll prepared
for sacrifice full of wine, and the bloud of a white hinde, spake in this
maner as here followeth:


     Diua potens nemorum, terror syluestribus apris,
          Cui licet anfractus ire per aethereos,
     Infernasq; domos, terrestria iura resolue,
          Et die quas terras nos habitare velis:
     Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aeuum,
          Qua tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris.


These verses (as Ponticus Virumnius and others also doo gesse) were
written by Gildas Cambrius in his booke intituled _Cambreidos,_ and may
thus be Englished:


     Thou goddesse that doost rule
         the woods and forrests greene,
     And chasest foming boares
         that flee thine awfull sight,
     Thou that maist passe aloft
         in airie skies so sheene,
     And walke eke vnder earth
         in places void of light,
     Discouer earthlie states,
         direct our course aright,
     And shew where we shall dwell,
         according to thy will,
     In seates of sure abode,
         where temples we may dight
     For virgins that shall sound
         thy laud with voices shrill.


After this praier and ceremonie done, according to
the pagane rite and custome, Brute abiding his answer, fell asleepe: in
which sleepe appeared to him the said goddesse vttering this answer in
the verses following expressed.


     Brute, sub occasum solis trans Gallica regna,
          Insula in oceano est, vndiq; clausa mari,
     Insula in oceano est, habitata gigantibus olim,
          Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuis:
     Hanc pete, namq; tibi sedes erit ilia perennis,
          Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis:
     Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, & ipsis
          Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.



     Brute, farre by-west beyond the Gallike
          land is found,
     An Ile which with the ocean seas
          inclosed is about,
     Where giants dwelt sometime,
          but now is desart ground,
     Most meet where thou maist plant
          thy selfe with all thy rout:
     Make thitherwards with speed,
          for there thou shalt find out
     An euerduring seat,
          and Troie shall rise anew,
     Vnto thy race, of whom
          shall kings be borne no dout,
     That with their mightie power
          the world shall whole subdew.


After he awaked out of sleepe, and had called his dreame to
remembrance, he first doubted whether it were a verie dreame, or a true
vision, the goddes hauing spoken to him with liuelie voice. Wherevpon
calling such of his companie vnto him as he thought requisite in such
a case, he declared vnto them the whole matter with the circumstances,
whereat they greatlie reioising, caused mightie bonfires to be made, in
the which they cast wine, milke, and other liquors, with diuers gums
and spices of most sweet smell and sauour, as in the pagan religion was
accustomed. Which obseruances and ceremonies performed and brought to
end, they returned streightwaies to their ships, and as soone as the wind
served, passed forward on their iournie with great ioy and gladnesse, as
men put in comfort to find out the wished seats for their firme and sure
[Sidenote: Brute with his companie landed in Affrike.]
habitations. From hence therefore they cast about, and making westward,
first arrived in Affrica, and after keeping on their course, they passed
the straits of Gibralterra, and coasting alongst the shore on the right
hand, they found another companie that were likewise descended of the
[Sidenote: The mistaking of those that haue copied the British historie
putting _Mare Tyrrhenum_, for _Pyrenaeum_] Troian progenie, on
the coasts nere where the Pyrenine hils shoot downe to the sea, whereof
the same sea by good reason (as some suppose) was named in those daies
Mare Pyrenaeum, although hitherto by fault of writers & copiers of the
British historie receiued, in this place Mare Tyrrhenum, was slightlie
put downe in stead of Pyrenaeum.

The ofspring of those Troians, with whom Brute and his companie thus did
meet, were a remnant of them that came away with Antenor. Their capteine
hight Corineus, a man of great modestie and approoued wisedome, and
thereto of incomparable strength and boldnesse.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Brute and the said Troians with their capteine Corineus doo associat,
they take landing within the dominion of king Goffarus, he raiseth an
armie against Brute and his power, but is discomfited: of the citie of
Tours: Brutes arrivall in this Iland with his companie._

THE THIRD CHAPTER.


[Sidenote: Brute and Corineus ioin their companies together.]
After that Brute and the said Troians, by conference interchangeablie
had, vnderstood one anothers estates, and how they were descended from
one countrie and progenie, they vnited themselves togither, greatlie
reioising that they were so fortunatlie met: and hoising vp their sailes,
[Sidenote: They arrive on the coasts of Gallia, now called France.]
directed their course forward still, till they arriued within the mouth
of the riuer of Loire, which diuideth Aquitaine from Gall Celtike, where
they tooke land within the dominion of a king called Goffarius, surnamed
Pictus, by reason he was descended of the people Agathyrsi, otherwise
[Sidenote: Goffarius surnamed Pictus _Les annales d'Aquitaine_.]
named Picts, bicause they used to paint their faces and bodies, insomuch
that the richer a man was amongst them, the more cost he bestowed in
[Sidenote: Agathyrsi, otherwise called Picts, of painting their bodies.
_Marcellus Plinie. Herodotus li.4_.]
painting himselfe; and commonlie the haire of their head was red, or (as
probable writers say) of skie colour. Herodotus calleth them [Greek:
chrysothorous] bicause they did weare much gold about them. They vsed
their wives in common, and bicause they are all supposed to be brethren,
there is no strife nor discord among them. Of these Agathyrsi, it is
recorded by the said Herodotus, that they refused to succour the
Scythians against Darius, giving this reason of their refusall; bicause
they would not make warre against him who had doone them no wrong. And
of this people dooth the poet make mention, saieng,

[Sidenote: _Virg. Aeneid. 4_.]
Cretesq; Dryopesq; fremunt pictiq; Agathyrsi.

[Sidenote: _Caesar com. li. 5_.]
To paint their faces not for amiablenesse, but for terriblenesse, the
Britons in old time vsed, and that with a kind of herbe like vnto
plantine. In which respect I see no reason why they also should not be
called Picts, as well as the Agathyrsi; seeing the denomination sprang
[Sidenote: _P. Mart; com. part 2. sect. 60_.]
of a vaine custome in them both. And here by the way, sithens we have
touched this follie in two severall people, let it not seeme tedious to
read this one tricke of the Indians, among whom there is great plentie of
pretious stones, wherewith they adorne themselves in this maner; namelie,
in certein hollow places which they make in their flesh, they inclose and
riuet in precious stones, and that as well in their forheads as their
cheekes, to none other purpose, than the Agathyrsi in the vse of their
painting.

The countrie of Poictou (as some hold) where the said Goffarius reigned,
tooke name of this people: & likewise a part of this our Ile of Britaine
now conteined within Scotland, which in ancient time was called Pightland
[Sidenote: Pightland or Pictland.]
or Pictland, as elsewhere both in this historie of England, and also of
Scotland may further appeare. But to our purpose.

[Sidenote: Goffarius sendeth vnto Brute.]
When Goffarius the king of Poictou was aduertised of the landing of these
strangers within his countrie, he sent first certeine of his people to
vnderstand what they ment by their comming a land within his dominion,
without licence or leaue of him obteined. They that were thus sent, came
by chance to a place where Corineus with two hundred of the companie
were come from the ships into a forrest neere the sea side, to kill some
veneson for their sustenance: and being rebuked with some disdainfull
speach of those Poictouins, he shaped them a round answer: insomuch that
[Sidenote: Corineus answereth the messengers. Imbert.]
one of them whose name was Imbert, let driue an arrow at Corineus: but he
auoiding the danger thereof, shot againe at Imbert, in reuenge of that
[Sidenote: Imbert is slaine by Corineus.]
iniurie offered, and claue his head in sunder. The rest of the Poictouins
fled therevpon, and brought word to Goffarius what had happened: who
[Sidenote: Goffarius raiseth an armie.]
immediatlie with a mightie armie made forward to encounter with the
Troians, and comming to ioine with them in battell, after a sharpe and
[Sidenote: Goffarius is discomfited.]
sore conflict, in the end Brute with his armie obteined a triumphant
victorie, speciallie through the noble prowesse of Corineus.

[Sidenote: Goffarius seeketh aid against Brute.]
Goffarius escaping from the field, fled into the inner parts of Gallia,
making sute for assistance vnto such kings as in those daies reigned in
diuers prouinces of that land, who promised to aid him with all their
forces, and to expell out of the coasts of Aquitaine, such strangers as
without his licence were thus entred the countrie. But Brute in the meane
[Sidenote: Brute spoileth the countrie.]
time passed forward, and with fire and sword made hauocke in places where
he came: and gathering great spoiles, fraught his ships with plentie of
riches. At length he came to the place, where afterwards he built a citie
[Sidenote: Turonium or Tours built by Brute.]
named Turonium, that is, Tours.

[Sidenote: Goffarius hauing renewed his forces, fighteth eftsoones with
Brute.]
Here Goffarius with such Galles as were assembled to his aid, gaue
battell againe vnto the Troians that were incamped to abide his comming.
Where after they had fought a long time with singular manhood on both
parties: the Troians in fine oppressed with multitudes of aduersaries
(euen thirtie times as manie mo as the Troians) were constreined to
retire into their campe, within the which the Galles kept them as
besieged, lodging round about them, and purposing by famine to compell
them to yeeld themselues vnto their mercie. But Corineus taking counsell
with Brute, deuised to depart in the darke of the night out of the campe,
to lodge himselfe with three thousand chosen souldiers secretlie in a
wood, and there to remaine in couert till the morning that Brute should
come foorth and giue a charge vpon the enimies, wherewith Corineus should
breake foorth and assaile the Galles on the backes.

This policie was put in practise, and tooke such effect as the deuisers
themselues wished: for the Galles being sharplie assailed on the front by
Brute and his companie, were now with the sudden comming of Corineus (who
set vpon them behind on their backes) brought into such a feare, that
incontinentlie they tooke them to flight, whom the Troians egerlie
pursued, making no small slaughter of them as they did ouertake them. In
this battell Brute lost manie of his men, and amongst other one of his
nephues named Turinus, after he had shewed maruellous proofe of his
manhood. Of him (as some haue written) the foresaid citie of Tours tooke
the name, and was called _Turonium_, bicause the said Turinus was there
buried.

[Sidenote: _Theuet_.]
Andrew Theuet affirmeth the contrarie, and mainteineth that one Taurus
the nephue of Haniball was the first that inclosed it about with a pale
of wood (as the maner of those daies was of fensing their townes) in the
[Sidenote: 3374.]
yeare of the world 3374. and before the birth of our sauiour 197.

But to our matter concerning Brute, who after he had obteined so famous
a victorie, albeit there was good cause for him to reioise, yet it sore
troubled him to consider that his numbers dailie decaied, and his enimies
still increased, and grew stronger: wherevpon resting doubtfull what to
[Sidenote: Brute in dout what to doo.]
doo, whether to proceed against the Galles, or returne to his ships to
seeke the Ile that was appointed him by oracle, at length he chose the
surest and best way, as he tooke it, and as it proued. For whilest the
greater part of his armie was yet left aliue, and that the victorie
remained on his side, he drew to his nauie, and lading his ships with
exceeding great store of riches which his people had got abroad in the
countrie, he tooke the seas againe.
[Sidenote Brute with his remnant of Troians arriue in this ile. _Anno
mundi. 2850_. 1116.]
After a few daies sailing they landed at the hauen now called Totnesse,
the yeare of the world 2850, after the destruction of Troy 66, after
the deliuerance of the Israelites from the captiuitie of Babylon 397,
almost ended; in the 18 yeare of the reigne of Tineas king of Babylon,
13 of Melanthus king of Athens, before the building of Rome 368, which
was before the natiuitie of our Sauior Christ 1116, almost ended, and
before the reigne of Alexander the great 783.

       *       *       *       *       *



_Brute discouereth the commodities of this Iland, mightie giants
withstand him, Gogmagog and Corineus wrestle together at a place beside
Douer: he buildeth the citie of Trinouant now termed London, calleth this
Iland by the name of Britaine, and diuideth it into three parts among his
three sonnes._

THE FOURTH CHAPTER.


When Brute had entred this land, immediatlie after his arriuall (as
writers doo record) he searched the countrie from side to side, and from
end to end, finding it in most places verie fertile and plentious of wood
and grasse, and full of pleasant springs and faire riuers. As he thus
[Sidenote: Brute encountered by the giants.]
trauelled to discouer the state and commodities of the Iland, he was
encountred by diuers strong and mightie giants, whome he destroied and
slue, or rather subdued, with all such other people as he found in the
Iland, which were more in number than by report of some authors it should
appeare there were. Among these giants (as Geffrey of Monmouth writeth)
there was one of passing strength and great estimation, named Gogmagog,
[Sidenote: Corineus wrestleth with Gogmagog.]
whome Brute caused Corineus to wrestle at a place beside Douer, where it
chanced that the giant brake a rib in the side of Corineus while they
stroue to claspe, and the one to ouerthrow the other: wherewith Corineus
being sore chafed and stirred to wrath, did so double his force that he
got the vpper hand of the giant, and cast him downe headlong from one of
[Sidenote: Gogmagog is slaine.]
the rocks there, not farre from Douer, and so dispatched him: by reason
whereof the place was named long after, _The fall or leape of Gogmagog_,
but afterward it was called _The fall of Douer_. For this valiant deed,
and other the like seruices first and last atchiued, Brute gaue vnto
[Sidenote: Cornwall giuen to Corineus.]
Corineus the whole countrie of Cornwall. To be briefe, after that Brute
had destroied such as stood against him, and brought such people vnder
his subiection as he found in the Ile, and searched the land from the one
end to the other: he was desirous to build a citie, that the same might
be the seate roiall of his empire or kingdome. Wherevpon he chose a plot
of ground lieng on the north side of the riuer of Thames, which by good
consideration seemed to be most pleasant and conuenient for any great
multitude of inhabitants, aswell for holsomnesse of aire, goodnesse of
soile, plentie of woods, and commoditie of the riuer, seruing as well to
bring in as to carrie out all kinds of merchandize and things necessarie
for the gaine, store, and vse of them that there should inhabit.

Here therefore he began to build and lay the foundation of a citie, in
the tenth or (as other thinke) in the second yeare after his arriuall,
which he named (saith Gal. Mon.) Troinouant, or (as Hum. Llhoyd saith)
Troinewith, that is, new Troy, in remembrance of that noble citie of Troy
from whence he and his people were for the greater part descended.

When Brutus had builded this citie, and brought the Iland fullie vnder
his subiection, he by the aduise of his nobles commanded this Ile (which
before hight Albion) to be called Britaine, and the inhabitants Britons
after his name, for a perpetuall memorie that he was the first bringer
of them into the land. In this meane while also he had by his wife.
iii. sonnes, the first named Locrinus or Locrine, the second Cambris or
Camber, and the third Albanactus or Albanact. Now when the time of his
death drew neere, to the first he betooke the gouernment of that part of
the land nowe knowne by the name of England: so that the same was long
after called Loegria, or Logiers, of the said Locrinus. To the second he
appointed the countrie of Wales, which of him was first named Cambria,
diuided from Loegria by the riuer of Seuerne. To his third sonne Albanact
he deliuered all the north part of the Ile, afterward called Albania,
after the name of the said Albanact: which portion of the said He lieth
beyond the Humber northward. Thus when Brutus had diuided the Ile of
Britaine (as before is mentioned) into 3. parts, and had gouerned the
[Sidenote: In the daies of this our Brute Saule and Samuell gouerned
Israell.]
same by the space of 15. yeares, he died in the 24 yeare after his
arriuall (as Harison noteth) and was buried at Troinouant or London:
although the place of his said buriall there be now be growne out of
memorie.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Of Locrine the eldest sonne of Brute, of Albanact his yoongest sonne,
and his death: of Madan, Mempricius, Ebranke, Brute Greenesheeld, Leill,
Ludhurdibras, Baldud, and Leir, the nine rulers of Britaine successiuelie
after Brute._

THE FIFT CHAPTER.


[Sidenote: LOCRINE THE SECOND RULER OF BRITAIN. _Gal. Mon. Mat. West.
Fa. out of G. de Co. Gal Mon. Mat. West._]
Locrinus or Locrine the first begotten sonne of Brute began to reigne
ouer the countrie called Logiers, in the yeare of the world 1874, and
held to his part the countrie that reached from the south sea vnto the
riuer of Humber. While this Locrinus gouerned Logiers, his brother
Albanact ruled in Albania, where in fine he was slaine in a battell by a
king of the Hunnes or Scythians, called Humber, who inuaded that part
of Britaine, and got possession thereof, till Locrinus with his brother
Camber, in reuenge of their other brothers death, and for the recouerie
of the kingdome, gathered their powers togither, and comming against
the said king of the Hunnes, by the valiancie of their people they
[Sidenote: It should seeme that he was come over the Humber.
_Gal. Mon._]
discomfited him in battell, and chased him so egerlie, that he himselfe
and a great number of his men were drowned in the gulfe that then parted
Loegria and Albania, which after tooke name of the said king, and was
called Humber, and so continueth vnto this daie.


Moreouer in this battell against the Hunnes were three yong damsels taken
of excellent beautie, specially one of them, whose name was Estrild,
daughter to a certeine king of Scythia. With this Estrild king Locrine
fell so farre in loue, notwithstanding a former contract made betwixt him
and the ladie Guendoloena, daughter to Corineus duke of Cornwall, that he
meant yet with all speed to marie the same Estrild. But being earnestlie
called vpon, and in manner forced thereto by Corineus, hee changed his
purpose, and married Guendoloena, keeping neuertheles the aforesaid
Estrild as paramour still after a secret sort, during the life of
Corineus his father in law.

Now after that Corineus was departed this world, Locrine forsooke
Guendoloena, and maried Estrild. Guendoloena therefore being cast off by
hir husband, got hir into Cornewall to hir friends and kinred, and there
procured them to make warre against the said Locrine hir husband, in the
which warres hee was slaine, and a battell fought neere to the riuer of
[Sidenote: _Mat. West._]
Sture, after he had reigned (as writers affirme) twentie yeares, & was
buried by his father in the citie of Troinouant, leauing behind him
a yoong sonne (begotten of his wife Guendoloena) named Madan, as yet
vnmeete to gouerne.
[Sidenote: Shee is not numbred amongst those that reigned as rulers in
this land by _Mat. West._]

Guendoloena or Guendoline the wife of Locrinus, and daughter of Corineus
duke of Cornewall, for so much as hir sonne Madan was not of yeeres
sufficient to gouerne, was by common consent of the Britons made ruler of
the Ile, in the yeere of the world 2894, and so hauing the administration
in hir hands, she did right discreetlie vse hir selfe therein, to the
comfort of all hir subiects, till hir sonne Madan came to lawfull age,
and then she gaue ouer the rule and dominion to him, after she had
[Sidenote: _Gal. Mon_.]
gouerned by the space of fifteene yeares.

[Sidenote: MADAN THE THIRD RULER]
Madan the sonne of Locrine and Guendoline entred into the gouernement of
Britaine in the 2909, of the world. There is little left in writing of
his doings, sauing that he vsed great tyrannie amongst his Britons: and
therefore after he had ruled this land the tearme of 40. yeares, he was
deuoured of wild beastes, as he was abroad in hunting. He left behind
him two sonnes, Mempricius and Manlius. He builded (as is reported)
Madancaistre, now Dancastre, which reteineth still the later part of his
name.

[Sidenote: MEMPRICIUS THE FOURTH RULER. _Fabian_. Manlius is slaine.
_Gal. Mon._ Slouth engendred lecherie]
Mempricius the eldest sonne of Madan began his reigne ouer the Britons in
the yeare of the world 2949, he continued not long in peace. For his
brother Manlius vpon an ambitious mind prouoked the Britons to rebell
against him, so that sore and deadly warre continued long betweene them.
But finallie, vnder colour of a treatie, Manlius was slaine by his
brother Mempricius, so that then he liued in more tranquillitie and rest.
Howbeit, being deliuered thus from trouble of warres, he fell into slouth,
and so into vnlawfull lust of lecherie, and thereby into the hatred of
his people, by forcing of their wiues and daughters: and finallie became
so beastlie, that he forsooke his lawfull wife and all his concubines,
and fell into the abhominable sinne of Sodomie. And thus from one vice he
[Sidenote: Mempricius is deuoured of beastes.]
fell into another, till he became odious to God and man, and at length,
going on hunting, was lost of his people, and destroied of wild beastes,
when he had reigned twentie yeares, leauing behind him a noble yoong sonne
named Ebranke, begotten of his lawfull wife.

[Sidenote: EBRANKE THE FIFT RULER. Ebranke had 21. wiues: his thirtie
daughters sent into Italie. _Bergomas lib. 6_.]
Ebranke the sonne of Mempricius began to rule ouer the Britons in the
yeare of the world 2969. He had as writers doo of him record, one and
twentie wiues, on whom he begot 20. sonnes and 30. daughters, of the
which the eldest hight Guales, or Gualea. These daughters he sent to
Alba Syluius, which was the eleuenth king of Italie, or the sixt king of
the Latines, to the end they might be married to his noble men of the
bloud of Troians, because the Sabines refused to ioine their daughters
with them in marriage. Furthermore, he was the first prince of his land
that euer inuaded France after Brute, and is commended as author and
originall builder of many cities, both in his owne kingdome, and else
where. His sonnes also vnder the conduct of Assaracus, one of their
eldest brethren, returning out of Italie, after they had conducted their
sisters thither, inuaded Germanie, being first molested by the people of
that countrie in their rage, and by the helpe of the said Alba subdued a
great part of that countrie, & there planted themselues. Our histories
say, that Ebracus their father married them in their returne, and aided
[Sidenote: The citie of Caerbranke builded. _Matth. West._]
them in their conquests, and that he builded the citie of Caerbranke,
now called Yorke, about the 14, yeare of his reigne. He builded also in
Albania now called Scotland, the castle of Maidens, afterward called
Edenburgh of Adian one of their kings. The citie of Alclud was builded
likewise by him (as some write) now decaied. After which cities thus
[Sidenote: Fortie yeares hath _Math. West._ and _Gal. Monuine_.]
builded, he sailed ouer into Gallia, now called France, with a great
armie, and subduing the Galles as is aforesaid, he returned home with
great riches and triumph. Now when he had guided the land of Britaine
in noble wise by the tearme of fortie yeares, he died, and was buried
at Yorke.

[Sidenote: BRUTE GREENESHIELD THE SIXT RULER. _Iacobus Lef._]
Brute Greeneshield, the sonne of Ebranke, was made gouernor of this
land in the yeare of the world 3009, Asa reigning in Iuda, and Baasa in
Israell. This prince bare alwaies in the field a greene shield, whereof
he tooke his surname, and of him some forraine authors affirme, that he
made an attempt to bring the whole realme of France vnder his subiection,
which he performed, because his father susteined some dishonor and losse
in his last voiage into that countrie. Howbeit they say, that when he
came into Henaud, Brinchild a prince of that quarter gaue him also
a great ouerthrow, and compelled him to retire home againe into his
countrie. This I borrow out of William Harison, who in his chronologie
toucheth the same at large, concluding in the end, that the said passage
of this prince into France is verie likelie to be true, and that he named
a parcell of Armorica lieng on the south, and in manner vpon the verie
loine after his owne name, and also a citie which he builded there
[Sidenote: _Strabo lib. 4_.]
Britaine. For (saith he) it should seeme by Strabo. lib. 4. that there
was a noble citie of that name long before his time in the said countrie,
whereof Plinie also speaketh lib. 4. cap. 7. albeit that he ascribe it
vnto France after a disordered maner. More I find not of this foresaid
Brute, sauing that he ruled the land a certeine time, his father yet
liuing, and after his decease the tearme of twelue yeares, and then died,
and was buried at Caerbranke now called Yorke.

[Sidenote: LEILL THE SEVENTH RULER. Carleil builded. Chester repaired.]
LEILL the sonne of Brute Greeneshield, began to reigne in the yeare of
the world 3021, the same time that Asa was reigning in Iuda, and Ambri in
Israell. He built the citie now called Carleil, which then after his
owne name was called Caerleil, that is, Leill his citie, or the citie of
Leill. He repaired also (as Henrie Bradshaw saith) the citie of Caerleon
now called Chester, which (as in the same Bradshaw appeareth) was built
before Brutus entrie into this land by a giant named Leon Gauer. But what
authoritie he had to auouch this, it may be doubted, for Ranulfe Higden
in his woorke intituled "Polychronicon," saith in plaine wordes, that it
is vnknowen who was the first founder of Chester, but that it tooke the
name of the soiourning there of some Romaine legions, by whome also it is
not vnlike that it might be first built by P. Ostorius Scapula, who as we
find, after he had subdued Caratacus king of the Ordouices that inhabited
the countries now called Lancashire, Cheshire, and Salopshire, built in
those parts, and among the Silures, certeine places of defense, for the
better harbrough of his men of warre, and keeping downe of such Britaines
as were still readie to moue rebellion.

But now to the purpose concerning K. Leill. We find it recorded that he
was in the beginning of his reigne verie vpright, and desirous to see
iustice executed, and aboue all thinges loued peace & quietnesse; but as
yeares increased with him, so his vertues began to diminish, in so much
that abandoning the care for the bodie of the commonwealth, he suffered
his owne bodie to welter in all vice and voluptuousnesse, and so
procuring the hatred of his subiects, caused malice and discord to rise
amongst them, which during his life he was neuer able to appease. But
leauing them so at variance, he departed this life, & was buried at
Carleil, which as ye haue heard he had builded while he liued.

[Sidenote: LUD or LUDHURDIBRAS THE EIGHT RULER.
Kaerkin or Canterburie is builded. Caerguent is builded. Paladour is
builded.]
Lud or Ludhurdibras the sonne of Leill began to gouerne in the yeare of
the world 3046. In the beginning of his reigne, hee sought to appease the
debate that was raised in his fathers daies, and bring the realme to
hir former quietnesse, and after that he had brought it to good end, he
builded the towne of Kaerkin now called Canterburie: also the towne
of Caerguent now cleped Winchester, and mount Paladour now called
Shaftsburie. About the building of which towne of Shaftsburie, Aquila
a prophet of the British nation wrote his prophesies, of which some
fragments remaine yet to be scene, translated into the Latine by some
ancient writers. When this Lud had reigned 29 yeares, he died, and left a
sonne behind him named Baldud.

[Sidenote: BALDUD OR BLADUD THE NINTH RULER.
_Gal. Mon._ The king was learned. Hot bathes.]

Baldud the sonne of Ludhurdibras began to rule ouer the Britaines in
the yeare of the world 3085. This man was well seene in the sciences of
astronomie and nigromancie, by which (as the common report saith) he made
the hot bathes in the citie of Caerbran now called Bath. But William of
Malmesburie is of a contrarie opinion, affirming that Iulius Cesar made
those bathes, or rather repaired them when he was here in England: which
is not like to be true: for Iulius Cesar, as by good coniecture we haue
to thinke, neuer came so farre within the land that way forward. But of
these bathes more shall be said in the description. Now to proceed. This
[Sidenote: _Mat. West._ The prince did flie.]
Baldud tooke such pleasure in artificiall practises & magike, that he
taught this art throughout all his realme. And to shew his cunning in
other points, vpon a presumptuous pleasure which he had therein, he tooke
vpon him to flie in the aire, but he fell vpon the temple of Apollo,
which stood in the citie of Troinouant, and there was torne in peeces
after he had ruled the Britaines by the space of 20 yeares.

[Sidenote: LEIR THE 10. RULER. _Mat. West._ Leicester is builded.]
Leir the sonne of Baldud was admitted ruler ouer the Britaines, in the
yeare of the world 3105, at what time Ioas reigned in Iuda. This Leir
was a prince of right noble demeanor, gouerning his land and subiects in
great wealth. He made the towne of Caerleir now called Leicester, which
standeth vpon the riuer of Sore. It is written that he had by his wife
three daughters without other issue, whose names were Gonorilla, Regan,
and Cordeilla, which daughters he greatly loued, but specially Cordeilla
the yoongest farre aboue the two elder. When this Leir therefore was
come to great yeres, & began to waxe vnweldie through age, he thought to
[Sidenote: _Gal. Mon._]
vnderstand the affections of his daughters towards him, and preferre hir
whome he best loued, to the succession ouer the kingdome. Whervpon he
first asked Gonorilla the eldest, how well she loued him: who calling hir
[Sidenote: A triall of loue.]
gods to record, protested that she "loued him more than hir owne life,
which by right and reason should be most deere vnto hir. With which
answer the father being well pleased, turned to the second, and demanded
of hir how well she loued him: who answered (confirming hir saiengs with
great othes) that she loued him more than toong could expresse, and farre
aboue all other creatures of the world."

Then called he his yoongest daughter Cordeilla before him, and asked of
hir what account she made of him, vnto whome she made this answer as
followeth: "Knowing the great loue and fatherlie zeale that you haue
[Sidenote: The answer of the yoongest daughter.]
alwaies borne towards me (for the which I maie not answere you otherwise
than I thinke, and as my conscience leadeth me) I protest vnto you, that
I haue loued you euer, and will continuallie (while I liue) loue you as
my naturall father. And if you would more vnderstand of the loue that I
beare you, assertaine your selfe, that so much as you haue, so much you
are woorth, and so much I loue you, and no more. The father being nothing
content with this answer, married his two eldest daughters, the one vnto
[Sidenote: The two eldest daughters are maried. The realme is promised to
his two daughters.]
Henninus the duke of Cornewall, and the other vnto Maglanus the duke of
Albania, betwixt whome he willed and ordeined that his land should be
diuided after his death, and the one halfe thereof immediatlie should
be assigned to them in hand: but for the third daughter Cordeilla he
reserued nothing."

Neuertheles it fortuned that one of the princes of Gallia (which now
is called France) whose name was Aganippus, hearing of the beautie,
womanhood, and good conditions of the said Cordeilla, desired to haue hir
in mariage, and sent ouer to hir father, requiring that he might haue hir
to wife: to whome answer was made, that he might haue his daughter, but
as for anie dower he could haue none, for all was promised and assured
to hir other sisters alreadie. Aganippus notwithstanding this answer of
deniall to receiue anie thing by way of dower with Cordeilla, tooke hir
to wife, onlie moued thereto (I saie) for respect of hir person and
amiable vertues. This Aganippus was one of the twelue kings that ruled
Gallia in those daies, as in the British historie it is recorded. But to
proceed.

[Sidenote: He gouerned the third part of Gallia as _Gal. Mon._ saith.]
After that Leir was fallen into age, the two dukes that had married his
two eldest daughters, thinking it long yer the gouernment of the land did
come to their hands, arose against him in armour, and reft from him the
gouernance of the land, vpon conditions to be continued for terme of
life: by the which he was put to his portion, that is, to liue after a
rate assigned to him for the maintenance of his estate, which in processe
of time was diminished as well by Maglanus as by Henninus. But the
greatest griefe that Leir tooke, was to see the vnkindnesse of his
daughters, which seemed to thinke that all was too much which their
father had, the same being neuer so little: in so much that going from
the one to the other, he was brought to that miserie, that scarslie they
would allow him one seruant to wait vpon him.

In the end, such was the vnkindnesse, or (as I maie saie) the
vnnaturalnesse which he found in his two daughters, notwithstanding their
faire and pleasant words vttered in time past, that being constreined of
necessitie, he fled the land, & sailed into Gallia, there to seeke some
comfort of his yongest daughter Cordeilla, whom before time he hated. The
ladie Cordeilla hearing that he was arriued in poore estate, she first
sent to him priuilie a certeine summe of monie to apparell himselfe
withall, and to reteine a certeine number of seruants that might attend
vpon him in honorable wise, as apperteined to the estate which he had
borne: and then so accompanied, she appointed him to come to the court,
which he did, and was so ioifullie, honorablie, and louinglie receiued,
both by his sonne in law Aganippus, and also by his daughter Cordeilla,
that his hart was greatlie comforted: for he was no lesse honored, than
if he had beene king of the whole countrie himselfe.

Now when he had informed his sonne in law and his daughter in what sort
he had beene vsed by his other daughters, Aganippus caused a mightie
armie to be put in a readinesse, and likewise a great nauie of ships to
be rigged, to passe ouer into Britaine with Leir his father in law, to
see him againe restored to his kingdome. It was accorded, that Cordeilla
should also go with him to take possession of the land, the which he
promised to leaue vnto hir, as the rightfull inheritour after his
decesse, notwithstanding any former grant made to hir sisters or to their
husbands in anie maner of wise.

Herevpon, when this armie and nauie of ships were readie, Leir and his
daughter Cordeilla with hir husband tooke the sea, and arriuing in
Britaine, fought with their enimies, and discomfited them in battell, in
the which Maglanus and Henninus were slaine: and then was Leir restored
to his kingdome, which he ruled after this by the space of two yeeres,
[Sidenote: _Matth. West_]
and then died, fortie yeeres after he first began to reigne. His bodie
was buried at Leicester in a vaut vnder the chanell of the riuer of Sore
beneath the towne.

       *       *       *       *       *




_The gunarchie of queene Cordeilla, how she was vanquished, of hir
imprisonment and selfe-murther: the contention betweene Cunedag and
Margan nephewes for gouernement, and the euill end thereof._

THE SIXT CHAPTER.


[Sidenote: QUEENE CORDEILLA]
Cordeilla the yoongest daughter of Leir was admitted Q. and supreme
gouernesse of Britaine, in the yeere of the world 3155, before the
bylding of Rome 54, Vzia then reigning in Iuda, and Ieroboam ouer
Israell. This Cordeilla after hir fathers deceasse ruled the land of
Britaine right worthilie during the space of fiue yeeres, in which meane
time hir husband died, and then about the end of those fiue yeeres,
hir two nephewes Margan and Cunedag, sonnes to hir aforesaid sisters,
disdaining to be vnder the gouernment of a woman, leuied warre against
hir, and destroied a great part of the land, and finallie tooke hir
prisoner, and laid hir fast in ward, wherewith she tooke such griefe,
being a woman of a manlie courage, and despairing to recouer libertie,
there she slue hirselfe, when she had reigned (as before is mentioned)
the tearme of fiue yeeres.

[Sidenote: CUNEDAG AND MARGAN.]
Cunedagius and Marganus nephewes to Cordeilla, hauing recouered the land
out of hir hands, diuided the same betwixt them, that is to saie, the
countrie ouer and beyond Humber fell to Margan, as it stretcheth euen to
Catnesse, and the other part lieng south and by-west, was assigned to
Cunedagius. This partition chanced in the yeere of the world 3170, before
the building of Rome 47, Uzia as then reigning in Iuda, and Ieroboam
in Israell. Afterwards, these two cousins, Cunedag and Margan, had not
reigned thus past a two yeeres, but thorough some seditious persons,
Margan was persuaded to raise warre against Cunedag, telling him in his
eare, how it was a shame for him being come of the elder sister, not to
haue the rule of the whole Ile in his hand. Herevpon ouercome with pride,
[Sidenote: Margan inuadeth his cousine Cunedag.]
ambition, and couetousnesse, he raised an armie, and entring into the
land of Cunedag, he burned and destroied the countrie before him in
miserable maner.

Cunedag in all hast to resist his aduersarie, assembled also all the
power he could make, and comming with the same against Margan, gaue him
battell, in the which he slue a great number of Margans people, and put
the residue to flight, and furthermore pursued him from countrie to
countrie, till he came into Cambria, now called Wales, where the said
Margan gaue him eftsoones a new battell: but being too weake in number
of men, he was there ouercome and slaine in the field, by reason whereof
[Sidenote: Margan is slaine. _Matt. West._]
that countrie tooke name of him, being there slaine, and so is called to
this daie Glau Margan, which is to meane in our English toong, Margans
land. This was the end of that Margan, after he had reigned with his
brother two yeeres, or thereabouts.

[Sidenote: CUNEDAGUS ALONE.]
After the death of Margan, Cunedag the sonne of Hennius and Ragaie
(middlemost daughter of Leir before mentioned) became ruler of all the
whole land of Britaine, in the yeare of the world 3172, before the
building of Rome 45, Vzia still reigning in Iuda, and Ieroboam in
Israell. He gouerned this Ile well and honourablie for the tearme of 33
yeares, and then dieng, his bodie was buried at Troinouant or London.
Moreouer, our writers doo report, that he builded three temples, one to
Mars at Perth in Scotland, another to Mercurie at Bangor, and the third
to Apollo in Cornewall.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Of Riuallus, Gurgustius, Sysillius, Iago, and Kinimacus, rulers of
Britaine by succession, and of the accidents coincident with their
times_.

THE SEUENTH CHAPTER.


[Sidenote: RIUALLUS THE I3. RULER.]
Riuallus, the sonne of Cunedag, began to reigne ouer the Britaines in the
yeare of the world 3203, before the building of Rome 15, Ioathan as then
being king of Iuda, and Phacea king of Israel. This Riuall gouerned the
Iland in great welth and prosperitie. In his time it rained bloud by the
[Sidenote: It rained blood. _Matth. West._]
space of three daies togither; after which raine ensued such an exceeding
number and multitude of flies, so noisome and contagious, that much
people died by reason thereof. When he had reigned 46 yeares he died, and
[Sidenote: Rome builded.]
was buried at Caerbranke now called Yorke. In the time of this Riuals
reigne was the citie of Rome builded, after concordance of most part of
writers. Perdix also a wizard, and a learned astrologian florished and
writ his prophesies, and Herene also.

[Sidenote: GURGUSTIUS THE 14. RULER.]
Gurgustius, the son of the before named Riuall, began to gouerne the
Britaines in the yeare after the creation of the world 3249, and after
the first foundation of Rome 33, Ezechias reigning in Iuda. This
Gurgustius in the chronicle of England, is called Gorbodian the sonne of
Reignold, he reigned 37 yeares, then departing this life, was buried at
Caerbranke (now called Yorke) by his father.

[Sidenote: SYSILLIUS THE 15. RULER.]
Sysillius, or after some writers SYLUIUS, the brother of Gurgustius, was
chosen to haue the gouernance of Britaine, in the yere of the world 3287,
and after the building of Rome 71, Manasses still reigning in Iuda. This
Sysillius in the English chronicle is named Secill. He reigned 49 yeares,
and then died, and was buried at Carbadon, now called Bath.

[Sidenote: JAGO THE 16. RULER.]
Iago or Lago, the cousin of Gurgustius, as next inheritor to Sysillius,
tooke vpon him the gouernement of Britaine, in the yeare of the world
3386, and after the building of Rome 120, in whose time the citie of
Ierusalem was taken by Nabuchodonozar and the king of Iuda, Mathania,
otherwise called Zedechias, being slaine. This Iago or Lago died without
issue, when he had reigned 28 yeares, and was buried at Yorke.

[Sidenote: KINIMACUS THE 17. RULER.]
Kinimacus or Kinmarus the sonne of Sysillius as some write, or rather the
brother of Iago, began to gouerne the land of Britain, in the yere of the
world 3364, and after the building of Rome 148, the Iewes as then being
in the third yeare of their captiuitie of Babylon. This Kinimacus
departed this life, after he had reigned 54 yeares, and was buried at
Yorke.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Of Gorbodug and his two sonnes Ferrex and Porrex, one brother killeth
another, the mother sluieth hir sonne, and how Britaine by ciuill warres
(for lacke of issue legitimate to the government) of a monarchie became a
pentarchie: the end of Brutes line_.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER.


[Sidenote: GORBODUG THE 18. RULER.]
Gorbodug the sonne of Kinimacus began his reigne ouer the Britains, in
the yeare after the creation of the world 3418, from the building of
the citie of Rome 202, the 58 of the Iews captiuitie at Babylon. This
Gorbodug by most likelihood to bring histories to accord, should reigne
about the tearme of 62 yeares, and then departing this world, was buried
at London, leauing after him two sonnes Ferrex and Porrex, or after some
writers, Ferreus and Porreus.

[Sidenote: FERREX THE 19. RULER]
Ferrex with Porrex his brother began iointlie to rule ouer the Britaines,
in the yeare of the world 3476, after the building of Rome 260, at which
time, the people of Rome forsooke their citie in their rebellious mood.
These two brethren continued for a time in good friendship and amitie,
till at length through couetousnesse, and desire of greater dominion,
prouoked by flatterers, they fell at variance and discord, wherby Ferrex
[Sidenote: Ferrex fled into Gallia.]
was constreined to flee into Gallia, and there purchased aid of a great
duke called Gunhardus or Suardus, and so returned into Britaine, thinking
to preuaile and obteine the dominion of the whole Iland. But his brother
Porrex was readie to receiue him with battell after he was landed, in the
which battell Ferrex was slaine, with the more part of his people. The
English chronicle saith, that Porrex was he that fled into France, &
at his returne, was slaine, and that Ferrex suruiued. But Geffrey
of Monmouth & Polychronicon are of a contrarie opinion. Matthew
[Sidenote: _Matth. West._]
Westmonasteriensis writeth, that Porrex deuising waies to kill Ferrex,
atchiued his purpose and slue him. But whether of them so euer suruiued,
the mother of them was so highlie offended for the death of him that was
slaine, whom she most intierlie loued, that setting apart all motherlie
affection, she found the meanes to enter the chamber of him that suruiue
[Sidenote: The mother killeth hir son.]
in the night season, and as he slept, she with the helpe of hir maidens
slue him, and cut him into small peeces, as the writers doo affirme. Such
was the end of these two brethren, after they had reigned by the space of
foure or fiue yeares.

After this followed a troublous season, full of cruell warre, and
seditious discord, whereby in the end, and for the space of fiftie
yeares, the monarchie or sole gouernement of the Iland became a
pentarchie, that is, it was diuided betwixt fiue kings or rulers,
till Dunwallon of Cornewall ouercame them all. Thus the line of Brute
(according to the report of most writers) tooke an end: for after the
[Sidenote: _Robert Record_.]
death of the two foresaid brethren, no rightfull inheritor was left aliue
to succeed them in the kingdome. The names of these fiue kings are found
in certeine old pedegrees: and although the same be much corrupted in
diuers copies, yet these vndernamed are the most agreeable.

But of these fiue kings or dukes, the English chronicle alloweth Cloton
king of Cornewall for most rightfull heire. There appeareth not any time
certeine by report of ancient authors, how long this variance continued
[Sidenote: _Fabian_. Ciuill warres 51. yeares.]
amongst the Britains: but (as some say) it lasted for the space of 51
yeres, coniecturing so much by that which is recorded in Polychron, who
saith, who it endured euen till the beginning of the reigne of Mulmucius
Dunwallon, who began to gouerne from the time that Brute first entred
Britaine, about the space of 703 three yeares. (sic)

 Here ye must note, that there is difference amongst writers about the
supputation and account of these yeares, insomuch that some making their
reckoning after certeine writers, and finding the same to varie aboue
three C. yeares, are brought into further doubt of the truth of the
whole historie: but whereas other haue by diligent search tried out
the continuance of euerie gouernors reigne, and reduced the same to a
likelihood of some conformitie, I haue thought best to follow the same,
leauing the credit thereof with the first authors.


THE PENTARCHIE.

1 Rudacus  king of  Wales.
2 Clotenus king of  Cornewall.
3 Pinnor   king of  Loegria.
4 Staterus king of  Albania.
5 Yewan    king of  Northumberland.



THE END OF THE SECOND BOOKE.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles (1 of 6): The Historie of
England (2 of 8), by Raphael Holinshed

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIE OF ENGLAND ***

***** This file should be named 13624.txt or 13624.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/6/2/13624/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Lesley Halamek and the Online Distributed

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
