The Project Gutenberg EBook of Compilation of the Messages and Papers of
the Presidents, by Theodore Roosevelt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents
       Section 2 (of 2) of Supplemental Volume: Theodore Roosevelt, Supplement

Author: Theodore Roosevelt

Release Date: October 29, 2004 [EBook #13891]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEODORE ROOSEVELT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Garcia and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.











A COMPILATION OF THE MESSAGES AND PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS

BY JAMES D. RICHARDSON




Theodore Roosevelt

September 14, 1901

       *       *       *       *       *

Messages, Proclamations, and Executive Orders to the
end of the Fifty-seventh Congress, First Session

       *       *       *       *       *




Theodore Roosevelt

Theodore Roosevelt, the twenty-seventh President of the United States,
was born in the city of New York, October 27, 1858. His ancestors on the
paternal side were of an old Knickerbocker family, and on the maternal
side of Scotch-Irish descent. He was educated at home under private
tuition and prepared for matriculation into Harvard, where he was
graduated in 1880. He spent the year of 1881 in study and travel. During
the years 1882-1884 he was an assemblyman in the legislature of New
York. During this term of service he introduced the first civil service
bill in the legislature in 1883, and its passage was almost simultaneous
with the passage of the Civil Service Bill through Congress. In 1884
he was the Chairman of the delegation from New York to the National
Republican Convention. He received the nomination for mayor of the city
of New York in 1886 as an Independent, but was defeated. He was made
Civil Service Commissioner by President Harrison in 1889 and served as
president of the board until May, 1895. He resigned to become President
of the New York Board of Police Commissioners in May, 1895. This
position, in which the arduous duties were discharged with remarkable
vigor and fearlessness, he resigned in 1897 to become Assistant
Secretary of the Navy. On the breaking out of the Spanish-American War
in 1898, he resigned on May 6, and, entering the army, organized the
First United States Volunteer ("Rough Rider") Regiment of Cavalry,
recommending Col. L.G. Wood to the command, and taking for himself the
second-in-command as lieutenant-colonel. He had gained his military
experience as a member of the Eighth Regiment of N.Y.N.G. from
1884-1888, during which time he rose to the rank of captain. The Rough
Riders were embarked at Tampa, Fla., with the advance of Shafter's
invading army, and sailed for Cuba on June 15, 1898. They participated
in every engagement preceding the fall of Santiago. Theodore Roosevelt
led the desperate charge of the Ninth Cavalry and the Rough Riders at
the Battle of San Juan Hill on July 1. He was made a colonel on July 11.
He received the nomination on September 27, 1898, for Governor of the
State of New York, obtaining 753 votes, against 218 for Gov. Frank S.
Black. At the election Theodore Roosevelt was supported by a majority
of the Independent Republicans and many Democrats, and defeated the
Democratic candidate, Judge Augustus Van Wyck, by a plurality of 18,079.
At the Republican Convention, held at Philadelphia in June, 1900, he was
nominated for Vice-President, upon which he resigned the governorship
of New York. Was elected Vice-President in November, 1900, and took the
oath of office March 4, 1901. President McKinley was shot September 6,
1901, and died September 14. His Cabinet announced his death to the
Vice-President, who took the oath of President at the residence of
Mr. Ansley Wilcox in Buffalo, before Judge John R. Hazel, of the United
States District Court, on September 14.




VICE-PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT'S INAUGURAL ADDRESS AS VICE-PRESIDENT.

The history of free government is in large part the history of those
representative legislative bodies in which, from the earliest times,
free government has found its loftiest expression. They must ever hold
a peculiar and exalted position in the record which tells how the great
nations of the world have endeavored to achieve and preserve orderly
freedom. No man can render to his fellows greater service than is
rendered by him who, with fearlessness and honesty, with sanity and
disinterestedness, does his life work as a member of such a body.
Especially is this the case when the legislature in which the service is
rendered is a vital part in the governmental machinery of one of those
world powers to whose hands, in the course of the ages, is intrusted a
leading part in shaping the destinies of mankind. For weal or for woe,
for good or for evil, this is true of our own mighty nation. Great
privileges and great powers are ours, and heavy are the responsibilities
that go with these privileges and these powers. Accordingly as we do
well or ill, so shall mankind in the future be raised or cast down.
We belong to a young nation, already of giant strength, yet whose
political strength is but a forecast of the power that is to come.
We stand supreme in a continent, in a hemisphere. East and west we look
across the two great oceans toward the larger world life in which,
whether we will or not, we must take an ever-increasing share. And as,
keen-eyed, we gaze into the coming years, duties, new and old, rise
thick and fast to confront us from within and from without. There is
every reason why we should face these duties with a sober appreciation
alike of their importance and of their difficulty. But there is also
every reason for facing them with highhearted resolution and eager and
confident faith in our capacity to do them aright. A great work lies
already to the hand of this generation; it should count itself happy,
indeed, that to it is given the privilege of doing such a work. A
leading part therein must be taken by this the august and powerful
legislative body over which I have been called upon to preside. Most
deeply do I appreciate the privilege of my position; for high, indeed,
is the honor of presiding over the American Senate at the outset of
the twentieth century.

MARCH 4, 1901.




MESSAGE.


WHITE HOUSE, _December 3, 1901_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives:_

The Congress assembles this year under the shadow of a great calamity.
On the sixth of September, President McKinley was shot by an anarchist
while attending the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo, and died in that
city on the fourteenth of that month.

Of the last seven elected Presidents, he is the third who has been
murdered, and the bare recital of this fact is sufficient to justify
grave alarm among all loyal American citizens. Moreover, the
circumstances of this, the third assassination of an American President,
have a peculiarly sinister significance. Both President Lincoln and
President Garfield were killed by assassins of types unfortunately not
uncommon in history; President Lincoln falling a victim to the terrible
passions aroused by four years of civil war, and President Garfield
to the revengeful vanity of a disappointed office-seeker. President
McKinley was killed by an utterly depraved criminal belonging to that
body of criminals who object to all governments, good and bad alike,
who are against any form of popular liberty if it is guaranteed by even
the most just and liberal laws, and who are as hostile to the upright
exponent of a free people's sober will as to the tyrannical and
irresponsible despot.

It is not too much to say that at the time of President McKinley's
death he was the most widely loved man in all the United States; while
we have never had any public man of his position who has been so wholly
free from the bitter animosities incident to public life. His political
opponents were the first to bear the heartiest and most generous tribute
to the broad kindliness of nature, the sweetness and gentleness of
character which so endeared him to his close associates. To a standard
of lofty integrity in public life he united the tender affections and
home virtues which are all-important in the make-up of national
character. A gallant soldier in the great war for the Union, he also
shone as an example to all our people because of his conduct in the most
sacred and intimate of home relations. There could be no personal hatred
of him, for he never acted with aught but consideration for the welfare
of others. No one could fail to respect him who knew him in public or
private life. The defenders of those murderous criminals who seek to
excuse their criminality by asserting that it is exercised for political
ends, inveigh against wealth and irresponsible power. But for this
assassination even this base apology cannot be urged.

President McKinley was a man of moderate means, a man whose stock sprang
from the sturdy tillers of the soil, who had himself belonged among the
wage-workers, who had entered the Army as a private soldier. Wealth was
not struck at when the President was assassinated, but the honest toil
which is content with moderate gains after a lifetime of unremitting
labor, largely in the service of the public. Still less was power struck
at in the sense that power is irresponsible or centered in the hands of
any one individual. The blow was not aimed at tyranny or wealth. It was
aimed at one of the strongest champions the wage-worker has ever had; at
one of the most faithful representatives of the system of public rights
and representative government who has ever risen to public office.
President McKinley filled that political office for which the entire
people vote, and no President--not even Lincoln himself--was ever more
earnestly anxious to represent the well thought-out wishes of the
people; his one anxiety in every crisis was to keep in closest touch
with the people--to find out what they thought and to endeavor to give
expression to their thought, after having endeavored to guide that
thought aright. He had just been re-elected to the Presidency because
the majority of our citizens, the majority of our farmers and
wage-workers, believed that he had faithfully upheld their interests for
four years. They felt themselves in close and intimate touch with him.
They felt that he represented so well and so honorably all their ideals
and aspirations that they wished him to continue for another four years
to represent them.

And this was the man at whom the assassin struck! That there might be
nothing lacking to complete the Judas-like infamy of his act, he took
advantage of an occasion when the President was meeting the people
generally; and advancing as if to take the hand out-stretched to him
in kindly and brotherly fellowship, he turned the noble and generous
confidence of the victim into an opportunity to strike the fatal blow.
There is no baser deed in all the annals of crime.

The shock, the grief of the country, are bitter in the minds of all
who saw the dark days, while the President yet hovered between life and
death. At last the light was stilled in the kindly eyes and the breath
went from the lips that even in mortal agony uttered no words save of
forgiveness to his murderer, of love for his friends, and of unfaltering
trust in the will of the Most High. Such a death, crowning the glory of
such a life, leaves us with infinite sorrow, but with such pride in what
he had accomplished and in his own personal character, that we feel the
blow not as struck at him, but as struck at the Nation. We mourn a good
and great President who is dead; but while we mourn we are lifted up by
the splendid achievements of his life and the grand heroism with which
he met his death.

When we turn from the man to the Nation, the harm done is so great as
to excite our gravest apprehensions and to demand our wisest and most
resolute action. This criminal was a professed anarchist, inflamed by
the teachings of professed anarchists, and probably also by the reckless
utterances of those who, on the stump and in the public press, appeal to
the dark and evil spirits of malice and greed, envy and sullen hatred.
The wind is sowed by the men who preach such doctrines, and they cannot
escape their share of responsibility for the whirlwind that is reaped.
This applies alike to the deliberate demagogue, to the exploiter of
sensationalism, and to the crude and foolish visionary who, for whatever
reason, apologizes for crime or excites aimless discontent.

The blow was aimed not at this President, but at all Presidents; at
every symbol of government. President McKinley was as emphatically the
embodiment of the popular will of the Nation expressed through the
forms of law as a New England town meeting is in similar fashion the
embodiment of the law-abiding purpose and practice of the people of the
town. On no conceivable theory could the murder of the President be
accepted as due to protest against "inequalities in the social order,"
save as the murder of all the freemen engaged in a town meeting could
be accepted as a protest against that social inequality which puts a
malefactor in jail. Anarchy is no more an expression of "social
discontent" than picking pockets or wife-beating.

The anarchist, and especially the anarchist in the United States, is
merely one type of criminal, more dangerous than any other because he
represents the same depravity in a greater degree. The man who advocates
anarchy directly or indirectly, in any shape or fashion, or the man
who apologizes for anarchists and their deeds, makes himself morally
accessory to murder before the fact. The anarchist is a criminal whose
perverted instincts lead him to prefer confusion and chaos to the most
beneficent form of social order. His protest of concern for workingmen
is outrageous in its impudent falsity; for if the political institutions
of this country do not afford opportunity to every honest and
intelligent son of toil, then the door of hope is forever closed against
him. The anarchist is everywhere not merely the enemy of system and of
progress, but the deadly foe of liberty. If ever anarchy is triumphant,
its triumph will last for but one red moment, to be succeeded for ages
by the gloomy night of despotism.

For the anarchist himself, whether he preaches or practices his
doctrines, we need not have one particle more concern than for any
ordinary murderer. He is not the victim of social or political
injustice. There are no wrongs to remedy in his case. The cause of his
criminality is to be found in his own evil passions and in the evil
conduct of those who urge him on, not in any failure by others or by the
State to do justice to him or his. He is a malefactor and nothing else.
He is in no sense, in no shape or way, a "product of social conditions,"
save as a highwayman is "produced" by the fact than an unarmed man
happens to have a purse. It is a travesty upon the great and holy names
of liberty and freedom to permit them to be invoked in such a cause.
No man or body of men preaching anarchistic doctrines should be allowed
at large any more than if preaching the murder of some specified private
individual. Anarchistic speeches, writings, and meetings are essentially
seditious and treasonable.

I earnestly recommend to the Congress that in the exercise of its wise
discretion it should take into consideration the coming to this country
of anarchists or persons professing principles hostile to all government
and justifying the murder of those placed in authority. Such individuals
as those who not long ago gathered in open meeting to glorify the murder
of King Humbert of Italy perpetrate a crime, and the law should ensure
their rigorous punishment. They and those like them should be kept out
of this country; and if found here they should be promptly deported to
the country whence they came; and far-reaching provision should be made
for the punishment of those who stay. No matter calls more urgently for
the wisest thought of the Congress.

The Federal courts should be given jurisdiction over any man who kills
or attempts to kill the President or any man who by the Constitution or
by law is in line of succession for the Presidency, while the punishment
for an unsuccessful attempt should be proportioned to the enormity of
the offense against our institutions.

Anarchy is a crime against the whole human race; and all mankind should
band against the anarchist. His crime should be made an offense against
the law of nations, like piracy and that form of man-stealing known as
the slave trade; for it is of far blacker infamy than either. It should
be so declared by treaties among all civilized powers. Such treaties
would give to the Federal Government the power of dealing with the
crime.

A grim commentary upon the folly of the anarchist position was afforded
by the attitude of the law toward this very criminal who had just taken
the life of the President. The people would have torn him limb from limb
if it had not been that the law he defied was at once invoked in his
behalf. So far from his deed being committed on behalf of the people
against the Government, the Government was obliged at once to exert its
full police power to save him from instant death at the hands of the
people. Moreover, his deed worked not the slightest dislocation in our
governmental system, and the danger of a recurrence of such deeds, no
matter how great it might grow, would work only in the direction of
strengthening and giving harshness to the forces of order. No man
will ever be restrained from becoming President by any fear as to his
personal safety. If the risk to the President's life became great, it
would mean that the office would more and more come to be filled by men
of a spirit which would make them resolute and merciless in dealing
with every friend of disorder. This great country will not fall into
anarchy, and if anarchists should ever become a serious menace to its
institutions, they would not merely be stamped out, but would involve in
their own ruin every active or passive sympathizer with their doctrines.
The American people are slow to wrath, but when their wrath is once
kindled it burns like a consuming flame.

During the last five years business confidence has been restored,
and the nation is to be congratulated because of its present abounding
prosperity. Such prosperity can never be created by law alone, although
it is easy enough to destroy it by mischievous laws. If the hand of the
Lord is heavy upon any country, if flood or drought comes, human wisdom
is powerless to avert the calamity. Moreover, no law can guard us
against the consequences of our own folly. The men who are idle or
credulous, the men who seek gains not by genuine work with head or hand
but by gambling in any form, are always a source of menace not only
to themselves but to others. If the business world loses its head,
it loses what legislation cannot supply. Fundamentally the welfare of
each citizen, and therefore the welfare of the aggregate of citizens
which makes the nation, must rest upon individual thrift and energy,
resolution, and intelligence. Nothing can take the place of this
individual capacity; but wise legislation and honest and intelligent
administration can give it the fullest scope, the largest opportunity
to work to good effect.

The tremendous and highly complex industrial development which went on
with ever accelerated rapidity during the latter half of the nineteenth
century brings us face to face, at the beginning of the twentieth, with
very serious social problems. The old laws, and the old customs which
had almost the binding force of law, were once quite sufficient to
regulate the accumulation and distribution of wealth. Since the
industrial changes which have so enormously increased the productive
power of mankind, they are no longer sufficient.

The growth of cities has gone on beyond comparison faster than the
growth of the country, and the upbuilding of the great industrial
centers has meant a startling increase, not merely in the aggregate of
wealth, but in the number of very large individual, and especially of
very large corporate, fortunes. The creation of these great corporate
fortunes has not been due to the tariff nor to any other governmental
action, but to natural causes in the business world, operating in other
countries as they operate in our own.

The process has aroused much antagonism, a great part of which is wholly
without warrant. It is not true that as the rich have grown richer the
poor have grown poorer. On the contrary, never before has the average
man, the wage-worker, the farmer, the small trader, been so well off
as in this country and at the present time. There have been abuses
connected with the accumulation of wealth; yet it remains true that a
fortune accumulated in legitimate business can be accumulated by the
person specially benefited only on condition of conferring immense
incidental benefits upon others. Successful enterprise, of the type
which benefits all mankind, can only exist if the conditions are such
as to offer great prizes as the rewards of success.

The captains of industry who have driven the railway systems across
this continent, who have built up our commerce, who have developed our
manufactures, have on the whole done great good to our people. Without
them the material development of which we are so justly proud could
never have taken place. Moreover, we should recognize the immense
importance of this material development of leaving as unhampered as is
compatible with the public good the strong and forceful men upon whom
the success of business operations inevitably rests. The slightest study
of business conditions will satisfy anyone capable of forming a judgment
that the personal equation is the most important factor in a business
operation; that the business ability of the man at the head of any
business concern, big or little, is usually the factor which fixes
the gulf between striking success and hopeless failure.

An additional reason for caution in dealing with corporations is to be
found in the international commercial conditions of today. The same
business conditions which have produced the great aggregations of
corporate and individual wealth have made them very potent factors
in international commercial competition. Business concerns which have
the largest means at their disposal and are managed by the ablest men
are naturally those which take the lead in the strife for commercial
supremacy among the nations of the world. America has only just begun
to assume that commanding position in the international business world
which we believe will more and more be hers. It is of the utmost
importance that this position be not jeoparded, especially at a time
when the overflowing abundance of our own natural resources and the
skill, business energy, and mechanical aptitude of our people make
foreign markets essential. Under such conditions it would be most
unwise to cramp or to fetter the youthful strength of our Nation.

Moreover, it cannot too often be pointed out that to strike with
ignorant violence at the interests of one set of men almost inevitably
endangers the interests of all. The fundamental rule in our national
life--the rule which underlies all others--is that, on the whole, and in
the long run, we shall go up or down together. There are exceptions;
and in times of prosperity some will prosper far more, and in times
of adversity, some will suffer far more, than others; but speaking
generally, a period of good times means that all share more or less in
them, and in a period of hard times all feel the stress to a greater or
less degree. It surely ought not to be necessary to enter into any proof
of this statement; the memory of the lean years which began in 1893 is
still vivid, and we can contrast them with the conditions in this very
year which is now closing. Disaster to great business enterprises
can never have its effects limited to the men at the top. It spreads
through-out, and while it is bad for everybody, it is worst for those
farthest down. The capitalist may be shorn of his luxuries; but the
wage-worker may be deprived of even bare necessities.

The mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must
be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance.
Many of those who have made it their vocation to denounce the great
industrial combinations which are popularly, although with technical
inaccuracy, known as "trusts," appeal especially to hatred and fear.
These are precisely the two emotions, particularly when combined with
ignorance, which unfit men for the exercise of cool and steady judgment.
In facing new industrial conditions, the whole history of the world
shows that legislation will generally be both unwise and ineffective
unless undertaken after calm inquiry and with sober self-restraint.
Much of the legislation directed at the trusts would have been
exceedingly mischievous had it not also been entirely ineffective.
In accordance with a well-known sociological law, the ignorant or
reckless agitator has been the really effective friend of the evils
which he has been nominally opposing. In dealing with business
interests, for the Government to undertake by crude and ill-considered
legislation to do what may turn out to be bad, would be to incur the
risk of such far-reaching national disaster that it would be preferable
to undertake nothing at all. The men who demand the impossible or the
undesirable serve as the allies of the forces with which they are
nominally at war, for they hamper those who would endeavor to find out
in rational fashion what the wrongs really are and to what extent and
in what manner it is practicable to apply remedies.

All this is true; and yet it is also true that there are real and grave
evils, one of the chief being over-capitalization because of its many
baleful consequences; and a resolute and practical effort must be made
to correct these evils.

There is a widespread conviction in the minds of the American people
that the great corporations known as trusts are in certain of their
features and tendencies hurtful to the general welfare. This springs
from no spirit of envy or uncharitableness, nor lack of pride in the
great industrial achievements that have placed this country at the head
of the nations struggling for commercial supremacy. It does not rest
upon a lack of intelligent appreciation of the necessity of meeting
changing and changed conditions of trade with new methods, nor upon
ignorance of the fact that combination of capital in the effort to
accomplish great things is necessary when the world's progress demands
that great things be done. It is based upon sincere conviction that
combination and concentration should be, not prohibited, but supervised
and within reasonable limits controlled; and in my judgment this
conviction is right.

It is no limitation upon property rights or freedom of contract to
require that when men receive from Government the privilege of doing
business under corporate form, which frees them from individual
responsibility, and enables them to call into their enterprises the
capital of the public, they shall do so upon absolutely truthful
representations as to the value of the property in which the capital is
to be invested. Corporations engaged in interstate commerce should be
regulated if they are found to exercise a license working to the public
injury. It should be as much the aim of those who seek for social
betterment to rid the business world of crimes of cunning as to rid the
entire body politic of crimes of violence. Great corporations exist only
because they are created and safeguarded by our institutions; and it is
therefore our right and our duty to see that they work in harmony with
these institutions.

The first essential in determining how to deal with the great industrial
combinations is knowledge of the facts--publicity. In the interest of
the public, the Government should have the right to inspect and examine
the workings of the great corporations engaged in interstate business.
Publicity is the only sure remedy which we can now invoke. What further
remedies are needed in the way of governmental regulation, or taxation,
can only be determined after publicity has been obtained, by process
of law, and in the course of administration. The first requisite is
knowledge, full and complete--knowledge which may be made public to
the world.

Artificial bodies, such as corporations and joint stock or other
associations, depending upon any statutory law for their existence or
privileges, should be subject to proper governmental supervision, and
full and accurate information as to their operations should be made
public regularly at reasonable intervals.

The large corporations, commonly called trusts, though organized in
one State, always do business in many States, often doing very little
business in the State where they are incorporated. There is utter lack
of uniformity in the State laws about them; and as no State has any
exclusive interest in or power over their acts, it has in practice
proved impossible to get adequate regulation through State action.
Therefore, in the interest of the whole people, the Nation should,
without interfering with the power of the States in the matter itself,
also assume power of supervision and regulation over all corporations
doing an interstate business. This is especially true where the
corporation derives a portion of its wealth from the existence of some
monopolistic element or tendency in its business. There would be no
hardship in such supervision; banks are subject to it, and in their case
it is now accepted as a simple matter of course. Indeed, it is probable
that supervision of corporations by the National Government need not go
so far as is now the case with the supervision exercised over them by
so conservative a State as Massachusetts, in order to produce excellent
results.

When the Constitution was adopted, at the end of the eighteenth
century, no human wisdom could foretell the sweeping changes, alike in
industrial and political conditions, which were to take place by the
beginning of the twentieth century. At that time it was accepted as a
matter of course that the several States were the proper authorities to
regulate, so far as was then necessary, the comparatively insignificant
and strictly localized corporate bodies of the day. The conditions are
now wholly different and wholly different action is called for. I believe
that a law can be framed which will enable the National Government
to exercise control along the lines above indicated; profiting by
the experience gained through the passage and administration of the
Interstate-Commerce Act. If, however, the judgment of the Congress
is that it lacks the constitutional power to pass such an act, then
a constitutional amendment should be submitted to confer the power.

There should be created a Cabinet officer, to be known as Secretary of
Commerce and Industries, as provided in the bill introduced at the last
session of the Congress. It should be his province to deal with commerce
in its broadest sense; including among many other things whatever
concerns labor and all matters affecting the great business corporations
and our merchant marine.

The course proposed is one phase of what should be a comprehensive
and far-reaching scheme of constructive statesmanship for the purpose
of broadening our markets, securing our business interests on a safe
basis, and making firm our new position in the international industrial
world; while scrupulously safeguarding the rights of wage-worker and
capitalist, of investor and private citizen, so as to secure equity as
between man and man in this Republic.

With the sole exception of the farming interest, no one matter
is of such vital moment to our whole people as the welfare of the
wage-workers. If the farmer and the wage-worker are well off, it is
absolutely certain that all others will be well off too. It Is therefore
a matter for hearty congratulation that on the whole wages are higher
to-day in the United States than ever before in our history, and far
higher than in any other country. The standard of living is also higher
than ever before. Every effort of legislator and administrator should
be bent to secure the permanency of this condition of things and its
improvement wherever possible. Not only must our labor be protected by
the tariff, but it should also be protected so far as it is possible
from the presence in this country of any laborers brought over by
contract, or of those who, coming freely, yet represent a standard of
living so depressed that they can undersell our men in the labor market
and drag them to a lower level. I regard it as necessary, with this end
in view, to re-enact immediately the law excluding Chinese laborers and
to strengthen it wherever necessary in order to make its enforcement
entirely effective.

The National Government should demand the highest quality of service
from its employees; and in return it should be a good employer. If
possible legislation should be passed, in connection with the Interstate
Commerce Law, which will render effective the efforts of different
States to do away with the competition of convict contract labor in
the open labor market. So far as practicable under the conditions of
Government work, provision should be made to render the enforcement
of the eight-hour law easy and certain. In all industries carried on
directly or indirectly for the United States Government women and
children should be protected from excessive hours of labor, from night
work, and from work under unsanitary conditions. The Government should
provide in its contracts that all work should be done under "fair"
conditions, and in addition to setting a high standard should uphold
it by proper inspection, extending if necessary to the subcontractors.
The Government should forbid all night work for women and children, as
well as excessive overtime. For the District of Columbia a good factory
law should be passed; and, as a powerful indirect aid to such laws,
provision should be made to turn the inhabited alleys, the existence of
which is a reproach to our Capital city, into minor streets, where the
inhabitants can live under conditions favorable to health and morals.

American wage-workers work with their heads as well as their hands.
Moreover, they take a keen pride in what they are doing; so that,
independent of the reward, they wish to turn out a perfect job. This is
the great secret of our success in competition with the labor of foreign
countries.

The most vital problem with which this country, and for that matter the
whole civilized world, has to deal, is the problem which has for one
side the betterment of social conditions, moral and physical, in large
cities, and for another side the effort to deal with that tangle of
far-reaching questions which we group together when we speak of "labor."
The chief factor in the success of each man--wage-worker, farmer, and
capitalist alike--must ever be the sum total of his own individual
qualities and abilities. Second only to this comes the power of acting
in combination or association with others. Very great good has been and
will be accomplished by associations or unions of wage-workers, when
managed with forethought, and when they combine insistence upon their
own rights with law-abiding respect for the rights of others. The
display of these qualities in such bodies is a duty to the nation no
less than to the associations themselves. Finally, there must also in
many cases be action by the Government in order to safeguard the rights
and interests of all. Under our Constitution there is much more scope
for such action by the State and the municipality than by the nation.
But on points such as those touched on above the National Government
can act.

When all is said and done, the rule of brotherhood remains as the
indispensable prerequisite to success in the kind of national life for
which we strive. Each man must work for himself, and unless he so works
no outside help can avail him; but each man must remember also that he
is indeed his brother's keeper, and that while no man who refuses to
walk can be carried with advantage to himself or anyone else, yet that
each at times stumbles or halts, that each at times needs to have the
helping hand outstretched to him. To be permanently effective, aid must
always take the form of helping a man to help himself; and we can all
best help ourselves by joining together in the work that is of common
interest to all.

Our present immigration laws are unsatisfactory. We need every honest
and efficient immigrant fitted to become an American citizen, every
immigrant who comes here to stay, who brings here a strong body, a stout
heart, a good head, and a resolute purpose to do his duty well in every
way and to bring up his children as law-abiding and God-fearing members
of the community. But there should be a comprehensive law enacted with
the object of working a threefold improvement over our present system.
First, we should aim to exclude absolutely not only all persons who
are known to be believers in anarchistic principles or members of
anarchistic societies, but also all persons who are of a low moral
tendency or of unsavory reputation. This means that we should require
a more thorough system of inspection abroad and a more rigid system
of examination at our immigration ports, the former being especially
necessary.

The second object of a proper immigration law ought to be to secure by
a careful and not merely perfunctory educational test some intelligent
capacity to appreciate American institutions and act sanely as American
citizens. This would not keep out all anarchists, for many of them
belong to the intelligent criminal class. But it would do what is also
in point, that is, tend to decrease the sum of ignorance, so potent in
producing the envy, suspicion, malignant passion, and hatred of order,
out of which anarchistic sentiment inevitably springs. Finally, all
persons should be excluded who are below a certain standard of economic
fitness to enter our industrial field as competitors with American
labor. There should be proper proof of personal capacity to earn an
American living and enough money to insure a decent start under American
conditions. This would stop the influx of cheap labor, and the resulting
competition which gives rise to so much of bitterness in American
industrial life; and it would dry up the springs of the pestilential
social conditions in our great cities, where anarchistic organizations
have their greatest possibility of growth.

Both the educational and economic tests in a wise immigration law should
be designed to protect and elevate the general body politic and social.
A very close supervision should be exercised over the steamship
companies which mainly bring over the immigrants, and they should be
held to a strict accountability for any infraction of the law.

There is general acquiescence in our present tariff system as a
national policy. The first requisite to our prosperity is the continuity
and stability of this economic policy. Nothing could be more unwise than
to disturb the business interests of the country by any general tariff
change at this time. Doubt, apprehension, uncertainty are exactly what
we most wish to avoid in the interest of our commercial and material
well-being. Our experience in the past has shown that sweeping revisions
of the tariff are apt to produce conditions closely approaching panic
in the business world. Yet it is not only possible, but eminently
desirable, to combine with the stability of our economic system a
supplementary system of reciprocal benefit and obligation with other
nations. Such reciprocity is an incident and result of the firm
establishment and preservation of our present economic policy.
It was specially provided for in the present tariff law.

Reciprocity must be treated as the handmaiden of protection. Our first
duty is to see that the protection granted by the tariff in every case
where it is needed is maintained, and that reciprocity be sought for so
far as it can safely be done without injury to our home industries. Just
how far this is must be determined according to the individual case,
remembering always that every application of our tariff policy to meet
our shifting national needs must be conditioned upon the cardinal fact
that the duties must never be reduced below the point that will cover
the difference between the labor cost here and abroad. The well-being
of the wage-worker is a prime consideration of our entire policy of
economic legislation.

Subject to this proviso of the proper protection necessary to our
industrial well-being at home, the principle of reciprocity must command
our hearty support. The phenomenal growth of our export trade emphasizes
the urgency of the need for wider markets and for a liberal policy in
dealing with foreign nations. Whatever is merely petty and vexatious
in the way of trade restrictions should be avoided. The customers to
whom we dispose of our surplus products in the long run, directly or
indirectly, purchase those surplus products by giving us something in
return. Their ability to purchase our products should as far as possible
be secured by so arranging our tariff as to enable us to take from them
those products which we can use without harm to our own industries and
labor, or the use of which will be of marked benefit to us.

It is most important that we should maintain the high level of our
present prosperity. We have now reached the point in the development of
our interests where we are not only able to supply our own markets but
to produce a constantly growing surplus for which we must find markets
abroad. To secure these markets we can utilize existing duties in any
case where they are no longer needed for the purpose of protection,
or in any case where the article is not produced here and the duty is
no longer necessary for revenue, as giving us something to offer in
exchange for what we ask. The cordial relations with other nations which
are so desirable will naturally be promoted by the course thus required
by our own interests.

The natural line of development for a policy of reciprocity will be in
connection with those of our productions which no longer require all of
the support once needed to establish them upon a sound basis, and with
those others where either because of natural or of economic causes we
are beyond the reach of successful competition.

I ask the attention of the Senate to the reciprocity treaties laid
before it by my predecessor.

The condition of the American merchant marine is such as to call for
immediate remedial action by the Congress. It is discreditable to us
as a Nation that our merchant marine should be utterly insignificant in
comparison to that of other nations which we overtop in other forms of
business. We should not longer submit to conditions under which only
a trifling portion of our great commerce is carried in our own ships.
To remedy this state of things would not merely serve to build up our
shipping interests, but it would also result in benefit to all who are
interested in the permanent establishment of a wider market for American
products, and would provide an auxiliary force for the Navy. Ships
work for their own countries just as railroads work for their terminal
points. Shipping lines, if established to the principal countries with
which we have dealings, would be of political as well as commercial
benefit. From every standpoint it is unwise for the United States
to continue to rely upon the ships of competing nations for the
distribution of our goods. It should be made advantageous to carry
American goods in American-built ships.

At present American shipping is under certain great disadvantages when
put in competition with the shipping of foreign countries. Many of the
fast foreign steamships, at a speed of fourteen knots or above, are
subsidized; and all our ships, sailing vessels and steamers alike, cargo
carriers of slow speed and mail carriers of high speed, have to meet the
fact that the original cost of building American ships is greater than
is the case abroad; that the wages paid American officers and seamen
are very much higher than those paid the officers and seamen of foreign
competing countries; and that the standard of living on our ships is
far superior to the standard of living on the ships of our commercial
rivals.

Our Government should take such action as will remedy these
inequalities. The American merchant marine should be restored to
the ocean.

The Act of March 14, 1900, intended unequivocally to establish gold as
the standard money and to maintain at a parity therewith all forms of
money medium in use with us, has been shown to be timely and judicious.
The price of our Government bonds in the world's market, when compared
with the price of similar obligations issued by other nations, is a
flattering tribute to our public credit. This condition it is evidently
desirable to maintain

In many respects the National Banking Law furnishes sufficient liberty
for the proper exercise of the banking function; but there seems to be
need of better safeguards against the deranging influence of commercial
crises and financial panics. Moreover, the currency of the country
should be made responsive to the demands of our domestic trade and
commerce.

The collections from duties on imports and internal taxes continue to
exceed the ordinary expenditures of the Government, thanks mainly to the
reduced army expenditures. The utmost care should be taken not to reduce
the revenues so that there will be any possibility of a deficit; but,
after providing against any such contingency, means should be adopted
which will bring the revenues more nearly within the limit of our actual
needs. In his report to the Congress the Secretary of the Treasury
considers all these questions at length, and I ask your attention to the
report and recommendations.

I call special attention to the need of strict economy in expenditures.
The fact that our national needs forbid us to be niggardly in providing
whatever is actually necessary to our well-being, should make us doubly
careful to husband our national resources, as each of us husbands his
private resources, by scrupulous avoidance of anything like wasteful or
reckless expenditure. Only by avoidance of spending money on what is
needless or unjustifiable can we legitimately keep our income to the
point required to meet our needs that are genuine.

In 1887 a measure was enacted for the regulation of interstate railways,
commonly known as the Interstate Commerce Act. The cardinal provisions
of that act were that railway rates should be just and reasonable and
that all shippers, localities, and commodities should be accorded equal
treatment. A commission was created and endowed with what were supposed
to be the necessary powers to execute the provisions of this act.

That law was largely an experiment. Experience has shewn the wisdom of
its purposes, but has also shown, possibly that some of its requirements
are wrong, certainly that the means devised for the enforcement of its
provisions are defective. Those who complain of the management of the
railways allege that established rates are not maintained; that rebates
and similar devices are habitually resorted to; that these preferences
are usually in favor of the large shipper; that they drive out of
business the smaller competitor; that while many rates are too low, many
others are excessive; and that gross preferences are made, affecting
both localities and commodities. Upon the other hand, the railways
assert that the law by its very terms tends to produce many of these
illegal practices by depriving carriers of that right of concerted
action which they claim is necessary to establish and maintain
non-discriminating rates.

The act should be amended. The railway is a public servant. Its rates
should be just to and open to all shippers alike. The Government should
see to it that within its jurisdiction this is so and should provide a
speedy, inexpensive, and effective remedy to that end. At the same time
it must not be forgotten that our railways are the arteries through
which the commercial lifeblood of this Nation flows. Nothing could be
more foolish than the enactment of legislation which would unnecessarily
interfere with the development and operation of these commercial
agencies. The subject is one of great importance and calls for the
earnest attention of the Congress.

The Department of Agriculture during the past fifteen years has steadily
broadened its work on economic lines, and has accomplished results of
real value in upbuilding domestic and foreign trade. It has gone into
new fields until it is now in touch with all sections of our country
and with two of the island groups that have lately come under our
jurisdiction, whose people must look to agriculture as a livelihood.
It is searching the world for grains, grasses, fruits, and vegetables
specially fitted for introduction into localities in the several States
and Territories where they may add materially to our resources. By
scientific attention to soil survey and possible new crops, to breeding
of new varieties of plants, to experimental shipments, to animal
industry and applied chemistry, very practical aid has been given our
farming and stock-growing interests. The products of the farm have taken
an unprecedented place in our export trade during the year that has just
closed.

Public opinion throughout the United States has moved steadily toward a
just appreciation of the value of forests, whether planted or of natural
growth. The great part played by them in the creation and maintenance of
the national wealth is now more fully realized than ever before.

Wise forest protection does not mean the withdrawal of forest resources,
whether of wood, water, or grass, from contributing their full share to
the welfare of the people, but, on the contrary, gives the assurance of
larger and more certain supplies. The fundamental idea of forestry is
the perpetuation of forests by use. Forest protection is not an end
of itself; it is a means to increase and sustain the resources of our
country and the industries which depend upon them. The preservation of
our forests is an imperative business necessity. We have come to see
clearly that whatever destroys the forest, except to make way for
agriculture, threatens our well being.

The practical usefulness of the national forest reserves to the mining,
grazing, irrigation, and other interests of the regions in which the
reserves lie has led to a widespread demand by the people of the West
for their protection and extension. The forest reserves will inevitably
be of still greater use in the future than in the past. Additions should
be made to them whenever practicable, and their usefulness should be
increased by a thoroughly business-like management.

At present the protection of the forest reserves rests with the General
Land Office, the mapping and description of their timber with the
United States Geological Survey, and the preparation of plans for their
conservative use with the Bureau of Forestry, which is also charged with
the general advancement of practical forestry in the United States.
These various functions should be united in the Bureau of Forestry,
to which they properly belong. The present diffusion of responsibility
is bad from every standpoint. It prevents that effective co-operation
between the Government and the men who utilize the resources of the
reserves, without which the interests of both must suffer. The
scientific bureaus generally should be put under the Department of
Agriculture. The President should have by law the power of transferring
lands for use as forest reserves to the Department of Agriculture. He
already has such power in the case of lands needed by the Departments
of War and the Navy.

The wise administration of the forest reserves will be not less helpful
to the interests which depend on water than to those which depend on
wood and grass. The water supply itself depends upon the forest. In
the arid region it is water, not land, which measures production. The
western half of the United States would sustain a population greater
than that of our whole country to-day if the waters that now run to
waste were saved and used for irrigation. The forest and water problems
are perhaps the most vital internal questions of the United States.

Certain of the forest reserves should also be made preserves for the
wild forest creatures. All of the reserves should be better protected
from fires. Many of them need special protection because of the great
injury done by live stock, above all by sheep. The increase in deer,
elk, and other animals in the Yellowstone Park shows what may be
expected when other mountain forests are properly protected by law and
properly guarded. Some of these areas have been so denuded of surface
vegetation by overgrazing that the ground breeding birds, including
grouse and quail, and many mammals, including deer, have been
exterminated or driven away. At the same time the water-storing capacity
of the surface has been decreased or destroyed, thus promoting floods in
times of rain and diminishing the flow of streams between rains.

In cases where natural conditions have been restored for a few
years, vegetation has again carpeted the ground, birds and deer are
coming back, and hundreds of persons, especially from the immediate
neighborhood, come each summer to enjoy the privilege of camping.
Some at least of the forest reserves should afford perpetual protection
to the native fauna and flora, safe havens of refuge to our rapidly
diminishing wild animals of the larger kinds, and free camping grounds
for the ever-increasing numbers of men and women who have learned
to find rest, health, and recreation in the splendid forests and
flower-clad meadows of our mountains. The forest reserves should be set
apart forever for the use and benefit of our people as a whole and not
sacrificed to the shortsighted greed of a few.

The forests are natural reservoirs. By restraining the streams in flood
and replenishing them in drought they make possible the use of waters
otherwise wasted. They prevent the soil from washing, and so protect the
storage reservoirs from filling up with silt. Forest conservation is
therefore an essential condition of water conservation.

The forests alone cannot, however, fully regulate and conserve the
waters of the arid region. Great storage works are necessary to equalize
the flow of streams and to save the flood waters. Their construction
has been conclusively shown to be an undertaking too vast for private
effort. Nor can it be best accomplished by the individual States acting
alone. Far-reaching interstate problems are involved; and the resources
of single States would often be inadequate. It is properly a national
function, at least in some of its features. It is as right for the
National Government to make the streams and rivers of the arid region
useful by engineering works for water storage as to make useful the
rivers and harbors of the humid region by engineering works of another
kind. The storing of the floods in reservoirs at the headwaters of our
rivers is but an enlargement of our present policy of river control,
under which levees are built on the lower reaches of the same streams.

The Government should construct and maintain these reservoirs as it
does other public works. Where their purpose is to regulate the flow of
streams, the water should be turned freely into the channels in the dry
season to take the same course under the same laws as the natural flow.

The reclamation of the unsettled arid public lands presents a different
problem. Here it is not enough to regulate the flow of streams. The
object of the Government is to dispose of the land to settlers who will
build homes upon it. To accomplish this object water must be brought
within their reach.

The pioneer settlers on the arid public domain chose their homes along
streams from which they could themselves divert the water to reclaim
their holdings. Such opportunities are practically gone. There remain,
however, vast areas of public land which can be made available for
homestead settlement, but only by reservoirs and main-line canals
impracticable for private enterprise. These irrigation works should be
built by the National Government. The lands reclaimed by them should
be reserved by the Government for actual settlers, and the cost of
construction should so far as possible be repaid by the land reclaimed.
The distribution of the water, the division of the streams among
irrigators, should be left to the settlers themselves in conformity
with State laws and without interference with those laws or with
vested rights. The policy of the National Government should be to aid
irrigation in the several States and Territories in such manner as will
enable the people in the local communities to help themselves, and as
will stimulate needed reforms in the State laws and regulations
governing irrigation.

The reclamation and settlement of the arid lands will enrich every
portion of our country, just as the settlement of the Ohio and
Mississippi valleys brought prosperity to the Atlantic States. The
increased demand for manufactured articles will stimulate industrial
production, while wider home markets and the trade of Asia will consume
the larger food supplies and effectually prevent Western competition
with Eastern agriculture. Indeed, the products of irrigation will be
consumed chiefly in upbuilding local centers of mining and other
industries, which would otherwise not come into existence at all.
Our people as a whole will profit, for successful home-making is but
another name for the upbuilding of the nation.

The necessary foundation has already been laid for the inauguration
of the policy just described. It would be unwise to begin by doing too
much, for a great deal will doubtless be learned, both as to what can
and what cannot be safely attempted, by the early efforts, which must
of necessity be partly experimental in character. At the very beginning
the Government should make clear, beyond shadow of doubt, its intention
to pursue this policy on lines of the broadest public interest. No
reservoir or canal should ever be built to satisfy selfish personal
or local interests; but only in accordance with the advice of trained
experts, after long investigation has shown the locality where all the
conditions combine to make the work most needed and fraught with the
greatest usefulness to the community as a whole. There should be no
extravagance, and the believers in the need of irrigation will most
benefit their cause by seeing to it that it is free from the least
taint of excessive or reckless expenditure of the public moneys.

Whatever the nation does for the extension of irrigation should
harmonize with, and tend to improve, the condition of those now living
on irrigated land. We are not at the starting point of this development.
Over two hundred millions of private capital has already been expended
in the construction of irrigation works, and many million acres of arid
land reclaimed. A high degree of enterprise and ability has been shown
in the work itself; but as much cannot be said in reference to the laws
relating thereto. The security and value of the homes created depend
largely on the stability of titles to water; but the majority of these
rest on the uncertain foundation of court decisions rendered in ordinary
suits at law. With a few creditable exceptions, the arid States have
failed to provide for the certain and just division of streams in times
of scarcity. Lax and uncertain laws have made it possible to establish
rights to water in excess of actual uses or necessities, and many
streams have already passed into private ownership, or a control
equivalent to ownership.

Whoever controls a stream practically controls the land it renders
productive, and the doctrine of private ownership of water apart from
land cannot prevail without causing enduring wrong. The recognition of
such ownership, which has been permitted to grow up in the arid regions,
should give way to a more enlightened and larger recognition of the
rights of the public in the control and disposal of the public water
supplies. Laws founded upon conditions obtaining in humid regions, where
water is too abundant to justify hoarding it, have no proper application
in a dry country.

In the arid States the only right to water which should be recognized
is that of use. In irrigation this right should attach to the land
reclaimed and be inseparable therefrom. Granting perpetual water rights
to others than users, without compensation to the public, is open to all
the objections which apply to giving away perpetual franchises to the
public utilities of cities. A few of the Western States have already
recognized this, and have incorporated in their constitutions the
doctrine of perpetual State ownership of water.

The benefits which have followed the unaided development of the past
justify the nation's aid and co-operation in the more difficult and
important work yet to be accomplished. Laws so vitally affecting homes
as those which control the water supply will only be effective when they
have the sanction of the irrigators; reforms can only be final and
satisfactory when they come through the enlightenment of the people most
concerned. The larger development which national aid insures should,
however, awaken in every arid State the determination to make its
irrigation system equal in justice and effectiveness that of any country
in the civilized world. Nothing could be more unwise than for isolated
communities to continue to learn everything experimentally, instead of
profiting by what is already known elsewhere. We are dealing with a new
and momentous question, in the pregnant years while institutions are
forming, and what we do will affect not only the present but future
generations.

Our aim should be not simply to reclaim the largest area of land and
provide homes for the largest number of people, but to create for this
new industry the best possible social and industrial conditions; and
this requires that we not only understand the existing situation, but
avail ourselves of the best experience of the time in the solution of
its problems. A careful study should be made, both by the Nation and
the States, of the irrigation laws and conditions here and abroad.
Ultimately it will probably be necessary for the Nation to co-operate
with the several arid States in proportion as these States by their
legislation and administration show themselves fit to receive it.

In Hawaii our aim must be to develop the Territory on the traditional
American lines. We do not wish a region of large estates tilled by cheap
labor; we wish a healthy American community of men who themselves till
the farms they own. All our legislation for the islands should be shaped
with this end in view; the well-being of the average home-maker must
afford the true test of the healthy development of the islands. The land
policy should as nearly as possible be modeled on our homestead system.

It is a pleasure to say that it is hardly more necessary to report as
to Puerto Rico than as to any State or Territory within our continental
limits. The island is thriving as never before, and it is being
administered efficiently and honestly. Its people are now enjoying
liberty and order under the protection of the United States, and upon
this fact we congratulate them and ourselves. Their material welfare
must be as carefully and jealously considered as the welfare of any
other portion of our country. We have given them the great gift of free
access for their products to the markets of the United States. I ask
the attention of the Congress to the need of legislation concerning the
public lands of Puerto Rico.

In Cuba such progress has been made toward putting the independent
government of the island upon a firm footing that before the present
session of the Congress closes this will be an accomplished fact. Cuba
will then start as her own mistress; and to the beautiful Queen of the
Antilles, as she unfolds this new page of her destiny, we extend our
heartiest greetings and good wishes. Elsewhere I have discussed the
question of reciprocity. In the case of Cuba, however, there are weighty
reasons of morality and of national interest why the policy should be
held to have a peculiar application, and I most earnestly ask your
attention to the wisdom, indeed to the vital need, of providing for a
substantial reduction in the tariff duties on Cuban imports into the
United States. Cuba has in her constitution affirmed what we desired,
that she should stand, in international matters, in closer and more
friendly relations with us than with any other power; and we are bound
by every consideration of honor and expediency to pass commercial
measures in the interest of her material well-being.

In the Philippines our problem is larger. They are very rich tropical
islands, inhabited by many varying tribes, representing widely different
stages of progress toward civilization. Our earnest effort is to help
these people upward along the stony and difficult path that leads to
self-government. We hope to make our administration of the islands
honorable to our Nation by making it of the highest benefit to the
Filipinos themselves; and as an earnest of what we intend to do, we
point to what we have done. Already a greater measure of material
prosperity and of governmental honesty and efficiency has been attained
in the Philippines than ever before in their history.

It is no light task for a nation to achieve the temperamental qualities
without which the institutions of free government are but an empty
mockery. Our people are now successfully governing themselves, because
for more than a thousand years they have been slowly fitting themselves,
sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously, toward this end. What
has taken us thirty generations to achieve, we cannot expect to see
another race accomplish out of hand, especially when large portions
of that race start very far behind the point which our ancestors had
reached even thirty generations ago. In dealing with the Philippine
people we must show both patience and strength, forbearance and
steadfast resolution. Our aim is high. We do not desire to do for the
islanders merely what has elsewhere been done for tropic peoples by even
the best foreign governments. We hope to do for them what has never
before been done for any people of the tropics--to make them fit for
self-government after the fashion of the really free nations.

History may safely be challenged to show a single instance in which a
masterful race such as ours, having been forced by the exigencies of war
to take possession of an alien land, has behaved to its inhabitants with
the disinterested zeal for their progress that our people have shown in
the Philippines. To leave the islands at this time would mean that they
would fall into a welter of murderous anarchy. Such desertion of duty on
our part would be a crime against humanity. The character of Governor
Taft and of his associates and subordinates is a proof, if such be
needed, of the sincerity of our effort to give the islanders a
constantly increasing measure of self-government, exactly as fast as
they show themselves fit to exercise it. Since the civil government was
established not an appointment has been made in the islands with any
reference to considerations of political influence, or to aught else
save the fitness of the man and the needs of the service.

In our anxiety for the welfare and progress of the Philippines, it may
be that here and there we have gone too rapidly in giving them local
self-government. It is on this side that our error, if any, has been
committed. No competent observer, sincerely desirous of finding out the
facts and influenced only by a desire for the welfare of the natives,
can assert that we have not gone far enough. We have gone to the very
verge of safety in hastening the process. To have taken a single step
farther or faster in advance would have been folly and weakness, and
might well have been crime. We are extremely anxious that the natives
shall show the power of governing themselves. We are anxious, first for
their sakes, and next, because it relieves us of a great burden. There
need not be the slightest fear of our not continuing to give them all
the liberty for which they are fit.

The only fear is lest in our overanxiety we give them a degree of
independence for which they are unfit, thereby inviting reaction and
disaster. As fast as there is any reasonable hope that in a given
district the people can govern themselves, self-government has
been given in that district. There is not a locality fitted for
self-government which has not received it. But it may well be that in
certain cases it will have to be withdrawn because the inhabitants show
themselves unfit to exercise it; such instances have already occurred.
In other words, there is not the slightest chance of our failing to show
a sufficiently humanitarian spirit. The danger comes in the opposite
direction.

There are still troubles ahead in the islands. The insurrection has
become an affair of local banditti and marauders, who deserve no higher
regard than the brigands of portions of the Old World. Encouragement,
direct or indirect, to these insurrectors stands on the same footing as
encouragement to hostile Indians in the days when we still had Indian
wars. Exactly as our aim is to give to the Indian who remains peaceful
the fullest and amplest consideration, but to have it understood that
we will show no weakness if he goes on the warpath, so we must make it
evident, unless we are false to our own traditions and to the demands of
civilization and humanity, that while we will do everything in our power
for the Filipino who is peaceful, we will take the sternest measures
with the Filipino who follows the path of the insurrecto and the
ladrone.

The heartiest praise is due to large numbers of the natives of the
islands for their steadfast loyalty. The Macabebes have been conspicuous
for their courage and devotion to the flag. I recommend that the
Secretary of War be empowered to take some systematic action in the way
of aiding those of these men who are crippled in the service and the
families of those who are killed.

The time has come when there should be additional legislation for
the Philippines. Nothing better can be done for the islands than to
introduce industrial enterprises. Nothing would benefit them so much as
throwing them open to industrial development. The connection between
idleness and mischief is proverbial, and the opportunity to do
remunerative work is one of the surest preventatives of war. Of course
no business man will go into the Philippines unless it is to his
interest to do so; and it is immensely to the interest of the islands
that he should go in. It is therefore necessary that the Congress should
pass laws by which the resources of the islands can be developed; so
that franchises (for limited terms of years) can be granted to companies
doing business in them, and every encouragement be given to the incoming
of business men of every kind.

Not to permit this is to do a wrong to the Philippines. The franchises
must be granted and the business permitted only under regulations which
will guarantee the islands against any kind of improper exploitation.
But the vast natural wealth of the islands must be developed, and the
capital willing to develop it must be given the opportunity. The field
must be thrown open to individual enterprise, which has been the real
factor in the development of every region over which our flag has flown.
It is urgently necessary to enact suitable laws dealing with general
transportation, mining, banking, currency, homesteads, and the use and
ownership of the lands and timber. These laws will give free play to
industrial enterprise; and the commercial development which will surely
follow will accord to the people of the islands the best proofs of the
sincerity of our desire to aid them.

I call your attention most earnestly to the crying need of a cable to
Hawaii and the Philippines, to be continued from the Philippines to
points in Asia. We should not defer a day longer than necessary the
construction of such a cable. It is demanded not merely for commercial
but for political and military considerations.

Either the Congress should immediately provide for the construction of
a Government cable, or else an arrangement should be made by which like
advantages to those accruing from a Government cable may be secured to
the Government by contract with a private cable company.

No single great material work which remains to be undertaken on this
continent is of such consequence to the American people as the building
of a canal across the Isthmus connecting North and South America. Its
importance to the Nation is by no means limited merely to its material
effects upon our business prosperity; and yet with view to these effects
alone it would be to the last degree important for us immediately to
begin it. While its beneficial effects would perhaps be most marked upon
the Pacific Coast and the Gulf and South Atlantic States, it would also
greatly benefit other sections. It is emphatically a work which it is
for the interest of the entire country to begin and complete as soon as
possible; it is one of those great works which only a great nation can
undertake with prospects of success, and which when done are not only
permanent assets in the nation's material interests, but standing
monuments to its constructive ability.

I am glad to be able to announce to you that our negotiations on this
subject with Great Britain, conducted on both sides in a spirit of
friendliness and mutual good will and respect, have resulted in my being
able to lay before the Senate a treaty which if ratified will enable
us to begin preparations for an Isthmian canal at any time, and which
guarantees to this Nation every right that it has ever asked in
connection with the canal. In this treaty, the old Clayton-Bulwer
treaty, so long recognized as inadequate to supply the base for the
construction and maintenance of a necessarily American ship canal, is
abrogated. It specifically provides that the United States alone shall
do the work of building and assume the responsibility of safeguarding
the canal and shall regulate its neutral use by all nations on terms of
equality without the guaranty or interference of any outside nation from
any quarter. The signed treaty will at once be laid before the Senate,
and if approved the Congress can then proceed to give effect to the
advantages it secures us by providing for the building of the canal.

The true end of every great and free people should be self-respecting
peace; and this Nation most earnestly desires sincere and cordial
friendship with all others. Over the entire world, of recent years, wars
between the great civilized powers have become less and less frequent.
Wars with barbarous or semi-barbarous peoples come in an entirely
different category, being merely a most regrettable but necessary
international police duty which must be performed for the sake of the
welfare of mankind. Peace can only be kept with certainty where both
sides wish to keep it; but more and more the civilized peoples are
realizing the wicked folly of war and are attaining that condition of
just and intelligent regard for the rights of others which will in the
end, as we hope and believe, make world-wide peace possible. The peace
conference at The Hague gave definite expression to this hope and belief
and marked a stride toward their attainment.

This same peace conference acquiesced in our statement of the Monroe
Doctrine as compatible with the purposes and aims of the conference.

The Monroe Doctrine should be the cardinal feature of the foreign policy
of all the nations of the two Americas, as it is of the United States.
Just seventy-eight years have passed since President Monroe in his
Annual Message announced that "The American continents are henceforth
not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European
power." In other words, the Monroe Doctrine is a declaration that there
must be no territorial aggrandizement by any non-American power at
the expense of any American power on American soil. It is in no wise
intended as hostile to any nation in the Old World. Still less is it
intended to give cover to any aggression by one New World power at
the expense of any other. It is simply a step, and a long step, toward
assuring the universal peace of the world by securing the possibility
of permanent peace on this hemisphere.

During the past century other influences have established the permanence
and independence of the smaller states of Europe. Through the Monroe
Doctrine we hope to be able to safeguard like independence and secure
like permanence for the lesser among the New World nations.

This doctrine has nothing to do with the commercial relations of any
American power, save that it in truth allows each of them to form such
as it desires. In other words, it is really a guaranty of the commercial
independence of the Americas. We do not ask under this doctrine for
any exclusive commercial dealings with any other American state. We do
not guarantee any state against punishment if it misconducts itself,
provided that punishment does not take the form of the acquisition of
territory by any non-American power.

Our attitude in Cuba is a sufficient guaranty of our own good faith.
We have not the slightest desire to secure any territory at the expense
of any of our neighbors. We wish to work with them hand in hand, so that
all of us may be uplifted together, and we rejoice over the good fortune
of any of them, we gladly hail their material prosperity and political
stability, and are concerned and alarmed if any of them fall into
industrial or political chaos. We do not wish to see any Old World
military power grow up on this continent, or to be compelled to become
a military power ourselves. The peoples of the Americas can prosper
best if left to work out their own salvation in their own way.

The work of upbuilding the Navy must be steadily continued. No one point
of our policy, foreign or domestic, is more important than this to the
honor and material welfare, and above all to the peace, of our nation in
the future. Whether we desire it or not, we must henceforth recognize
that we have international duties no less than international rights.
Even if our flag were hauled down in the Philippines and Puerto Rico,
even if we decided not to build the Isthmian Canal, we should need a
thoroughly trained Navy of adequate size, or else be prepared definitely
and for all time to abandon the idea that our nation is among those
whose sons go down to the sea in ships. Unless our commerce is always to
be carried in foreign bottoms, we must have war craft to protect it.

Inasmuch, however, as the American people have no thought of abandoning
the path upon which they have entered, and especially in view of the
fact that the building of the Isthmian Canal is fast becoming one of the
matters which the whole people are united in demanding, it is imperative
that our Navy should be put and kept in the highest state of efficiency,
and should be made to answer to our growing needs. So far from being in
any way a provocation to war, an adequate and highly trained navy is
the best guaranty against war, the cheapest and most effective peace
insurance. The cost of building and maintaining such a navy represents
the very lightest premium for insuring peace which this nation can
possibly pay.

Probably no other great nation in the world is so anxious for peace
as we are. There is not a single civilized power which has anything
whatever to fear from aggressiveness on our part. All we want is peace;
and toward this end we wish to be able to secure the same respect for
our rights from others which we are eager and anxious to extend to their
rights in return, to insure fair treatment to us commercially, and to
guarantee the safety of the American people.

Our people intend to abide by the Monroe Doctrine and to insist upon it
as the one sure means of securing the peace of the Western Hemisphere.
The Navy offers us the only means of making our insistence upon the
Monroe Doctrine anything but a subject of derision to whatever nation
chooses to disregard it. We desire the peace which comes as of right to
the just man armed; not the peace granted on terms of ignominy to the
craven and the weakling.

It is not possible to improvise a navy after war breaks out. The ships
must be built and the men trained long in advance. Some auxiliary
vessels can be turned into makeshifts which will do in default of any
better for the minor work, and a proportion of raw men can be mixed with
the highly trained, their shortcomings being made good by the skill of
their fellows; but the efficient fighting force of the Navy when pitted
against an equal opponent will be found almost exclusively in the war
ships that have been regularly built and in the officers and men who
through years of faithful performance of sea duty have been trained
to handle their formidable but complex and delicate weapons with the
highest efficiency. In the late war with Spain the ships that dealt the
decisive blows at Manila and Santiago had been launched from two to
fourteen years, and they were able to do as they did because the men in
the conning towers, the gun turrets, and the engine-rooms had through
long years of practice at sea learned how to do their duty.

Our present Navy was begun in 1882. At that period our Navy
consisted of a collection of antiquated wooden ships, already almost as
out of place against modern war vessels as the galleys of Alcibiades
and Hamilcar--certainly as the ships of Tromp and Blake. Nor at that
time did we have men fit to handle a modern man-of-war. Under the wise
legislation of the Congress and the successful administration of a
succession of patriotic Secretaries of the Navy, belonging to both
political parties, the work of upbuilding the Navy went on, and ships
equal to any in the world of their kind were continually added; and what
was even more important, these ships were exercised at sea singly and in
squadrons until the men aboard them were able to get the best possible
service out of them. The result was seen in the short war with Spain,
which was decided with such rapidity because of the infinitely greater
preparedness of our Navy than of the Spanish Navy.

While awarding the fullest honor to the men who actually commanded
and manned the ships which destroyed the Spanish sea forces in the
Philippines and in Cuba, we must not forget that an equal meed of praise
belongs to those without whom neither blow could have been struck. The
Congressmen who voted years in advance the money to lay down the ships,
to build the guns, to buy the armor-plate; the Department officials and
the business men and wage-workers who furnished what the Congress had
authorized; the Secretaries of the Navy who asked for and expended the
appropriations; and finally the officers who, in fair weather and foul,
on actual sea service, trained and disciplined the crews of the ships
when there was no war in sight--all are entitled to a full share in the
glory of Manila and Santiago, and the respect accorded by every true
American to those who wrought such signal triumph for our country.
It was forethought and preparation which secured us the overwhelming
triumph of 1898. If we fail to show forethought and preparation now,
there may come a time when disaster will befall us instead of triumph;
and should this time come, the fault will rest primarily, not upon those
whom the accident of events puts in supreme command at the moment, but
upon those who have failed to prepare in advance.

There should be no cessation in the work of completing our Navy. So far
ingenuity has been wholly unable to devise a substitute for the great
war craft whose hammering guns beat out the mastery of the high seas.
It is unsafe and unwise not to provide this year for several additional
battle ships and heavy armored cruisers, with auxiliary and lighter
craft in proportion; for the exact numbers and character I refer you to
the report of the Secretary of the Navy. But there is something we need
even more than additional ships, and this is additional officers and
men. To provide battle ships and cruisers and then lay them up, with the
expectation of leaving them unmanned until they are needed in actual
war, would be worse than folly; it would be a crime against the Nation.

To send any war ship against a competent enemy unless those aboard it
have been trained by years of actual sea service, including incessant
gunnery practice, would be to invite not merely disaster, but the
bitterest shame and humiliation. Four thousand additional seamen and one
thousand additional marines should be provided; and an increase in the
officers should be provided by making a large addition to the classes
at Annapolis. There is one small matter which should be mentioned in
connection with Annapolis. The pretentious and unmeaning title of "naval
cadet" should be abolished; the title of "midshipman," full of historic
association, should be restored.

Even in time of peace a war ship should be used until it wears out, for
only so can it be kept fit to respond to any emergency. The officers and
men alike should be kept as much as possible on blue water, for it is
there only they can learn their duties as they should be learned. The
big vessels should be manoeuvred in squadrons containing not merely
battle ships, but the necessary proportion of cruisers and scouts. The
torpedo boats should be handled by the younger officers in such manner
as will best fit the latter to take responsibility and meet the
emergencies of actual warfare.

Every detail ashore which can be performed by a civilian should be
so performed, the officer being kept for his special duty in the
sea service. Above all, gunnery practice should be unceasing. It
is important to have our Navy of adequate size, but it is even more
important that ship for ship it should equal in efficiency any navy in
the world. This is possible only with highly drilled crews and officers,
and this in turn imperatively demands continuous and progressive
instruction in target practice, ship handling, squadron tactics, and
general discipline. Our ships must be assembled in squadrons actively
cruising away from harbors and never long at anchor. The resulting wear
upon engines and hulls must be endured; a battle ship worn out in long
training of officers and men is well paid for by the results, while, on
the other hand, no matter in how excellent condition, it is useless if
the crew be not expert.

We now have seventeen battle ships appropriated for, of which nine are
completed and have been commissioned for actual service. The remaining
eight will be ready in from two to four years, but it will take at least
that time to recruit and train the men to fight them. It is of vast
concern that we have trained crews ready for the vessels by the time
they are commissioned. Good ships and good guns are simply good weapons,
and the best weapons are useless save in the hands of men who know how
to fight with them. The men must be trained and drilled under a thorough
and well-planned system of progressive instruction, while the recruiting
must be carried on with still greater vigor. Every effort must be made
to exalt the main function of the officer--the command of men. The
leading graduates of the Naval Academy should be assigned to the
combatant branches, the line and marines.

Many of the essentials of success are already recognized by the General
Board, which, as the central office of a growing staff, is moving
steadily toward a proper war efficiency and a proper efficiency of the
whole Navy, under the Secretary. This General Board, by fostering the
creation of a general staff, is providing for the official and then the
general recognition of our altered conditions as a Nation and of the
true meaning of a great war fleet, which meaning is, first, the best
men, and, second, the best ships.

The Naval Militia forces are State organizations, and are trained for
coast service, and in event of war they will constitute the inner line
of defense. They should receive hearty encouragement from the General
Government.

But in addition we should at once provide for a National Naval Reserve,
organized and trained under the direction of the Navy Department,
and subject to the call of the Chief Executive whenever war becomes
imminent. It should be a real auxiliary to the naval seagoing peace
establishment, and offer material to be drawn on at once for manning
our ships in time of war. It should be composed of graduates of the
Naval Academy, graduates of the Naval Militia, officers and crews of
coast-line steamers, longshore schooners, fishing vessels, and steam
yachts, together with the coast population about such centers as
life-saving stations and light-houses.

The American people must either build and maintain an adequate navy or
else make up their minds definitely to accept a secondary position in
international affairs, not merely in political, but in commercial,
matters. It has been well said that there is no surer way of courting
national disaster than to be "opulent, aggressive, and unarmed."

It is not necessary to increase our Army beyond its present size at this
time. But it is necessary to keep it at the highest point of efficiency.
The individual units who as officers and enlisted men compose this Army,
are, we have good reason to believe, at least as efficient as those of
any other army in the entire world. It is our duty to see that their
training is of a kind to insure the highest possible expression of power
to these units when acting in combination.

The conditions of modern war are such as to make an infinitely heavier
demand than ever before upon the individual character and capacity of
the officer and the enlisted man, and to make it far more difficult for
men to act together with effect. At present the fighting must be done in
extended order, which means that each man must act for himself and at
the same time act in combination with others with whom he is no longer
in the old-fashioned elbow-to-elbow touch. Under such conditions a few
men of the highest excellence are worth more than many men without the
special skill which is only found as the result of special training
applied to men of exceptional physique and morale. But nowadays the most
valuable fighting man and the most difficult to perfect is the rifleman
who is also a skillful and daring rider.

The proportion of our cavalry regiments has wisely been increased.
The American cavalryman, trained to manoeuvre and fight with equal
facility on foot and on horseback, is the best type of soldier for
general purposes now to be found in the world. The ideal cavalryman of
the present day is a man who can fight on foot as effectively as the
best infantryman, and who is in addition unsurpassed in the care and
management of his horse and in his ability to fight on horseback.

A general staff should be created. As for the present staff and supply
departments, they should be filled by details from the line, the men
so detailed returning after a while to their line duties. It is very
undesirable to have the senior grades of the Army composed of men who
have come to fill the positions by the mere fact of seniority. A system
should be adopted by which there shall be an elimination grade by grade
of those who seem unfit to render the best service in the next grade.
Justice to the veterans of the Civil War who are still in the Army would
seem to require that in the matter of retirements they be given by law
the same privileges accorded to their comrades in the Navy.

The process of elimination of the least fit should be conducted in a
manner that would render it practically impossible to apply political
or social pressure on behalf of any candidate, so that each man may be
judged purely on his own merits. Pressure for the promotion of civil
officials for political reasons is bad enough, but it is tenfold worse
where applied on behalf of officers of the Army or Navy. Every promotion
and every detail under the War Department must be made solely with
regard to the good of the service and to the capacity and merit of the
man himself. No pressure, political, social, or personal, of any kind,
will be permitted to exercise the least effect in any question of
promotion or detail; and if there is reason to believe that such
pressure is exercised at the instigation of the officer concerned, it
will be held to militate against him. In our Army we cannot afford to
have rewards or duties distributed save on the simple ground that those
who by their own merits are entitled to the rewards get them, and that
those who are peculiarly fit to do the duties are chosen to perform
them.

Every effort should be made to bring the Army to a constantly increasing
state of efficiency. When on actual service no work save that directly
in the line of such service should be required. The paper work in the
Army, as in the Navy, should be greatly reduced. What is needed is
proved power of command and capacity to work well in the field. Constant
care is necessary to prevent dry rot in the transportation and
commissary departments.

Our Army is so small and so much scattered that it is very difficult to
give the higher officers (as well as the lower officers and the enlisted
men) a chance to practice manoeuvres in mass and on a comparatively
large scale. In time of need no amount of individual excellence would
avail against the paralysis which would follow inability to work as
a coherent whole, under skillful and daring leadership. The Congress
should provide means whereby it will be possible to have field exercises
by at least a division of regulars, and if possible also a division of
national guardsmen, once a year. These exercises might take the form of
field manoeuvres; or, if on the Gulf Coast or the Pacific or Atlantic
Seaboard, or in the region of the Great Lakes, the army corps when
assembled could be marched from some inland point to some point on the
water, there embarked, disembarked after a couple of days' journey at
some other point, and again marched inland. Only by actual handling and
providing for men in masses while they are marching, camping, embarking,
and disembarking, will it be possible to train the higher officers to
perform their duties well and smoothly.

A great debt is owing from the public to the men of the Army and Navy.
They should be so treated as to enable them to reach the highest point
of efficiency, so that they may be able to respond instantly to any
demand made upon them to sustain the interests of the Nation and the
honor of the flag. The individual American enlisted man is probably on
the whole a more formidable fighting man than the regular of any other
army. Every consideration should be shown him, and in return the highest
standard of usefulness should be exacted from him. It is well worth
while for the Congress to consider whether the pay of enlisted men upon
second and subsequent enlistments should not be increased to correspond
with the increased value of the veteran soldier.

Much good has already come from the act reorganizing the Army, passed
early in the present year. The three prime reforms, all of them of
literally inestimable value, are, first, the substitution of four-year
details from the line for permanent appointments in the so-called staff
divisions; second, the establishment of a corps of artillery with a
chief at the head; third, the establishment of a maximum and minimum
limit for the Army. It would be difficult to overestimate the
improvement in the efficiency of our Army which these three reforms
are making, and have in part already effected.

The reorganization provided for by the act has been substantially
accomplished. The improved conditions in the Philippines have enabled
the War Department materially to reduce the military charge upon our
revenue and to arrange the number of soldiers so as to bring this number
much nearer to the minimum than to the maximum limit established by law.
There is, however, need of supplementary legislation. Thorough military
education must be provided, and in addition to the regulars the
advantages of this education should be given to the officers of the
National Guard and others in civil life who desire intelligently to fit
themselves for possible military duty. The officers should be given the
chance to perfect themselves by study in the higher branches of this
art. At West Point the education should be of the kind most apt to turn
out men who are good in actual field service; too much stress should not
be laid on mathematics, nor should proficiency therein be held to
establish the right of entry to a _corps d'elite_. The typical
American officer of the best kind need not be a good mathematician;
but he must be able to master himself, to control others, and to show
boldness and fertility of resource in every emergency.

Action should be taken in reference to the militia and to the raising
of volunteer forces. Our militia law is obsolete and worthless. The
organization and armament of the National Guard of the several States,
which are treated as militia in the appropriations by the Congress,
should be made identical with those provided for the regular forces. The
obligations and duties of the Guard in time of war should be carefully
defined, and a system established by law under which the method of
procedure of raising volunteer forces should be prescribed in advance.
It is utterly impossible in the excitement and haste of impending war
to do this satisfactorily if the arrangements have not been made
long beforehand. Provision should be made for utilizing in the first
volunteer organizations called out the training of those citizens who
have already had experience under arms, and especially for the selection
in advance of the officers of any force which may be raised; for careful
selection of the kind necessary is impossible after the outbreak of war.

That the Army is not at all a mere instrument of destruction has been
shown during the last three years. In the Philippines, Cuba, and Puerto
Rico it has proved itself a great constructive force, a most potent
implement for the upbuilding of a peaceful civilization.

No other citizens deserve so well of the Republic as the veterans, the
survivors of those who saved the Union. They did the one deed which
if left undone would have meant that all else in our history went for
nothing. But for their steadfast prowess in the greatest crisis of our
history, all our annals would be meaningless, and our great experiment
in popular freedom and self-government a gloomy failure. Moreover, they
not only left us a united Nation, but they left us also as a heritage
the memory of the mighty deeds by which the Nation was kept united. We
are now indeed one Nation, one in fact as well as in name; we are united
in our devotion to the flag which is the symbol of national greatness
and unity; and the very completeness of our union enables us all, in
every part of the country, to glory in the valor shown alike by the sons
of the North and the sons of the South in the times that tried men's
souls.

The men who in the last three years have done so well in the East
and the West Indies and on the mainland of Asia have shown that this
remembrance is not lost. In any serious crisis the United States must
rely for the great mass of its fighting men upon the volunteer soldiery
who do not make a permanent profession of the military career; and
whenever such a crisis arises the deathless memories of the Civil War
will give to Americans the lift of lofty purpose which comes to those
whose fathers have stood valiantly in the forefront of the battle.

The merit system of making appointments is in its essence as
democratic and American as the common school system itself. It simply
means that in clerical and other positions where the duties are entirely
non-political, all applicants should have a fair field and no favor,
each standing on his merits as he is able to show them by practical
test. Written competitive examinations offer the only available means in
many cases for applying this system. In other cases, as where laborers
are employed, a system of registration undoubtedly can be widely
extended. There are, of course, places where the written competitive
examination cannot be applied, and others where it offers by no means
an ideal solution, but where under existing political conditions it is,
though an imperfect means, yet the best present means of getting
satisfactory results.

Wherever the conditions have permitted the application of the merit
system in its fullest and widest sense, the gain to the Government has
been immense. The navy-yards and postal service illustrate, probably
better than any other branches of the Government, the great gain in
economy, efficiency, and honesty due to the enforcement of this
principle.

I recommend the passage of a law which will extend the classified
service to the District of Columbia, or will at least enable the
President thus to extend it. In my judgment all laws providing for the
temporary employment of clerks should hereafter contain a provision that
they be selected under the Civil Service Law.

It is important to have this system obtain at home, but it is even more
important to have it applied rigidly in our insular possessions. Not
an office should be filled in the Philippines or Puerto Rico with any
regard to the man's partisan affiliations or services, with any regard
to the political, social, or personal influence which he may have at his
command; in short, heed should be paid to absolutely nothing save the
man's own character and capacity and the needs of the service.

The administration of these islands should be as wholly free from the
suspicion of partisan politics as the administration of the Army and
Navy. All that we ask from the public servant in the Philippines or
Puerto Rico is that he reflect honor on his country by the way in which
he makes that country's rule a benefit to the peoples who have come
under it. This is all that we should ask, and we cannot afford to be
content with less.

The merit system is simply one method of securing honest and efficient
administration of the Government; and in the long run the sole
justification of any type of government lies in its proving itself both
honest and efficient.

The consular service is now organized under the provisions of a law
passed in 1856, which is entirely inadequate to existing conditions.
The interest shown by so many commercial bodies throughout the country
in the reorganization of the service is heartily commended to your
attention. Several bills providing for a new consular service have in
recent years been submitted to the Congress. They are based upon the
just principle that appointments to the service should be made only
after a practical test of the applicant's fitness, that promotions
should be governed by trustworthiness, adaptability, and zeal in the
performance of duty, and that the tenure of office should be unaffected
by partisan considerations.

The guardianship and fostering of our rapidly expanding foreign
commerce, the protection of American citizens resorting to foreign
countries in lawful pursuit of their affairs, and the maintenance of
the dignity of the nation abroad, combine to make it essential that
our consuls should be men of character, knowledge and enterprise. It is
true that the service is now, in the main, efficient, but a standard of
excellence cannot be permanently maintained until the principles set
forth in the bills heretofore submitted to the Congress on this subject
are enacted into law.

In my judgment the time has arrived when we should definitely make up
our minds to recognize the Indian as an individual and not as a member
of a tribe. The General Allotment Act is a mighty pulverizing engine
to break up the tribal mass. It acts directly upon the family and the
individual. Under its provisions some sixty thousand Indians have
already become citizens of the United States. We should now break up the
tribal funds, doing for them what allotment does for the tribal lands;
that is, they should be divided into individual holdings. There will be
a transition period during which the funds will in many cases have to
be held in trust. This is the case also with the lands. A stop should
be put upon the indiscriminate permission to Indians to lease their
allotments. The effort should be steadily to make the Indian work like
any other man on his own ground. The marriage laws of the Indians should
be made the same as those of the whites.

In the schools the education should be elementary and largely
industrial. The need of higher education among the Indians is very, very
limited. On the reservations care should be taken to try to suit the
teaching to the needs of the particular Indian. There is no use in
attempting to induce agriculture in a country suited only for cattle
raising, where the Indian should be made a stock grower. The ration
system, which is merely the corral and the reservation system, is highly
detrimental to the Indians. It promotes beggary, perpetuates pauperism,
and stifles industry. It is an effectual barrier to progress. It must
continue to a greater or less degree as long as tribes are herded on
reservations and have everything in common. The Indian should be treated
as an individual--like the white man. During the change of treatment
inevitable hardships will occur; every effort should be made to minimize
these hardships; but we should not because of them hesitate to make the
change. There should be a continuous reduction in the number of
agencies.

In dealing with the aboriginal races few things are more important
than to preserve them from the terrible physical and moral degradation
resulting from the liquor traffic. We are doing all we can to save our
own Indian tribes from this evil. Wherever by international agreement
this same end can be attained as regards races where we do not possess
exclusive control, every effort should be made to bring it about.

I bespeak the most cordial support from the Congress and the people for
the St. Louis Exposition to commemorate the One Hundredth Anniversary
of the Louisiana Purchase. This purchase was the greatest instance of
expansion in our history. It definitely decided that we were to become
a great continental republic, by far the foremost power in the Western
Hemisphere. It is one of three or four great landmarks in our
history--the great turning points in our development. It is eminently
fitting that all our people should join with heartiest good will in
commemorating it, and the citizens of St. Louis, of Missouri, of all the
adjacent region, are entitled to every aid in making the celebration a
noteworthy event in our annals. We earnestly hope that foreign nations
will appreciate the deep interest our country takes in this Exposition,
and our view of its importance from every standpoint, and that they will
participate in securing its success. The National Government should be
represented by a full and complete set of exhibits.

The people of Charleston, with great energy and civic spirit, are
carrying on an Exposition which will continue throughout most of the
present session of the Congress. I heartily commend this Exposition to
the good will of the people. It deserves all the encouragement that can
be given it. The managers of the Charleston Exposition have requested
the Cabinet officers to place thereat the Government exhibits which have
been at Buffalo, promising to pay the necessary expenses. I have taken
the responsibility of directing that this be done, for I feel that it is
due to Charleston to help her in her praiseworthy effort. In my opinion
the management should not be required to pay all these expenses.
I earnestly recommend that the Congress appropriate at once the small
sum necessary for this purpose.

The Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo has just closed. Both from the
industrial and the artistic standpoint this Exposition has been in a
high degree creditable and useful, not merely to Buffalo but to the
United States. The terrible tragedy of the President's assassination
interfered materially with its being a financial success. The Exposition
was peculiarly in harmony with the trend of our public policy, because
it represented an effort to bring into closer touch all the peoples of
the Western Hemisphere, and give them an increasing sense of unity.
Such an effort was a genuine service to the entire American public.

The advancement of the highest interests of national science and
learning and the custody of objects of art and of the valuable results
of scientific expeditions conducted by the United States have been
committed to the Smithsonian Institution. In furtherance of its declared
purpose--for the "increase and diffusion of knowledge among men"--the
Congress has from time to time given it other important functions. Such
trusts have been executed by the Institution with notable fidelity.
There should be no halt in the work of the Institution, in accordance
with the plans which its Secretary has presented, for the preservation
of the vanishing races of great North American animals in the National
Zoological Park. The urgent needs of the National Museum are recommended
to the favorable consideration of the Congress.

Perhaps the most characteristic educational movement of the past fifty
years is that which has created the modern public library and developed
it into broad and active service. There are now over five thousand
public libraries in the United States, the product of this period.
In addition to accumulating material, they are also striving by
organization, by improvement in method, and by co-operation, to give
greater efficiency to the material they hold, to make it more widely
useful, and by avoidance of unnecessary duplication in process to reduce
the cost of its administration.

In these efforts they naturally look for assistance to the Federal
library, which, though still the Library of Congress, and so entitled,
is the one national library of the United States. Already the largest
single collection of books on the Western Hemisphere, and certain
to increase more rapidly than any other through purchase, exchange,
and the operation of the copyright law, this library has a unique
opportunity to render to the libraries of this country--to American
scholarship--service of the highest importance. It is housed in a
building which is the largest and most magnificent yet erected for
library uses. Resources are now being provided which will develop the
collection properly, equip it with the apparatus and service necessary
to its effective use, render its bibliographic work widely available,
and enable it to become, not merely a center of research, but the chief
factor in great co-operative efforts for the diffusion of knowledge and
the advancement of learning.

For the sake of good administration, sound economy, and the advancement
of science, the Census Office as now constituted should be made a
permanent Government bureau. This would insure better, cheaper, and more
satisfactory work, in the interest not only of our business but of
statistic, economic, and social science.

The remarkable growth of the postal service is shown in the fact that
its revenues have doubled and its expenditures have nearly doubled
within twelve years. Its progressive development compels constantly
increasing outlay, but in this period of business energy and prosperity
its receipts grow so much faster than its expenses that the annual
deficit has been steadily reduced from $11,411,779 in 1897 to $3,923,727
in 1901. Among recent postal advances the success of rural free delivery
wherever established has been so marked, and actual experience has made
its benefits so plain, that the demand for its extension is general and
urgent.

It is just that the great agricultural population should share in the
improvement of the service. The number of rural routes now in operation
is 6,009, practically all established within three years, and there are
6,000 applications awaiting action. It is expected that the number in
operation at the close of the current fiscal year will reach 8,600. The
mail will then be daily carried to the doors of 5,700,000 of our people
who have heretofore been dependent upon distant offices, and one-third
of all that portion of the country which is adapted to it will be
covered by this kind of service.

The full measure of postal progress which might be realized has
long been hampered and obstructed by the heavy burden imposed on the
Government through the intrenched and well-understood abuses which have
grown up in connection with second-class mail matter. The extent of this
burden appears when it is stated that while the second-class matter
makes nearly three-fifths of the weight of all the mail, it paid for
the last fiscal year only $4,294,445 of the aggregate postal revenue of
$111,631,193. If the pound rate of postage, which produces the large
loss thus entailed, and which was fixed by the Congress with the purpose
of encouraging the dissemination of public information, were limited
to the legitimate newspapers and periodicals actually contemplated by
the law, no just exception could be taken. That expense would be the
recognized and accepted cost of a liberal public policy deliberately
adopted for a justifiable end. But much of the matter which enjoys the
privileged rate is wholly outside of the intent of the law, and has
secured admission only through an evasion of its requirements or through
lax construction. The proportion of such wrongly included matter is
estimated by postal experts to be one-half of the whole volume of
second-class mail. If it be only one-third or one-quarter, the magnitude
of the burden is apparent. The Post-Office Department has now undertaken
to remove the abuses so far as is possible by a stricter application of
the law; and it should be sustained in its effort.

Owing to the rapid growth of our power and our interests on the Pacific,
whatever happens in China must be of the keenest national concern to us.

The general terms of the settlement of the questions growing out
of the antiforeign uprisings in China of 1900, having been formulated
in a joint note addressed to China by the representatives of the
injured powers in December last, were promptly accepted by the Chinese
Government. After protracted conferences the plenipotentiaries of the
several powers were able to sign a final protocol with the Chinese
plenipotentiaries on the 7th of last September, setting forth the
measures taken by China in compliance with the demands of the joint
note, and expressing their satisfaction therewith. It will be laid
before the Congress, with a report of the plenipotentiary on behalf of
the United States, Mr. William Woodville Rockhill, to whom high praise
is due for the tact, good judgment, and energy he has displayed in
performing an exceptionally difficult and delicate task.

The agreement reached disposes in a manner satisfactory to the powers
of the various grounds of complaint, and will contribute materially to
better future relations between China and the powers. Reparation has
been made by China for the murder of foreigners during the uprising and
punishment has been inflicted on the officials, however high in rank,
recognized as responsible for or having participated in the outbreak.
Official examinations have been forbidden for a period of five years in
all cities in which foreigners have been murdered or cruelly treated,
and edicts have been issued making all officials directly responsible
for the future safety of foreigners and for the suppression of violence
against them.

Provisions have been made for insuring the future safety of the foreign
representatives in Peking by setting aside for their exclusive use a
quarter of the city which the powers can make defensible and in which
they can if necessary maintain permanent military guards; by dismantling
the military works between the capital and the sea; and by allowing the
temporary maintenance of foreign military posts along this line. An
edict has been issued by the Emperor of China prohibiting for two years
the importation of arms and ammunition into China. China has agreed to
pay adequate indemnities to the states, societies, and individuals for
the losses sustained by them and for the expenses of the military
expeditions sent by the various powers to protect life and restore
order.

Under the provisions of the joint note of December, 1900, China has
agreed to revise the treaties of commerce and navigation and to take
such other steps for the purpose of facilitating foreign trade as the
foreign powers may decide to be needed.

The Chinese Government has agreed to participate financially in the
work of bettering the water approaches to Shanghai and to Tientsin,
the centers of foreign trade in central and northern China, and an
international conservancy board, in which the Chinese Government is
largely represented, has been provided for the improvement of the
Shanghai River and the control of its navigation. In the same line of
commercial advantages a revision of the present tariff on imports has
been assented to for the purpose of substituting specific for _ad
valorem_ duties, and an expert has been sent abroad on the part of
the United States to assist in this work. A list of articles to remain
free of duty, including flour, cereals, and rice, gold and silver coin
and bullion, has also been agreed upon in the settlement.

During these troubles our Government has unswervingly advocated
moderation, and has materially aided in bringing about an adjustment
which tends to enhance the welfare of China and to lead to a more
beneficial intercourse between the Empire and the modern world; while
in the critical period of revolt and massacre we did our full share in
safeguarding life and property, restoring order, and vindicating the
national interest and honor. It behooves us to continue in these paths,
doing what lies in our power to foster feelings of good will, and
leaving no effort untried to work out the great policy of full and fair
intercourse between China and the nations, on a footing of equal rights
and advantages to all. We advocate the "open door" with all that it
implies; not merely the procurement of enlarged commercial opportunities
on the coasts, but access to the interior by the waterways with which
China has been so extraordinarily favored. Only by bringing the people
of China into peaceful and friendly community of trade with all the
peoples of the earth can the work now auspiciously begun be carried to
fruition. In the attainment of this purpose we necessarily claim parity
of treatment, under the conventions, throughout the Empire for our trade
and our citizens with those of all other powers.

We view with lively interest and keen hopes of beneficial results the
proceedings of the Pan-American Congress, convoked at the invitation
of Mexico, and now sitting at the Mexican capital. The delegates of the
United States are under the most liberal instructions to co-operate with
their colleagues in all matters promising advantage to the great family
of American commonwealths, as well in their relations among themselves
as in their domestic advancement and in their intercourse with the world
at large.

My predecessor communicated to the Congress the fact that the Weil and
La Abra awards against Mexico have been adjudged by the highest courts
of our country to have been obtained through fraud and perjury on the
part of the claimants, and that in accordance with the acts of the
Congress the money remaining in the hands of the Secretary of State
on these awards has been returned to Mexico. A considerable portion of
the money received from Mexico on these awards had been paid by this
Government to the claimants before the decision of the courts was
rendered. My judgment is that the Congress should return to Mexico
an amount equal to the sums thus already paid to the claimants.

The death of Queen Victoria caused the people of the United States deep
and heartfelt sorrow, to which the Government gave full expression. When
President McKinley died, our Nation in turn received from every quarter
of the British Empire expressions of grief and sympathy no less sincere.
The death of the Empress Dowager Frederick of Germany also aroused the
genuine sympathy of the American people; and this sympathy was cordially
reciprocated by Germany when the President was assassinated. Indeed,
from every quarter of the civilized world we received, at the time of
the President's death, assurances of such grief and regard as to touch
the hearts of our people. In the midst of our affliction we reverently
thank the Almighty that we are at peace with the nations of mankind; and
we firmly intend that our policy shall be such as to continue unbroken
these international relations of mutual respect and good will.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _December 16, 1901_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith a report from the Secretary of State, with
accompanying papers, showing that a civil government for Puerto Rico has
been organized in accordance with the provisions of the act of Congress
approved April 12, 1900, entitled "An act to provide revenues and a
civil Government for Puerto Rico, and for other purposes," and that the
legislative assembly of Puerto Rico has enacted and put into operation a
system of local taxation to meet the necessities of the government of
Puerto Rico.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _March 11, 1902_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I return without approval Senate bill, No. 1258 entitled "An act to
remove the charge of desertion from the naval record of John Glass."

There can be no graver crime than the crime of desertion from the Army
or Navy, especially during war; it is then high treason to the nation,
and is justly punishable by death. No man should be relieved from such a
crime, especially when nearly forty years have passed since it occurred,
save on the clearest possible proof of his real innocence. In this case
the statement made by the affiant before the committee does not in all
points agree with his statement made to the Secretary of the Navy. In
any event it is incomprehensible to me that he should not have made
effective effort to get back into the Navy.

He had served but little more than a month when he deserted, and the
war lasted for over a year afterwards, yet he made no effort whatever to
get back into the war. Under such circumstances it seems to me that to
remove the charge of desertion from the Navy and give him an honorable
discharge would be to falsify the records and do an injustice to his
gallant and worthy comrades who fought the war to a finish. The names
of the veterans who fought in the civil war make the honor list of the
Republic, and I am not willing to put upon it the name of a man unworthy
of the high position.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _Washington, May 12, 1902_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives_:

One of the greatest calamities in history has fallen upon our
neighboring island of Martinique. The consul of the United States at
Guadeloupe has telegraphed from Fort de France, under date of yesterday,
that the disaster is complete; that the city of St. Pierre has ceased
to exist; and that the American consul and his family have perished.
He is informed that 30,000 people have lost their lives and that 50,000
are homeless and hungry; that there is urgent need of all kinds of
provisions, and that the visit of vessels for the work of supply and
rescue is imperatively required.

The Government of France, while expressing their thanks for the marks
of sympathy which have reached them from America, inform us that Fort
de France and the entire island of Martinique are still threatened.
They therefore request that, for the purpose of rescuing the people
who are in such deadly peril and threatened with starvation, the
Government of the United States may send, as soon as possible, the
means of transporting them from the stricken island. The island of St.
Vincent and, perhaps, others in that region are also seriously menaced
by the calamity which has taken so appalling a form in Martinique.

I have directed the departments of the Treasury, of War, and of the Navy
to take such measures for the relief of these stricken people as lies
within the Executive discretion, and I earnestly commend this case of
unexampled disaster to the generous consideration of the Congress. For
this purpose I recommend that an appropriation of $500,000 be made, to
be immediately available.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _June 13, 1902_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I deem it important before the adjournment of the present session of
Congress to call attention to the following expressions in the message
which in the discharge of the duty imposed upon me by the Constitution
I sent to Congress on the first Tuesday of December last:

  Elsewhere I have discussed the question of reciprocity. In the case of
  Cuba, however, there are weighty reasons of morality and of national
  interest why the policy should be held to have a peculiar application,
  and I most earnestly ask your attention to the wisdom, indeed to the
  vital need, of providing for a substantial reduction in the tariff
  duties on Cuban imports into the United States. Cuba has in her
  Constitution affirmed what we desired, that she should stand, in
  international matters, in closer and more friendly relations with us
  than with any other power; and we are bound by every consideration of
  honor and expediency to pass commercial measures in the interest of
  her material well being.


This recommendation was merely giving practical effect to President
McKinley's words, when, in his messages of December 5, 1898, and
December 5, 1899, he wrote:

  It is important that our relations with this people (of Cuba) shall be
  of the most friendly character and our commercial relations close and
  reciprocal. * * * We have accepted a trust, the fulfillment of which
  calls for the sternest integrity of purpose and the exercise of the
  highest wisdom. The new Cuba yet to arise from the ashes of the past
  must needs be bound to us by ties of singular intimacy and strength
  if its enduring welfare is to be assured. * * * The greatest blessing
  which can come to Cuba is the restoration of her agricultural and
  industrial prosperity.


Yesterday, June 12, I received, by cable from the American minister in
Cuba, a most earnest appeal from President Palma for "legislative relief
before it is too late and (his) country financially ruined."

The granting of reciprocity with Cuba is a proposition which stands
entirely alone. The reasons for it far outweigh those for granting
reciprocity with any other nation, and are entirely consistent with
preserving intact the protective system under which this country has
thriven so marvelously. The present tariff law was designed to promote
the adoption of such a reciprocity treaty, and expressly provided for a
reduction not to exceed 20 per cent upon goods coming from a particular
country, leaving the tariff rates on the same articles unchanged as
regards all other countries. Objection has been made to the granting of
the reduction on the ground that the substantial benefit would not go
to the agricultural producer of sugar, but would inure to the American
sugar refiners. In my judgment provision can and should be made which
will guarantee us against this possibility, without having recourse to
a measure of doubtful policy, such as a bounty in the form of a rebate.

The question as to which if any of the different schedules of the
tariff ought most properly to be revised does not enter into this matter
in any way or shape. We are concerned with getting a friendly reciprocal
arrangement with Cuba. This arrangement applies to all the articles that
Cuba grows or produces. It is not in our power to determine what these
articles shall be, and any discussion of the tariff as it affects
special schedules or countries other than Cuba is wholly aside from the
subject matter to which I call your attention.

Some of our citizens oppose the lowering of the tariff on Cuban products
just as three years ago they opposed the admission of the Hawaiian
Islands lest free trade with them might ruin certain of our interests
here. In the actual event their fears proved baseless as regards Hawaii,
and their apprehensions as to the damage to any industry of our own
because of the proposed measure of reciprocity with Cuba seem to me
equally baseless. In my judgment no American industry will be hurt,
and many American industries will be benefited by the proposed action.
It is to our advantage as a nation that the growing Cuban market should
be controlled by American producers.

The events following the war with Spain, and the prospective building of
the Isthmian Canal, render it certain that we must take in the future a
far greater interest than hitherto in what happens throughout the West
Indies, Central America, and the adjacent coasts and waters. We expect
Cuba to treat us on an exceptional footing politically, and we should
put her in the same exceptional position economically. The proposed
action is in line with the course we have pursued as regards all the
islands with which we have been brought into relations of varying
intimacy by the Spanish war. Puerto Rico and Hawaii have been included
within our tariff lines, to their great benefit as well as ours,
and without any of the feared detriment to our own industries. The
Philippines, which stand in a different relation, have been granted
substantial tariff concessions.

Cuba is an independent republic, but a republic which has assumed
certain special obligations as regards her international position in
compliance with our request. I ask for her certain special economic
concessions in return; these economic concessions to benefit us as well
as her. There are few brighter pages in American history than the page
which tells of our dealings with Cuba during the past four years. On her
behalf we waged a war of which the mainspring was generous indignation
against oppression; and we have kept faith absolutely. It is earnestly
to be hoped that we will complete in the same spirit the record so well
begun, and show in our dealings with Cuba that steady continuity of
policy which it is essential for our nation to establish in foreign
affairs if we desire to play well our part as a world power.

We are a wealthy and powerful nation; Cuba is a young republic, still
weak, who owes to us her birth, whose whole future, whose very life,
must depend on our attitude toward her. I ask that we help her as she
struggles upward along the painful and difficult road of self-governing
independence. I ask this aid for her, because she is weak, because she
needs it, because we have already aided her. I ask that open-handed
help, of a kind which a self-respecting people can accept, be given to
Cuba, for the very reason that we have given her such help in the past.
Our soldiers fought to give her freedom; and for three years our
representatives, civil and military, have toiled unceasingly, facing
disease of a peculiarly sinister and fatal type, with patient and
uncomplaining fortitude, to teach her how to use aright her new freedom.
Never in history has any alien country been thus administered, with such
high integrity of purpose, such wise judgment, and such single-minded
devotion to the country's interests. Now, I ask that the Cubans be given
all possible chance to use to the best advantage the freedom of which
Americans have such right to be proud, and for which so many American
lives have been sacrificed.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.




PROCLAMATIONS.


BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

_To the People of the United States_:

A terrible bereavement has befallen our people. The President of the
United States has been struck down; a crime not only against the Chief
Magistrate, but against every law-abiding and liberty-loving citizen.

President McKinley crowned a life of largest love for his fellow men, of
earnest endeavor for their welfare, by a death of Christian fortitude;
and both the way in which he lived his life and the way in which, in the
supreme hour of trial, he met his death will remain forever a precious
heritage of our people.

It is meet that we as a nation express our abiding love and reverence
for his life, our deep sorrow for his untimely death.

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States
of America, do appoint Thursday next, September 19, the day in which
the body of the dead President will be laid in its last earthly resting
place, as a day of mourning and prayer throughout the United States.
I earnestly recommend all the people to assemble on that day in their
respective places of divine worship, there to bow down in submission to
the will of Almighty God, and to pay out of full hearts the homage of
love and reverence to the memory of the great and good President, whose
death has so sorely smitten the nation.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, the fourteenth day of September, A.D.
1901, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

The season is nigh when, according to the time-hallowed custom of our
people, the President appoints a day as the especial occasion for praise
and thanksgiving to God.

This Thanksgiving finds the people still bowed with sorrow for the death
of a great and good President. We mourn President McKinley because we so
loved and honored him; and the manner of his death should awaken in the
breasts of our people a keen anxiety for the country, and at the same
time a resolute purpose not to be driven by any calamity from the path
of strong, orderly, popular liberty which as a nation we have thus far
safely trod.

Yet in spite of this great disaster, it is nevertheless true that no
people on earth have such abundant cause for thanksgiving as we have.
The past year in particular has been one of peace and plenty. We have
prospered in things material and have been able to work for our own
uplifting in things intellectual and spiritual. Let us remember that,
as much has been given us, much will be expected from us; and that true
homage comes from the heart as well as from the lips and shows itself in
deeds. We can best prove our thankfulness to the Almighty by the way in
which on this earth and at this time each of us does his duty to his
fellow men.

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
do hereby designate as a day of general thanksgiving Thursday, the 28th
of this present November, and do recommend that throughout the land the
people cease from their wonted occupations, and at their several homes
and places of worship reverently thank the Giver of all good for the
countless blessings of our national life.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this second day of November, A.D. 1901,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March third, 1891, entitled "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," "That the President of the United States
may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Colorado, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
are hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a Public
Reservation all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the State of Colorado and particularly described
as follows, to wit:

In township forty-four (44) north, range eleven (11) east, the following
sections: one (1) to three (3), both inclusive, east half of section
four (4), sections ten (10) to fifteen (15), both inclusive, east half
of section twenty-two (22), sections twenty-three (23) to twenty-six
(26), both inclusive, and section thirty-five (35).

In township forty-five (45) north, range eleven (11) east, the following
sections: one (1) to five (5), both inclusive, east half of sections six
(6) and seven (7), sections eight (8) to seventeen (17), both inclusive,
sections twenty (20) to twenty-eight (28), both inclusive, east half of
section twenty-nine (29) and sections thirty-three (33) to thirty-six
(36), both inclusive.

In township forty-three (43) north, range twelve (12) east, the
following sections: one (1) to five (5), both inclusive, and sections
eight (8) to twelve (12), both inclusive.

In township forty-four (44) north, range twelve (12) east, the following
sections: one (1) to thirty-five (35), both inclusive.

In township forty-five (45) north, range twelve (12) east, the following
sections: two (2) to eleven (11), both inclusive, and sections thirteen
(13) to thirty-five (35), both inclusive.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the tract of land reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The San Isabel
Forest Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this eleventh day of April, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress
approved March third, eighteen hundred and ninety-one, entitled
"An act to repeal timber-culture laws, and for other purposes," "That
the President of the United States may, from time to time, set apart and
reserve, in any State or Territory having public land bearing forests,
in any part of the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or
undergrowth, whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations,
and the President shall, by public proclamation, declare the
establishment of such reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas the public lands in the Territory of Arizona, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
is hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a public
reservation all those certain tracts, pieces, or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the Territory of Arizona, and within the boundaries
particularly described as follows, to wit:

Beginning at the northwest corner of township fifteen (15) south, range
fourteen (14) east, Gila and Salt River Meridian, Arizona; thence
southerly along the range line to its intersection with the third (3d)
Standard Parallel south; thence easterly along said parallel to the
northwest corner of section five (5), township sixteen (16) south, range
fourteen (14) east; thence southerly along the section lines to the
southwest corner of section twenty (20), said township; thence easterly
to the southeast corner of said section; thence southerly along the
section lines to the northeast corner of section eight (8), township
seventeen (17) south, range fourteen (14) east; thence westerly to the
northwest corner of said section; thence southerly along the section
lines to the northeast corner of section thirty-one (31), said township;
thence westerly to the northwest corner of said section; thence
southerly along the range line to its intersection with the northern
boundary of the San Ygnacio de la Canoa Grant, as confirmed by the
United States Court of Private Land Claims; thence in a southeasterly
and southwesterly direction along the boundary of said grant to its
intersection with the range line between ranges thirteen (13) and
fourteen (14) east; thence southerly to the northeast corner of township
nineteen (19) south, range thirteen (13) east; thence westerly along the
township line to its intersection with the boundary of said grant;
thence in a southwesterly and northwesterly direction along said
boundary to its intersection with the section lines between sections
twenty-eight (28) and twenty-nine (29) and thirty-two (32) and
thirty-three (33), said township; thence southerly to the northeast
corner of section eight (8), township twenty (20) south, range thirteen
(13) east; thence westerly to the northwest corner of said section;
thence southerly to the southwest corner of section twenty (20), said
township; thence easterly to the southeast corner of said section;
thence southerly to the southwest corner of section thirty-three (33),
said township; thence easterly to the southeast corner of section
thirty-five (35), said township; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of said section; thence easterly to the southeast corner of
section twenty-five (25), said township; thence southerly along the
range line to its intersection with the fourth (4th) Standard Parallel
south; thence easterly, along the said surveyed and unsurveyed parallel,
to the point for its intersection with the range line between ranges
fifteen (15) east and sixteen (16) east; thence northerly along said
range line to the northwest corner of township nineteen (19) south,
range sixteen (16) east; thence easterly to the southeast corner of
section thirty-four (34), township eighteen (18) south, range seventeen
(17) east; thence northerly along the section lines to the southwest
corner of section fourteen (14), said township; thence easterly to the
southeast corner of said section; thence northerly to the southwest
corner of section one (1), said township; thence easterly to the
southeast corner of said section; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of said section; thence westerly to the southeast corner of
section thirty-five (35), township seventeen (17) south, range seventeen
(17) east; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence easterly to the southeast corner of section twenty-five (25),
said township; thence northerly to the northeast corner of section
twelve (12), said township; thence westerly to the northwest corner of
said section; thence northerly to the northeast corner of section two
(2), said township; thence westerly to the southeast corner of section
thirty-three (33), township sixteen (16) south, range seventeen (17)
east; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section; thence
westerly to the northwest corner of said section; thence northerly to
the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of section twenty-nine
(29), said township; thence westerly along the quarter-section lines to
the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of section twenty-five
(25), township sixteen (16) south, range sixteen (16) east; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of said section; thence westerly to
the northwest corner of said section; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of section twenty-three (23), said township; thence westerly to
the southeast corner of section seventeen (17), said township; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of section eight (8), said township;
thence westerly to the northwest corner of said section; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of section six (6), said township;
thence westerly along the third (3d) Standard Parallel south to the
southeast corner of section thirty-five (35), township fifteen (15)
south, range fifteen (15) east; thence northerly to the northeast corner
of section twenty-six (26), said township; thence westerly to the
northwest corner of said section; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of section twenty-two (22), said township; thence westerly to
the southeast corner of section seventeen (17), said township; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of section eight (8), said township;
thence westerly to the northwest corner of said section; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of section six (6), said township;
thence westerly to the southeast corner of section thirty-five township
fourteen (14) south, range fourteen (14) east; thence northerly to the
northeast corner of section twenty-six (26), said township; thence
westerly to the northwest corner of section twenty-seven (27), said
township; thence southerly to the southwest corner of section
thirty-four (34), said township; thence westerly to the northwest
corner, of township fifteen (15) south, range fourteen (14) east,
the place of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler, or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing, or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the tract of land reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The Santa Rita
Forest Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, this eleventh day of April, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, The San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserves, in the Territory
of Arizona, were established by proclamation dated August 17, 1898,
under and by virtue of section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March 3, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture laws,
and for other purposes," which provides, "That the President of the
United States may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any
State or Territory having public land bearing forests, in any part of
the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth,
whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the
President shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of
such reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, it is further provided by the act of Congress, approved
June 4, 1897, entitled, "An act making appropriations for sundry civil
expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1898, and
for other purposes," that "The President is hereby authorized at any
time to modify any Executive order that has been or may hereafter be
made establishing any forest reserve, and by such modification may
reduce the area or change the boundary lines of such reserve, or may
vacate altogether any order creating such reserve;"

And whereas, the public lands in the Territory of Arizona, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid acts of Congress,
do hereby make known and proclaim that, for the purpose of consolidating
into one reserve the lands heretofore embraced in the said San Francisco
Mountains Forest Reserves and of including therein the other adjacent
lands within the description hereinafter given, there is hereby reserved
and set apart as a public forest reservation all the lands embraced
within the following described boundaries and lying and being situate
in the Territory of Arizona, to wit:

Beginning at the northwest corner of township twenty-two (22) north,
range one (1) east, Gila and Salt River Meridian, Arizona; thence
southerly along the said meridian, allowing for the proper offset on the
fifth (5th) Standard Parallel north, to the southwest corner of township
nineteen (19) south, range one (1) east; thence easterly along the
surveyed and unsurveyed township line to the point for the northwest
corner of township eighteen (18) north, range four (4) east; thence
southerly along the unsurveyed range line to its intersection with the
fourth (4th) Standard Parallel north; thence easterly along said
parallel to the point for the northwest corner of township sixteen (16)
north, range five (5) east; thence southerly to the point for the
southwest corner of said township; thence easterly to the point for the
northwest corner of township fifteen (15) north, range six (6) east;
thence southerly to the point for the southwest corner of section
eighteen (18), said township; thence easterly along the unsurveyed
section line to the point for the northwest corner of section nineteen
(19), township fifteen (15) north, range seven (7) east; thence
southerly to the southwest corner of said section; thence easterly along
the unsurveyed section lines to the southwest corner of section nineteen
(19), township fifteen (15) north, range nine (9) east; thence northerly
to the northwest corner of said section; thence easterly along the
section line to the southeast corner of section thirteen (13), said
township; thence northerly to the northeast corner of section twelve
(12), said township; thence easterly along the section lines to the
southeast corner of section one (1), township fifteen (15) north,
range eleven (11) east; thence northerly along the range line to its
intersection with the fourth (4th) Standard Parallel north; thence
westerly along said parallel to the southeast corner of township
seventeen (17) north, range eleven (11) east; thence northerly along the
surveyed and unsurveyed range line to the point for the northeast corner
of township eighteen (18) north, range eleven (11) east; thence westerly
to the southeast corner of township nineteen (19) north, range ten (10)
east; thence northerly along the range line to its intersection with the
fifth (5th) Standard Parallel north; thence westerly along said parallel
to the point for the southeast corner of township twenty-one (21) north,
range nine (9) east; thence northerly along the unsurveyed range line,
allowing for the proper offset on the sixth (6th) Standard Parallel
north, to the point for the northeast corner of township twenty-five
(25) north, range nine (9) east; thence westerly along the surveyed
and unsurveyed township line to the point for the northwest corner of
township twenty-five (25) north, range three (3) east; thence southerly
along the surveyed and unsurveyed range line, allowing for the proper
offset on the sixth (6th) Standard Parallel north, to the northeast
corner of township twenty-two (22) north, range two (2) east; thence
westerly along the township line to the northwest corner of township
twenty-two (22) north, range one (1) east, to the place of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: Provided, that this exception shall not continue
to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman, settler,
or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the entry,
filing, or settlement was made.

_Provided further_, That nothing herein shall give any force or
effect to any claim or right to any of the lands heretofore embraced
within the said San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserves which would not
have been entitled to recognition if said reserves as heretofore
established had been continued in force without this consolidation.

The reserve hereby created shall be known as the San Francisco Mountains
Forest Reserve.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this twelfth day of April, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State._



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress
approved March 3rd, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," "That the President of the United States
may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Nebraska, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
is hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a Public
Reservation all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the State of Nebraska and within the boundaries
particularly described as follows, to wit:

Beginning at the northeast corner of section ten (10), township
thirty-two (32) north, range thirty (30) west, Sixth (6th) Principal
Meridian, Nebraska; thence westerly to the southeast corner of section
six (6), said township; thence northerly to the northeast corner
of the southeast quarter of said section; thence westerly along the
quarter-section lines to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter
of section five (5), township thirty-two (32) north, range thirty-one
(31) west; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence westerly along the township line to the northwest corner of
section six (6), township thirty-two (32) north, range thirty-three (33)
west; thence southerly to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter
of said section; thence westerly along the quarter-section line to the
northwest corner of the southwest quarter of section two (2) township
thirty-two (32) north, range thirty-four (34) west; thence southerly
along the section lines to the southwest corner of section twenty-three
(23), said township; thence easterly to the northwest corner of section
thirty (30), township thirty-two (32) north, range thirty-three (33)
west; thence southerly to the southwest corner of said section; thence
easterly to the northwest corner of section thirty-three (33), said
township; thence southerly to the southwest corner of said section;
thence easterly to the northwest corner of section two (2), township
thirty-one (31) north, range thirty-three (33) West; thence southerly to
the southwest corner of said section; thence easterly to the northwest
corner of section ten (10), township thirty-one (31) north, range
thirty-two (32) west; thence southerly to the southwest corner of the
northwest quarter of section three (3), township thirty (30) north,
range thirty-two (32) west; thence easterly along the quarter-section
lines to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of section two
(2), township thirty (30) north, range thirty-one (31) west; thence
northerly to the northeast corner of section thirty-five (35), township
thirty-one (31) north, range thirty-one (31) west; thence easterly to
the southeast corner of section twenty-five (25), said township; thence
northerly to the southwest corner of section nineteen (19), township
thirty-one (31) north, range thirty (30) west; thence easterly to the
southeast corner of said section; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of the southeast quarter of said section; thence easterly along
the quarter-section line to the southeast corner of the northwest
quarter of section twenty (20), said township; thence northerly along
the quarter-section lines to the northeast corner of the southwest
quarter of section thirty-two (32), township thirty-two (32) north,
range thirty (30) west; thence westerly to the northwest corner of
said quarter-section; thence northerly to the southwest corner of the
northwest quarter of section twenty-nine (29), said township; thence
easterly along the quarter-section lines to the southeast corner of the
northeast quarter of section twenty-eight (28), said township; thence
northerly to the southwest corner of section fifteen (15), said
township; thence easterly to the southeast corner of said section;
thence northerly to the northeast corner of section ten (10), said
township, the place of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The Niobrara Forest
Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this sixteenth day of April, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March 3rd, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," "That the President of the United States
may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Nebraska, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
is hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a Public
Reservation all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the State of Nebraska and within the boundaries
particularly described as follows, to wit:

Beginning at the northeast corner of section twenty-seven (27),
township twenty-two (22) north, range twenty-five (25) west, Sixth (6th)
Principal Meridian, Nebraska; thence westerly to the southeast corner of
section twenty (20), said township; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of said section; thence westerly to the southeast corner of
section thirteen (13), township twenty-two (22) north, range twenty-six
(26) west; thence northerly to the northeast corner of the southeast
quarter of section twelve (12), said township; thence westerly along the
quarter-section line to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter
of section ten (10), said township; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of said section; thence westerly to the southeast corner of
section six (6), said township; thence northerly to the northeast corner
of said section; thence westerly to the southeast corner of section
thirty-five (35), township twenty-three (23) north, range twenty-seven
(27) west; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence westerly to the southeast corner of section twenty-eight (28),
said township; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence westerly to the southeast corner of section twenty (20), said
township; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence westerly along the section lines to the northwest corner of
section twenty-three (23), township twenty-three (23) north, range
twenty-eight (28) west; thence southerly along the section lines to the
southwest corner of section two (2), township twenty-two (22) north,
range twenty-eight (28) west; thence easterly to the southeast corner
of section one (1), said township; thence southerly along the range
line to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of section nineteen (19), township twenty-one (21) north,
range twenty-seven (27) west; thence easterly along the quarter
quarter-section lines to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter
of the northeast quarter of section twenty-three (23), township
twenty-one (21) north, range twenty-six (26) west; thence northerly
to the southwest corner of section twelve (12), said township; thence
easterly to the southeast corner of said section; thence northerly to
the northeast corner of said section; thence easterly to the southeast
corner of section five (5), township twenty-one (21) north, range
twenty-five (25) west; thence northerly to the northeast corner
of the southeast quarter of said section; thence easterly along the
quarter-section lines to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter
of section three (3), said township; thence northerly along the section
lines to the northeast corner of section twenty-seven (27), township
twenty-two (22) north, range twenty-five (25) west, the place of
beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_\ that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The Dismal River
Forest Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this sixteenth day of April, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas by an agreement between the Shoshone and Bannock Indians
of the Fort Hall Reservation in Idaho, on the one part and certain
commissioners of the United States on the other part, ratified by act of
Congress approved June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 672) the said Indians ceded,
granted, and relinquished to the United States all right, title, and
interest which they had to the following described land, the same being
a part of the land obtained through the treaty of Fort Bridger on the
third day of July. 1868, and ratified by the United States Senate on
the sixteenth day of February, 1869:

  All that portion of the said reservation embraced within and lying east
  and south of the following described lines:

  Commencing at a point in the south boundary of the Fort Hall Indian
  Reservation, being the southwest corner of township nine (9) south,
  range thirty-four (34) east of the Boise meridian, thence running due
  north on the range line between townships 33 and 34 east to a point two
  (2) miles north of the township line between townships five (5) and six
  (6) south, thence due east to the range line between ranges 35 and 36
  east, thence south on said range line four (4) miles, thence due east
  to the east boundary line of the reservation; from this point the east
  and south boundaries of the said reservation as it now exists to the
  point of beginning, namely, the southwest corner of township nine
  (9) south, range thirty-four (34) east, being the remainder of the
  description and metes and bounds of the said tract of land herein
  proposed to be ceded.


And whereas, in pursuance of said act of Congress ratifying said
agreement, allotments of land have been regularly made to each Indian
occupant who desired it, and a schedule has been made of the lands to be
abandoned and the improvements thereon appraised, and such improvements
will be offered for sale to the highest bidder at not less than the
appraised price prior to the date fixed for the opening of the ceded
lands to settlement, and the classification as to agricultural and
grazing lands has been made;

And whereas, in the act of Congress ratifying said agreement it is
provided:

  That on the completion of the allotments and the preparation of the
  schedule provided for in the preceding section, and the classification
  of the lands as provided for herein, the residue of said ceded lands
  shall be opened to settlement by the proclamation of the President,
  and shall be subject to disposal under the homestead, townsite, stone
  and timber, and mining laws of the United States only, excepting as
  to price and excepting the sixteenth and thirty-sixth sections in each
  Congressional township, which shall be reserved for common school
  purposes and be subject to the laws of Idaho; _Provided_, That all
  purchasers of lands lying under the canal of the Idaho Canal Company,
  and which are susceptible of irrigation from the water from said canal,
  shall pay for the same at the rate of ten dollars per acre; all
  agricultural lands not under said canal shall be paid for at the rate of
  two dollars and fifty cents per acre, and grazing lands at the rate of
  one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre, one-fifth of the respective
  sums to be paid at time of original entry, and four-fifths thereof at
  the time of making final proof; but no purchaser shall be permitted in
  any manner to purchase more than one hundred and sixty acres of the
  land hereinbefore referred to; but the rights of honorably discharged
  Union soldiers and sailors, as defined and described in sections
  twenty-three hundred and four and twenty-three hundred and five of the
  Revised Statutes of the United States, shall not be abridged, except
  as to the sum to be paid as aforesaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

  No lands in sections sixteen and thirty-six now occupied, as set forth
  in article three of the agreement herein ratified, shall be reserved for
  school purposes, but the State of Idaho shall be entitled to indemnity
  for any lands so occupied: _Provided_, That none of said lands
  shall be disposed of under the townsite laws for less than ten dollars
  per acre: _And provided further_, That all of said lands within
  five miles of the boundary line of the town of Pocatello shall be sold
  at public auction, payable as aforesaid, under the direction of the
  Secretary of the Interior for not less than ten dollars per acre: _And
  provided further_, That any mineral lands within said five mile limit
  shall be disposed of under the mineral land laws of the United States,
  excepting that the price of such mineral lands shall be fixed at ten
  dollars per acre, instead of the price fixed by the said mineral land
  laws.


And whereas, all the conditions required by law to be performed prior to
the opening of said lands to settlement and entry have been, as I hereby
declare, duly performed, except the sale of the improvements mentioned
above, but as this is not considered a bar to the opening of the
unallotted and unreserved lands to settlement and entry.

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States of
America, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby declare
and make known that all of the lands so as aforesaid ceded by the
Shoshone and Bannock Indians, saving and excepting all lands allotted
to the Indians, and saving and excepting the lands on which the Indian
improvements have been appraised, and saving and excepting the sixteenth
and thirty-sixth sections in each Congressional township, and saving and
excepting Lots 7 and 8, section 21, NW 1/4 SW 1/4 and Lots 9 and 10,
section 22, T. 9 S., R. 38 E., B.M., known as "Lava Hot Springs," and
saving and excepting all of the lands within five miles of the boundary
line of the town of Pocatello, Idaho and saving and excepting the
lands ceded under the act of September 1, 1888 (25 Stat, 452), for the
purposes of a townsite, will on the 17th day of June, 1902, at and
after the hour of 12 o'clock, noon (Mountain Standard time), be opened
to settlement and entry under the terms of and subject to all the
conditions, limitations, reservations, and restrictions contained in the
statutes above specified, and the laws of the United States applicable
thereto.

In view of the provision in said act "That all of said lands within
five miles of the boundary line of the town of Pocatello shall be sold
at public auction, payable as aforesaid, under the direction of the
Secretary of the Interior for not less than ten dollars per acre," the
lands "within five miles of the boundary line of the town of Pocatello."
saving and excepting all lands allotted to the Indians, and saving and
excepting the sixteenth and thirty-sixth sections in each Congressional
township, and saving and excepting the lands ceded under the act of
September 1, 1888 (25 Stat., 452), for the purposes of a townsite, will
on the 17th day of July, 1902, at and after the hour of 12 o'clock, noon
(Mountain Standard time), be offered at public auction at not less than
ten dollars per acre, under the terms and subject to all the conditions,
limitations, reservations and restrictions, contained in the statutes
above specified, and the laws of the United States applicable thereto.

Because of the provision in the act ratifying said agreement that
"The purchaser of said improvements shall have thirty days after such
purchase for preference right of entry, under the provisions of this
act, of the lands upon which the improvements purchased by him are
situated, not to exceed one hundred and sixty acres," the said lands
upon which such Indian improvements purchased are situated outside of
the lands within five miles of the town of Pocatello, shall for the
period of thirty days after said opening be subject to homestead entry,
townsite entry, stone and timber entry, and entry under the mineral laws
only by those who may have purchased the improvements thereon, and who
are accorded a preference right of entry for thirty days as aforesaid,
such entries to be made in accordance with the terms and conditions of
this act. Persons entitled to make entry under this preference right
will be permitted to do so at any time during the said period of thirty
days following the opening, and at the expiration of that period any
of said lands not so entered will come under the general provisions
of this proclamation.

The purchaser of the improvements on lands situated within five miles
of the town of Pocatello will have no preference right of entry of the
tract on which such improvements are situated, as the law provides that
"all of said lands within five miles of the boundary line of the town
of Pocatello shall be sold at public auction."

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington the seventh day of May, A.D. 1902, and of
the Independence of the United States the one hundred and twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, The Big Horn Forest Reserve, in the State of Wyoming, was
established by proclamation dated February 22d, 1897, under and by
virtue of section twenty-four of the act of Congress, approved March 3d,
1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture laws, and for other
purposes," which provides, "That the President of the United States may,
from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, it is further provided by the act of Congress, approved
June 4th, 1897, entitled, "An act making appropriations for sundry civil
expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30th, 1898,
and for other purposes," that The President is hereby authorized at any
time to modify any Executive order that has been or may hereafter be
made establishing any forest reserve, and by such modification may
reduce the area or change the boundary lines of such reserve, or may
vacate altogether any order creating such reserve; under such provision,
the boundary lines of the said forest reserve were changed and enlarged
by proclamation dated June 29th, 1900;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid act of Congress,
approved June 4th, 1897, do hereby make known and proclaim that there is
hereby reserved from entry or settlement, and added to and made a part
of the aforesaid Big Horn Forest Reserve, all those certain tracts,
pieces or parcels of land lying and being situate in the State of
Wyoming and particularly described as follows, to wit:

The west half of township fifty-six (56) north, range eighty-seven (87)
west; all of townships fifty-five (55) and fifty-six (56) north, range
eighty-eight (88) west; and the south half of township fifty-seven (57)
north, range eighty-eight (88) west, sixth (6th) Principal Meridian,
Wyoming.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, That this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March 3d, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," "That the President of the United States
may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Wyoming, within the limits
hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it appears
that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and reserving
said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
is hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a Public
Reservation all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the State of Wyoming and within the boundaries
particularly described as follows, to wit:

Beginning at the point where the range line between ranges seventy-six
(76) and seventy-seven (77) west, sixth (6th) Principal Meridian,
Wyoming, intersects the boundary line between the States of Wyoming
and Colorado; thence westerly along said state boundary line to a
point where it intersects the range line between ranges eighty (80) and
eighty-one (81) west; thence northerly along said range line, allowing
for the proper offset on the third (3rd) Standard Parallel north, to the
southeast corner of township fourteen (14) north, range eighty-one (81)
west; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said township; thence
northerly along the range line allowing for the proper offset on the
fourth (4th) Standard Parallel north, to the northwest corner of
township seventeen (17) north, range eighty-one (81) west; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of said township; thence southerly to
the southeast corner of said township; thence easterly along the fourth
(4th) Standard Parallel north to the southwest corner of township
seventeen (17) north, range seventy-nine (79) west; thence northerly to
the northwest corner of said township; thence easterly to the northeast
corner of section five (5), township seventeen (17) north, range
seventy-eight (78) west; thence southerly along the section lines,
allowing for the proper offset on the fourth (4th) Standard Parallel
north, to the southeast corner of section thirty-two (32), township
fifteen (15) north, range seventy-eight (78) west; thence westerly to
the northeast corner of township fourteen (14) north, range eighty (80)
west; thence southerly to the southeast corner of said township; thence
easterly along the township line to the northeast corner of township
thirteen (13) north, range seventy-seven (77) west; thence southerly
along the range line, allowing for the proper offset on the third (3rd)
Standard Parallel north, to the point where it intersects the boundary
line between the States of Wyoming and Colorado, the place of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The Medicine Bow
Forest Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, the Yellowstone Park Timber Land Reserve, in the State of
Wyoming, was established by proclamation dated March 30, 1891, and the
boundary lines thereof were corrected by proclamation dated September
10, 1891, and the Teton Forest Reserve, in the State of Wyoming, was
established by proclamation dated February 22, 1897, under and by virtue
of section twenty-four of the act of Congress, approved March 3,
1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture laws, and for other
purposes," which provides, "That the President of the United States may,
from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, it is further provided by the act of Congress, approved
June 4, 1897, entitled, "An act making appropriations for sundry civil
expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1898, and
for other purposes," that "The President is hereby authorized at any
time to modify any Executive order that has been or may hereafter be
made establishing any forest reserve, and by such modification may
reduce the area or change the boundary lines of such reserve, or may
vacate altogether any order creating such reserve;"

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Wyoming, within the limits
hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it appears
that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and reserving
said lands as public reservations;

Now. therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid acts of Congress,
do hereby make known and proclaim that, the executive proclamations of
March 30, 1891 (26 Stat., 1565), September 10, 1891 (27 Stat., 989),
and February 22, 1897 (29 Stat., 906), are hereby superseded, it being
one purpose of this proclamation to establish the two forest reserves
hereinafter named in place of the reserves heretofore created by said
executive proclamations; and, therefore, there are hereby reserved from
entry or settlement and set apart as Public Reservations all those
certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying and being situate in
the State of Wyoming and within the boundaries particularly described
as follows, to wit:


THE YELLOWSTONE FOREST RESERVE.

Beginning at the point where the eastern boundary line of the
Yellowstone National Park intersects the boundary line between the
States of Wyoming and Montana; thence easterly along said state boundary
line to the point for its intersection with the range line between
ranges one hundred and three (103) and one hundred and four (104) west,
sixth (6th) Principal Meridian, Wyoming; thence southerly along said
unsurveyed range line to the point for its intersection with the
fourteenth (14th) Standard Parallel north; thence easterly along said
parallel to the northeast corner of township fifty-six (56) north, range
one hundred and four (104) west; thence southerly along the range line
to the southeast corner of township fifty-three (53) north, range one
hundred and four (104) west; thence westerly along the thirteenth (13th)
Standard Parallel north to the northwest corner of township fifty-two
(52) north, range one hundred and four (104) west; thence southerly
along the range line to the southwest corner of township forty-nine (49)
north, range one hundred and four (104) west; thence easterly along
the twelfth (12th) Standard Parallel north to the northeast corner of
section four (4), township forty-eight (48) north, range one hundred
and four (104) west; thence southerly along the section lines to the
southeast corner of section thirty-three (33), said township; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of township forty-seven (47) north,
range one hundred and four (104) west; thence southerly to the southeast
corner of said township; thence easterly to the northeast corner of
township forty-six (46) north, range one hundred and three (103) west;
thence southerly to the southeast corner of said township; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of township forty-five (45) north,
range one hundred and two (102) west; thence southerly along the range
line, allowing for the proper offset on the eleventh (11th) Standard
Parallel north, to its intersection with the southern boundary line of
Big Horn County, Wyoming, as defined in Sec. 982 of the Revised Statutes
of Wyoming (1899); thence, in a general northwesterly and northerly
direction, along said county line to its intersection with the southern
boundary of the Yellowstone National Park; thence, in an easterly and
northerly direction, along the southern and eastern boundaries of said
park to the point of intersection with the boundary line between the
States of Wyoming and Montana, the place of beginning, to be known as
the Yellowstone Forest Reserve;


THE TETON FOREST RESERVE.

Beginning at the point where the boundary line between the States of
Wyoming and Idaho intersects the southern boundary of the Yellowstone
National Park; thence easterly along the southern boundary of said park
to its intersection with the western boundary line of Big Horn County,
Wyoming, as defined in Sec. 982 of the Revised Statutes of Wyoming
(1899); thence, in a general southerly and southeasterly direction,
along said county line to the northwest corner of the Wind River or
Shoshone Indian Reservation; thence, in a general southwesterly
direction, along the western boundary of said reservation to its
intersection with the township line between townships forty-two (42) and
forty-three (43) north; thence westerly along said township line to the
southwest corner of township forty-three (43) north, range one hundred
and seven (107) west; thence northerly to the northwest corner of
said township; thence westerly to the northeast corner of township
forty-three (43) north, range one hundred and nine (109) west; thence
southerly along the range line to the southeast corner of township
forty-one (41) north, range one hundred and nine (109) west; thence
easterly along the tenth (10th) Standard Parallel north to its
intersection with the western boundary of the Wind River or Shoshone
Indian Reservation; thence, in a southeasterly and southerly direction,
along the western boundary of said reservation to the point for its
intersection with the township line between townships thirty-three (33)
and thirty-four (34) north; thence westerly along said surveyed and
unsurveyed township line to the southwest corner of section thirty-four
(34), township thirty-four (34) north, range one hundred and nine (109)
west; thence northerly to the northwest corner of section three (3),
said township; thence westerly to the southeast corner of township
thirty-five (35) north, range one hundred and ten (110) west; thence
northerly to the north east corner of said township; thence westerly to
the southwest corner of section thirty-four (34), township thirty-six
(36) north, range one hundred and ten (110) west; thence northerly
to the northwest corner of section three (3), said township; thence
westerly along the ninth (9th) Standard Parallel north to the southeast
corner of township thirty-seven (37) north, range one hundred and ten
(110) west; thence northerly along the range line to the southeast
corner of township forty (40) north, range one hundred and ten (110)
west; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said township; thence
southerly along the range line to the southeast corner of township
thirty-seven (37) north, range one hundred and eleven (111) west; thence
westerly along the ninth (9th) Standard Parallel north to the northeast
corner of section four (4), township thirty-six (36) north, range one
hundred and twelve (112) west; thence southerly to the southeast corner
of section thirty-three (33), said township; thence westerly to the
northeast corner of township thirty-five (35) north, range one hundred
and thirteen (113) west; thence southerly to the southeast corner of
said township; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said township;
thence southerly along the range line to the southeast corner of
township thirty-three (33) north, range one hundred and fourteen (114)
west; thence westerly along the eighth (8th) Standard Parallel north
to the northeast corner of township thirty-two (32) north, range one
hundred and fifteen (115) west; thence southerly along the range line
to the southeast corner of township twenty-nine (29) north, range one
hundred and fifteen (115) west; thence westerly along the seventh (7th)
Standard Parallel north to the southeast corner of township twenty-nine
(29) north, range one hundred and eighteen (118) west; thence northerly
to the northeast corner of said township; thence westerly to the
southeast corner of the southwest quarter of section thirty-three (33),
township thirty (30) north, range one hundred and eighteen (118) west;
thence northerly along the quarter-section lines to the northeast corner
of the southwest quarter of section sixteen (16), said township; thence
westerly to the northwest corner of said quarter-section; thence
northerly along the section lines to the northeast corner of section
five (5), said township; thence westerly to the northwest corner of
said section; thence northerly to the northeast corner of the southeast
quarter of section thirty-one (31), township thirty-one (31) north,
range one hundred and eighteen (118) west; thence westerly to the
northwest corner of said quarter-section; thence northerly along the
quarter-section lines to the point of intersection with the eighth (8th)
Standard Parallel north; thence easterly along said parallel to the
southeast corner of township thirty-three (33) north, range one hundred
and eighteen (118) west; thence northerly to the northeast corner of
said township; thence westerly to the southeast corner of the southwest
quarter of section thirty-four (34), township thirty-four (34) north,
range one hundred and eighteen (118) west; thence northerly to the
northeast corner of the southwest quarter of section twenty-seven (27),
said township; thence westerly to the northwest corner of said
quarter-section; thence northerly to the northwest corner of said
section; thence westerly to the southeast corner of the southwest
quarter of section twenty-one (21), said township; thence northerly
along the quarter-section lines to the northeast corner of the southwest
quarter of section nine (9), said township; thence westerly to the
northwest corner of said quarter-section; thence northerly to the
northeast corner of section eight (8), said township; thence westerly
to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of section five
(5), said township; thence northerly to the northeast corner of said
quarter-section; thence westerly to the northwest corner of said
quarter-section; thence northerly to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of section thirty-one (31), township thirty-five (35)
north, range one hundred and eighteen (118) west; thence westerly to
the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of said section; thence
northerly along the range line to its intersection with the ninth (9th)
Standard Parallel north; thence westerly along said parallel to its
intersection with the boundary line between the States of Wyoming and
Idaho; thence northerly along said state boundary line to the point
where it intersects the southern boundary of the Yellowstone National
Park, the place of beginning, to be known as The Teton Forest Reserve;
excepting and excluding from reservation all those certain tracts,
pieces or parcels of land lying and being situate in the State of
Wyoming and particularly described as follows, to wit:

Township forty (40) north, range one hundred and sixteen (116) west;
townships forty-one (41) north, ranges one hundred and fifteen (115) and
one hundred and sixteen (116) west; and townships forty-two (42) north,
ranges one hundred and fifteen (115) and one hundred and sixteen (116)
west.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, That this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

_Provided further_, That nothing herein shall give any force or
effect to any claim or right to any of the lands heretofore embraced
within the Yellowstone Park Timber Land Reserve or the Teton Forest
Reserve which would not have been entitled to recognition if said
reserves as heretofore established had been continued in force without
being merged into larger reserves as hereinbefore provided.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

[SEAL.]

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, by Executive Order dated December 27, 1875, Section 7, township
15 south, range 2 east, San Bernardino meridian, California, was with
certain other tracts of land withdrawn from the public domain and
reserved for the use of the Capitan Grande band or Village of Mission
Indians; and

Whereas, the Commission appointed under the provisions of the act of
Congress approved January 12, 1891, entitled "An act for the relief of
the Mission Indians in the State of California" (U.S. Statutes at Large,
vol. 26, page 712), selected for the said Capitan Grande band or village
of Indians certain tracts of land and intentionally omitted and excluded
from such selection the said section 7, township 15 south, range 2 east,
and reported that the tracts thus omitted included the lands upon which
were found the claims of Jacob Kuehner and others; and

Whereas, the report and recommendations of the said Commission were
approved by Executive Order dated December 29, 1891, which Order also
directed that "All of the lands mentioned in said report are hereby
withdrawn from settlement and entry until patents shall have issued
for said selected reservations, and until the recommendations of said
Commission shall be fully executed, and, by the proclamation of the
President of the United States, the lands or any part thereof shall
be restored to the public domain;" and

Whereas a patent was issued March 10, 1894, to the said Indians for the
lands selected by the Commission as aforesaid and which patent also
excluded the said section 7, township 15 south, range 2 east; and

Whereas it appears that the said Jacob Kuehner cannot make the requisite
filings on the land occupied by him until it shall have been formally
restored to the public domain, and that no good reason appears to exist
for the further reservation of the said section for the said band of
Indians:

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested, do hereby declare and make known
that the Executive Orders dated December 27, 1875, and December 29,
1891, are so far modified as to except from their provisions section 7
of township 15 south, range 2 east, San Bernardino meridian, and the
said section is hereby restored to the public domain.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-ninth day of May, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

[SEAL.]

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas the Yellowstone Forest Reserve, in the State of Wyoming, was
established by proclamation dated May 22, 1902, under the provisions of
the acts of March 3, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," and June 4, 1897, entitled, "An act
making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1898, and for other purposes,"
superseding the Yellowstone Park Timber Land Reserve;

And whereas, the public lands in the State of Wyoming, hereinafter
described, are in part covered with timber, and it appears that the
public good would be promoted by setting apart and reserving said lands;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid acts of Congress,
do hereby make known and proclaim that there is hereby reserved from
entry or settlement, and added to and made a part of the aforesaid
Yellowstone Forest Reserve, all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels
of land lying and being situate in the State of Wyoming and particularly
described as follows, to wit:

Sections one (1), two (2) and three (3), township forty-eight (48)
north, range one hundred and four (104) west; and all of township
forty-nine (49) north, range one hundred and four (104) west, sixth
(6th) Principal Meridian, Wyoming.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, this thirteenth day of June, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, in the opening of the Kiowa, Comanche, Apache, and Wichita
Indian lands in the Territory of Oklahoma, by proclamation dated July 4,
1901, pursuant to section six of the act of Congress approved June 6,
1900 (31 Stat., 672, 676), the west half of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter and lot fourteen, of section sixteen in township seven
north, of range ten west of the Indian principal meridian, containing
thirty-eight acres and sixty-hundredths of an acre, were reserved for
the use of the Kiowa and Comanche Indian Agency;

And whereas it appears that said land is no longer used or required for
use by said Indian agency, and that it adjoins the city of Anadarko,
Oklahoma Territory, and is needed by said city for park purposes, the
mayor of which city has applied to make entry thereof for said purposes
under the act of Congress approved September 30, 1890 (26 Stat., 502).

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section six of said act of
Congress of June 6, 1900, do hereby declare and make known that said
land is hereby restored to the public domain, to be disposed of to said
city for park purposes under said act of Congress approved September 30,
1890.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, this twenty-third day of June, A.D.
1902, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, the White River Plateau Timber Land Reserve, in the State of
Colorado, was established by proclamation dated October 16th, 1891,
under and by virtue of section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March 3rd, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," which provides, "That the President of
the United States may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any
State or Territory having public land bearing forests, in any part of
the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth,
whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the
President shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of
such reservations and the limits thereof."

And whereas, it is further provided by the act of Congress, approved
June 4th, 1897, entitled, "An act making appropriations for sundry civil
expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30th, 1898,
and for other purposes," that "The President is hereby authorized at any
time to modify any Executive order that has been or may hereafter be
made establishing any forest reserve, and by such modification may
reduce the area or change the boundary lines of such reserve, or may
vacate altogether any order creating such reserve;"

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid act of Congress,
approved June 4th, 1897, do hereby make known and proclaim that the
boundary lines of the aforesaid White River Plateau Timber Land Reserve
are hereby changed so as to read as follows:

Beginning at the northwest corner of section twenty-seven (27), township
five (5) north, range ninety-one (91) west, sixth (6th) Principal
Meridian, Colorado; thence easterly along the section lines to the
northeast corner of section twenty-nine (29), township five (5) north,
range ninety (90) west; thence southerly to the southeast corner of said
section; thence easterly along the section lines to the northeast corner
of section thirty-five (35), said township; thence southerly to the
southeast corner of said section; thence easterly along the first (1st)
correction line north to the northeast corner of township four (4)
north, range ninety (90) west; thence southerly to the southeast corner
of section twenty-five (25), said township; thence westerly to the
southwest corner of said section; thence southerly along the section
lines to the northwest corner of section twelve (12), township three (3)
north, range ninety (90) west; thence easterly along the section lines
to the southwest corner of section four (4), township three (3) north,
range eighty-nine (89) west; thence northerly along the section lines
to the northwest corner of section twenty-one (21), township four (4)
north, range eighty-nine (89) west; thence easterly along the section
lines to the northeast corner of section twenty-four (24), said
township; thence southerly to the southeast corner of said township;
thence easterly to the northeast corner of section six (6), township
three (3) north, range eighty-eight (88) west; thence southerly along
the section lines to the northwest corner of section seventeen (17),
said township; thence easterly to the northeast corner of said section;
thence southerly to the southeast corner of said section; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of section twenty-one (21), said
township; thence southerly along the section lines to the northwest
corner of section thirty-four (34), said township; thence easterly along
the section lines to the northeast corner of section thirty-six (36),
said township; thence northerly to the southeast corner of section
twenty-four (24), said township; thence westerly to the southwest corner
of said section; thence northerly to the northwest corner of said
section; thence westerly to the southwest corner of section fourteen
(14), said township; thence northerly to the northwest corner of said
section; thence westerly to the southwest corner of section ten (10),
said township; thence northerly to the northwest corner of said section;
thence westerly to the southwest corner of section four (4), said
township; thence northerly along the section lines to the northwest
corner of section nine (9), township four (4) north, range eighty-eight
(88) west; thence westerly along the first (1st) correction line north
to the southwest corner of section thirty-four (34), township five (5)
north, range eighty-nine (89) west; thence northerly along the section
lines to the northwest corner of section twenty-two (22), said township;
thence easterly along the section lines to the northeast corner of
section twenty-four (24), township five (5) north, range eighty-six (86)
west; thence southerly along the range line, allowing for the proper
offsets on the first (1st) correction line north and on the base line,
to the southeast corner of township two (2) south, range eighty-six (86)
west; thence westerly along the township line to the northeast corner
of section four (4), township three (3) south, range eighty-seven (87)
west; thence southerly along the section lines to the southeast
corner of section thirty-three (33), township four (4) south, range
eighty-seven (87) west; thence westerly along the township line to the
southwest corner of township four (4) south, range ninety-one (91)
west; thence northerly to the northwest corner of said township; thence
westerly along the township line to the southwest corner of township
three (3) south, range ninety-three (93) west; thence northerly along
the range line to the northwest corner of township two (2) south, range
ninety-three (93) west; thence easterly along the township line to the
southwest corner of section thirty-four (34), township one (1) south,
range ninety-two (92) west; thence northerly along the section lines
to the northwest corner of section twenty-seven (27), said township;
thence easterly along the section lines to the northeast corner of the
northwest quarter of section twenty-six (26), township one (1) south,
range ninety-one (91) west; thence southerly along the quarter-section
lines to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of section
thirty-five (35), said township; thence easterly to the northeast corner
of section two (2), township two (2) south, range ninety-one (91) west;
thence southerly to the southeast corner of said section; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of section
twelve (12), said township; thence southerly along the quarter-section
lines to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of section
thirteen (13), said township; thence easterly along the section lines to
the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of section eighteen (18),
township two (2) south, range ninety (90) west; thence northerly along
the quarter-section lines to the northwest corner of the northeast
quarter of section six (6), said township; thence westerly to the
southwest corner of township one (1) south, range ninety (90) west;
thence northerly to the southeast corner of section twenty-five (25),
township one (1) south, range ninety-one (91) west; thence westerly to
the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of said section; thence
northerly to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of said
section; thence easterly to the northeast corner of said section; thence
northerly to the southeast corner of section thirteen (13), said
township; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said section;
thence northerly to the northwest corner of said section; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of said section; thence northerly to
the northeast corner of said township; thence easterly along the base
line to the southwest corner of township one (1) north, range ninety
(90) west; thence northerly to the northwest corner of section
thirty-one (31), said township; thence easterly to the northeast corner
of said section; thence northerly to the northwest corner of the
southwest quarter of section twenty-nine (29), said township; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of said
section; thence northerly to the northwest corner of section
twenty-eight (28), said township; thence easterly to the northeast
corner of said section; thence northerly to the northwest corner of the
southwest quarter of section twenty-two (22), said township; thence
easterly to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of said
section; thence northerly to the southeast corner of section fifteen
(15), said township; thence westerly along the section lines to the
northeast corner of section nineteen (19), said township; thence
southerly to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of said
section; thence westerly to the southwest corner of the northwest
quarter of said section; thence southerly to the southeast corner of
section twenty-four (24), township one (1) north, range ninety-one (91)
west; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said section; thence
southerly to the southeast corner of section twenty-six (26), said
township; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said section;
thence southerly to the southeast corner of section thirty-four (34),
said township; thence westerly along the base line to the northwest
corner of township one (1) south, range ninety-one (91) west; thence
southerly to the southeast corner of section twelve (12), township one
(1) south, range ninety-two (92) west; thence westerly along the section
lines to the southwest corner of section ten (10), said township; thence
northerly along the section lines to the northwest corner of section
three (3), said township; thence easterly along the base line to the
southwest corner of section thirty-four (34), township one (1) north,
range ninety-two (92) west; thence northerly along the surveyed and
unsurveyed section lines to the point for the intersection with the
township line between townships two (2) and three (3) north; thence
easterly along the said township line to the southwest corner of section
thirty-four (34), township three (3) north, range ninety-one (91) west;
thence northerly along the section lines to the northwest corner of
section ten (10), township four (4) north, range ninety-one (91) west;
thence westerly along the first (1st) correction line north to the
southwest corner of section thirty-four (34), township five (5) north,
range ninety-one (91) west; thence northerly along the section lines to
the northwest corner of section twenty-seven (27), said township, the
place of beginning.

The lands hereby excluded from the reservation and restored to the
public domain shall be open to settlement from date hereof, but shall
not be subject to entry, filing or selection until after ninety days'
notice by such publication as the Secretary of the Interior may
prescribe.

This reservation shall hereafter be known as The White River Forest
Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-eighth day of June, A.D.
1902, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas the President on August 20, 1901, issued his proclamation
stating that he has been advised by the Louisiana Purchase Exposition
Commission, pursuant to the provisions of section 9 of the act of
Congress approved March 3, 1901, entitled "An act to provide for
celebrating the one hundredth anniversary of the purchase of the
Louisiana Territory by the United States by holding an international
exhibition of arts, industries, manufactures, and the products of the
soil, mine, forest, and sea in the city of St. Louis, in the State of
Missouri," that provision had been made for grounds and buildings for
the uses specified in the said mentioned act of Congress;

Whereas it was declared and proclaimed by the President in his aforesaid
proclamation that "such international exhibition would be opened in the
city of St. Louis, in the State of Missouri, not later than the first
day of May, 1903, and be closed not later than the first day of December
thereafter;"

And whereas section 8 of the act of Congress approved June 28, 1902,
entitled "An act making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of
the government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1903, and for
other purposes," fixes a subsequent date for the holding of the said
international exhibition and specifically states that "said commission
shall provide for the dedication of the buildings of the Louisiana
Purchase Exposition, in said city of St. Louis, not later than the
thirtieth day of April, 1903, with appropriate ceremonies, and
thereafter said exposition shall be opened to visitors at such time
as may be designated by said company, subject to the approval of said
commission, not later than the first day of May, 1904, and shall be
closed at such time as the national commission may determine, subject
to the approval of said company, but not later than the first day of
December thereafter;"

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
do hereby declare and proclaim the aforesaid provision of law to the end
that it may definitely and formally be known that such international
exhibition will be opened in the city of St. Louis, in the State of
Missouri, not later than May 1, 1904, and will be closed not later than
December first of that year.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, the first day of July, A.D. 1902, and of
the Independence of the United States the one hundred and twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  DAVID J. HILL,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, it is provided by section twenty-four of the act of Congress,
approved March 3rd, 1891, entitled, "An act to repeal timber-culture
laws, and for other purposes," "That the President of the United States
may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory
having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands
wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of
commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President
shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such
reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas, the public lands in the Territory of Arizona, within the
limits hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it
appears that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and
reserving said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power in me vested by section twenty-four of the
aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby make known and proclaim that there
is hereby reserved from entry or settlement and set apart as a Public
Reservation all those certain tracts, pieces or parcels of land lying
and being situate in the Territory of Arizona, and within the boundaries
particularly described as follows, to wit:

Beginning at the northwest corner of township thirteen (13) south,
range fourteen (14) east, Gila and Salt River Meridian, Arizona; thence
northerly to the point for the northwest corner of section nineteen
(19), township twelve (12) south, range fourteen (14) east; thence
easterly along the unsurveyed section lines to the point for the
northeast corner of section twenty-one (21), said township; thence
northerly along the unsurveyed section lines to the point for the
northwest corner of section three (3), said township; thence easterly to
the point for the northeast corner of said township; thence northerly to
the point for the northwest corner of township eleven (11) south, range
fifteen (15) east; thence easterly along the second (2nd) standard
parallel south to the point for the northeast corner of said township;
thence southerly to the point for the southeast corner of section
thirteen (13), said township; thence easterly along the unsurveyed
section lines to the northeast corner of section twenty-four (24),
township eleven (11) south, range seventeen (17) east; thence southerly
along the unsurveyed range line to the point for the southeast corner of
section twelve (12), township thirteen (13) south, range seventeen (17)
east; thence westerly along the unsurveyed section lines to the point
for the southwest corner of section seven (7), township thirteen (13)
south, range fifteen (15) east; thence northerly to the point for the
northwest corner of said township; thence westerly to the northwest
corner of township thirteen (13) south, range fourteen (14) east, the
place of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

The reservation hereby established shall be known as The Santa Catalina
Forest Reserve.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington this second day of July, A.D. 1902, and
of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas, satisfactory proof has been given to me by the Government of
Cuba that no discriminating duties of tonnage or imposts are imposed or
levied in the ports of Cuba, upon vessels wholly belonging to citizens
of the United States or upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise
imported in the same from the United States, or from any foreign
country:

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States of
America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 4228 of the
Revised Statutes of the United States, do hereby declare and proclaim
that, from and after the date of this, my Proclamation, so long as
vessels of the United States and their cargoes shall be exempt from
discriminating duties as aforesaid, any such duties on Cuban vessels
entering the ports of the United States, or on the produce,
manufactures, or merchandise imported in such vessels, shall be
suspended and discontinued, and no longer.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, the third day of July, A.D. 1902, and of
the Independence of the United States the one hundred and twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas many of the inhabitants of the Philippine archipelago were in
insurrection against the authority and sovereignty of the kingdom of
Spain at divers times from August, 1896, until the cession of the
archipelago by that kingdom to the United States of America, and since
such cession many of the persons so engaged in insurrection have until
recently resisted the authority and sovereignty of the United States;
and

Whereas the insurrection against the authority and sovereignty of the
United States is now at an end, and peace has been established in all
parts of the archipelago except in the country inhabited by the Moro
tribes, to which this proclamation does not apply; and

Whereas during the course of the insurrection against the kingdom of
Spain and against the government of the United States, persons engaged
therein, or those in sympathy with and abetting them, committed many
acts in violation of the laws of civilized warfare; but it is believed
that such acts were generally committed in ignorance of these laws, and
under orders issued by the civil or military insurrectionary leaders;
and

Whereas it is deemed to be wise and humane, in accordance with the
beneficent purposes of the government of the United States toward the
Filipino people, and conducive to peace, order and loyalty among them,
that the doers of such acts who have not already suffered punishment
shall not be held criminally responsible, but shall be relieved from
punishment for participation in these insurrections and for unlawful
acts committed during the course thereof by a general amnesty and
pardon;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Theodore Roosevelt, President
of the United States of America, by virtue of the power and authority
vested by the Constitution, do hereby proclaim and declare, without
reservation or condition, except as hereinafter provided, a full and
complete pardon and amnesty to all persons in the Philippine archipelago
who have participated in the insurrections aforesaid, or who have given
aid and comfort to persons participating in said insurrections, for the
offenses of treason or sedition, and for all offenses political in their
character committed in the course of such insurrections pursuant to
orders issued by the civil or military insurrectionary authorities,
or which grow out of internal political feuds or dissensions between
Filipinos and Spaniards, or the Spanish authorities, or which resulted
from internal political feuds or dissensions among the Filipinos
themselves during either of said insurrections.

_Provided_, however, that the pardon and amnesty hereby granted
shall not include such persons committing crimes since May 1, 1902, in
any province of the archipelago in which at the time civil government
was established, nor shall it include such persons as have been
heretofore finally convicted of the crimes of murder, rape, arson, or
robbery, by any military or civil tribunal organized under the authority
of Spain or of the United States of America, but special application may
be made to the proper authority for pardon by any person belonging to
the exempted classes and such clemency as is consistent with humanity
and justice will be liberally extended; and, further

_Provided_, That this amnesty and pardon shall not affect the title or
right of the Government of the United States or that of the Philippine
Islands to any property or property rights heretofore used or
appropriated by the military or civil authorities of the Government of
the United States or that of the Philippine Islands organized under
authority of the United States by way of confiscation or otherwise; and

_Provided further_, That every person who shall seek to avail
himself of this proclamation shall take and subscribe the following
oath before any authority in the Philippine archipelago authorized to
administer oaths, namely: "I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I recognize
and accept the supreme authority of the United States of America in the
Philippine Islands and will maintain true faith and allegiance thereto;
that I impose upon myself this obligation voluntarily without mental
reservation or purpose of evasion so help me God."

Given under my hand at the city of Washington, this 4th day of July,
A.D. 1902, and in the one hundred and twenty-seventh year of the
Independence of the United States.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  ELIHU ROOT,
    _Secretary of War_.



Gen. Chaffee is relieved of his civil duties, and the Philippine
Commission is made the superior authority in the following order:


The insurrection against the sovereign authority of the United States
in the Philippine archipelago having ended, and provincial civil
governments having been established throughout the entire territory of
the archipelago not inhabited by Moro tribes, under the instructions of
the President to the Philippine Commission, dated April 7, 1900, now
ratified and confirmed by the act of Congress approved July 1, 1902,
entitled "An act temporarily to provide for the administration of
affairs of civil government in the Philippine Islands, and for other
purposes," the general commanding the division of the Philippines is
hereby relieved from the further performance of the duties of military
governor, and the office of military governor in said archipelago is
terminated. The general commanding the Division of the Philippines and
all military officers in authority therein will continue to observe the
direction contained in the aforesaid instructions of the President that
the military forces in the division of the Philippines shall be at all
times subject, under the orders of the military commander, to the call
of the civil authorities for the maintenance of law and order, and the
enforcement of their authority.



Finally the President, through Secretary Root, pronounces the following
eulogy upon the United States Army:


HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY,
  ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE,
    _Washington, July 4, 1902_.


_General Order, No. 66_.

The following has been received from the War Department:

  WAR DEPARTMENT, _Washington, July 4, 1902_.

_To the Army of the United States:_

The President, upon this anniversary of national independence, wishes to
express to the officers and enlisted men of the United States Army his
deep appreciation of the service they have rendered to the country in
the great and difficult undertakings which they have brought to a
successful conclusion during the past year.

He thanks the officers and the enlisted men who have been maintaining
order and carrying on the military government in Cuba, because they
have faithfully given effect to the humane purposes of the American
people. They have with sincere kindness helped the Cuban people to take
all the successive steps necessary to the establishment of their own
constitutional government. During the time required for that process
they have governed Cuba wisely, regarding justice and respecting
individual liberty; have honestly collected and expended for the
best interests of the Cuban people the revenues, amounting to over
$60,000,000; have carried out practical and thorough sanitary measures,
greatly improving the health and lowering the death rate of the island.
By patient, scientific research they have ascertained the causes of
yellow fever, and by good administration have put an end to that most
dreadful disease which has long destroyed the lives and hindered the
commercial prosperity of the Cubans. They have expedited justice and
secured protection for the rights of the innocent, while they have
cleansed the prisons and established sound discipline and healthful
conditions for the punishment of the guilty.

They have re-established and renovated and put upon a substantial basis
adequate hospitals and asylums for the care of the unfortunate. They
have established a general system of free common schools throughout
the island, in which over two hundred thousand children are in actual
attendance. They have constructed great and necessary public works.
They have gradually trained the Cubans themselves in all branches of
administration, so that the new government upon assuming power has begun
its work with an experienced force of Cuban civil service employees
competent to execute its orders. They have borne themselves with dignity
and self-control, so that nearly four years of military government
have passed unmarred by injury or insult to man or woman. They have
transferred the government of Cuba to the Cuban people amid universal
expressions of friendship and good will, and have left a record of
ordered justice and liberty of rapid improvement in material and moral
conditions and progress in the art of government which reflects great
credit upon the people of the United States.

The President thanks the officers and enlisted men of the army in
the Philippines, both regulars and volunteers, for the courage and
fortitude, the indomitable spirit and loyal devotion with which they
have put down and ended the great insurrection which has raged
throughout the archipelago against the lawful sovereignty and just
authority of the United States. The task was peculiarly difficult and
trying. They were required at first to overcome organized resistance
of superior numbers, well equipped with modern arms of precision,
intrenched in an unknown country of mountain defiles, jungles, and
swamps, apparently capable of interminable defense. When this resistance
had been overcome they were required to crush out a general system of
guerrilla warfare conducted among a people speaking unknown tongues,
from whom it was almost impossible to obtain the information necessary
for successful pursuit or to guard against surprise and ambush.

The enemies by whom they were surrounded were regardless of all
obligations of good faith and of all the limitations which humanity has
imposed upon civilized warfare. Bound themselves by the laws of war,
our soldiers were called upon to meet every device of unscrupulous
treachery and to contemplate without reprisal the infliction of
barbarous cruelties upon their comrades and friendly natives. They
were instructed, while punishing armed resistance, to conciliate the
friendship of the peaceful, yet had to do with a population among whom
it was impossible to distinguish friend from foe, and who in countless
instances used a false appearance of friendship for ambush and
assassination. They were obliged to deal with problems of communication
and transportation in a country without roads and frequently made
impassable by torrential rains. They were weakened by tropical heat and
tropical disease. Widely scattered over a great archipelago, extending
a thousand miles from north to south, the gravest responsibilities,
involving the life or death of their comrades, frequently devolved upon
young and inexperienced officers beyond the reach of specific orders or
advice.

Under all these adverse circumstances the army of the Philippines has
accomplished its task rapidly and completely. In more than two thousand
combats, great and small, within three years, it has exhibited unvarying
courage and resolution. Utilizing the lessons of the Indian wars it has
relentlessly followed the guerrilla bands to their fastness in mountain
and jungle, and crushed them. It has put an end to the vast system of
intimidation and secret assassination, by which the peaceful natives
were prevented from taking a genuine part in government under American
authority. It has captured or forced to surrender substantially all
the leaders of the insurrection. It has submitted to no discouragement
and halted at no obstacle. Its officers have shown high qualities of
command, and its men have shown devotion and discipline. Its splendid
virile energy has been accompanied by self-control, patience, and
magnanimity.

With surprisingly few individual exceptions its course has been
characterized by humanity and kindness to the prisoner and the
non-combatant. With admirable good temper, sympathy, and loyalty to
American ideals its commanding generals have joined with the civilian
agents of the government in healing the wounds of war and assuring to
the people of the Philippines the blessings of peace and prosperity.
Individual liberty, protection of personal rights, civil order, public
instruction and religious freedom have followed its footsteps. It has
added honor to the flag, which it defended, and has justified increased
confidence in the future of the American people, whose soldiers do not
shrink from labor or death, yet love liberty and peace.

The President feels that he expresses the sentiments of all the loyal
people of the United States in doing honor to the whole army which has
joined in the performance and shares in the credit of these honorable
services.

This general order will be read aloud at parade in every military post
on the 4th day of July, 1902, or on the first day after it shall have
been received.

ELIHU ROOT,
  _Secretary of War_.

By command of Lieutenant-General Miles:

H.C. CORBIN,
  _Adjutant-General, Major-General, U.S.A._



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas The Medicine Bow Forest Reserve, in the State of Wyoming, was
established by proclamation dated May 22, 1902, under and by virtue
of section twenty-four of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1891,
entitled "An act to repeal timber-culture laws, and for other purposes,"
which provides "That the President of the United States may, from time
to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory having public
land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands wholly or in part
covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of commercial value or not,
as public reservations, and the President shall, by public proclamation,
declare the establishment of such reservations and the limits thereof;"

And whereas it is further provided by the act of Congress approved
June 4, 1897, entitled "An act making appropriations for sundry civil
expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1898,
and for other purposes," that "The President is hereby authorized at
any time to modify any executive order that has been or may hereafter
be made establishing any forest reserve, and by such modification may
reduce the area or change the boundary lines of such reserve, or may
vacate altogether any order creating such reserve;"

And whereas the public lands in the State of Wyoming, within the limits
hereinafter described, are in part covered with timber, and it appears
that the public good would be promoted by setting apart and reserving
said lands as a public reservation;

Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
by virtue of the power vested in me by the aforesaid act of Congress
approved June 4, 1897, do hereby make known and proclaim that the
boundary lines of the aforesaid Medicine Bow Forest Reserve are hereby
changed so as to read as follows:

Beginning at the northwest corner of township seventeen (17) north,
range eighty-one (81) west, sixth (6th) Principal Meridian, Wyoming;
thence easterly to the northeast corner of said township; thence
southerly to the northwest corner of section thirty (30), township
seventeen (17) north, range eighty (80) west; thence easterly along the
section lines to the northeast corner of section twenty-five (25), said
township; thence northerly to the northwest corner of township seventeen
(17) north, range seventy-nine (79) west; thence easterly along the
township line to the northeast corner of section five (5), township
seventeen (17) north, range seventy-eight (78) west; thence southerly
along the section lines, allowing for the proper offset on the fourth
(4th) Standard Parallel north, to the southeast corner of section
thirty-two (32), township fourteen (14) north, range seventy-eight (78)
west; thence easterly along the township line to the northeast corner of
section four (4), township thirteen (13) north, range seventy-seven (77)
west; thence southerly along the section lines, allowing for the proper
offset on the third (3d) Standard Parallel north, to the point of
intersection with the boundary line between the States of Wyoming and
Colorado; thence westerly along said state boundary line to the point
of intersection with the range line between ranges eighty (80) and
eighty-one (81) west; thence northerly along said range line, allowing
for the proper offset on the third (3d) Standard Parallel north, to the
southeast corner of township fourteen (14) north, range eighty-one (81)
west; thence westerly to the southwest corner of said township; thence
northerly along the range line, allowing for the proper offset on
the fourth (4th) Standard Parallel north, to the northwest corner of
township seventeen (17) north, range eighty-one (81) west, the place
of beginning.

Excepting from the force and effect of this proclamation all lands which
may have been, prior to the date hereof, embraced in any legal entry or
covered by any lawful filing duly of record in the proper United States
Land Office, or upon which any valid settlement has been made pursuant
to law, and the statutory period within which to make entry or filing of
record has not expired: _Provided_, that this exception shall not
continue to apply to any particular tract of land unless the entryman,
settler, or claimant continues to comply with the law under which the
entry, filing, or settlement was made.

Warning is hereby expressly given to all persons not to make settlement
upon the lands reserved by this proclamation.

The lands hereby excluded from the said reserve and restored to the
public domain shall be open to settlement from date hereof, but shall
not be subject to entry, filing, or selection until after ninety days'
notice by such publication as the Secretary of the Interior may
prescribe.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, this sixteenth day of July, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-seventh.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
  JOHN HAY,
    _Secretary of State_.



A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas the act of Congress entitled, "An act to ratify and confirm a
supplemental agreement with the Creek tribe of Indians, and for other
purposes," approved on the thirtieth day of June, 1902, contains a
provision as follows:

  That the following supplemental agreement, submitted by certain
  commissioners of the Creek tribe of Indians, as herein amended, is
  hereby ratified and confirmed on the part of the United States, and the
  same shall be of full force and effect if ratified by the Creek tribal
  council on or before the first day of September, nineteen hundred and
  two, * * *


And whereas the principal chief of the said tribe has transmitted to me
an act of the Creek national council entitled, "An act to ratify and
confirm a supplemental agreement with the United States" approved the
twenty-sixth day of July, 1902, which contains a provision as follows:

  That the following supplemental agreement by and between the United
  States and the Muskogee (or Creek) Tribe of Indians, in Indian
  Territory, ratified and confirmed on the part of the United States by
  act of Congress approved June 30, 1902 (Public--No. 200.), is hereby
  confirmed on the part of the Muskogee (or Creek) Nation, * * *


And whereas paragraph twenty-two provides as follows:

  The principal chief, as soon as practicable after the ratification of
  this agreement by Congress, shall call an extra session of the Creek
  Nation council and submit this agreement, as ratified by Congress, to
  such council for its consideration, and if the agreement be ratified by
  the National council, as provided in the constitution of the tribe, the
  principal chief shall transmit to the President of the United States a
  certified copy of the act of the council ratifying the agreement, and
  thereupon the President shall issue his proclamation making public
  announcement of such ratification, thenceforward all the provisions of
  this agreement shall have the force and effect of law.


Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
do hereby declare said agreement duly ratified and that all the
provisions thereof became law according to the terms thereof upon the
twenty-sixth day of July, 1902.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Washington, this eighth day of August, A.D. 1902,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

By the President:
   ALVEY A. ADEE,
    _Acting Secretary of State_.




EXECUTIVE ORDERS.


EXECUTIVE MANSION, _September 23, 1901_.

In accordance with the provisions of the act of Congress approved June
4, 1897 (30 Stat., 34-36), and by virtue of the authority thereby given,
and on the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, it is hereby
ordered that sections 23, 24 of township seven south, range 93 west, 6th
principal meridian, Colorado, within the limits of the Black Mesa Forest
Reserve be restored to the public domain after sixty days' notice hereof
by publication, as required by law; these tracts having been found upon
personal and official inspection to be better adapted to agricultural
than forest purposes.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



TO ALL WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING:

Know ye that reposing special trust and confidence in the integrity,
prudence, and ability of Thaddeus S. Sharretts, United States General
Appraiser, I have invested him with full and all manner of authority for
and in the name of the United States of America, to meet and confer with
any person or persons duly authorized by the government of China or by
any government or governments having treaties with China being invested
with like power and authority, and with him or them to agree on a plan
for the conversion into specific duties, as far as possible, and as soon
as may be, of all _ad valorem_ duties on imports into China in
conformity with the provisions in this regard contained in the final
protocol signed by the diplomatic representatives of China and the
Powers at Peking on September 7, 1901, the same to be submitted to the
President of the United States for approval.

In testimony whereof I have caused the seal of the United States to be
hereunto affixed.

[SEAL.]

Given under my hand at the city of Washington, this first day of
October, A.D. 1901, and, of the Independence of the United States, the
one hundred and twenty-sixth.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_October 15, 1901_.

On and after January 1, 1902, the following ratings and pay per month
are established for the petty officers and other enlisted men of the
Commissary Branch of the United States Navy:


  RATING.                          MONTHLY PAY.

  Chief Commissary Steward                  $70
  Commissary Steward                         60
  Ship's Cook, 1st class                     55
  Ship's Cook, 2d class                      40
  Ship's Cook, 3d class                      30
  Ship's Cook, 4th Class                     25
  Baker, 1st class                           45
  Baker, 2d class                            35


Landsmen detailed as crew messmen shall while so acting except when
appointed as reliefs during temporary absence of the regular crew
messmen receive extra compensation at the rate of $5 per month.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _October 30, 1901_.

It is hereby ordered that Harbor Island, and three islets southeast
thereof in Sitka Harbor, District of Alaska, be and they are hereby
reserved for the use of the Revenue Cutter Service subject to any legal
existing rights.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _November 9, 1901_.

It is hereby ordered that all tracts and parcels of land belonging to
the United States situate in the provinces of Zambales and Bataan, in
the Island of Luzon, Philippine Islands to the southward and westward of
a line beginning at the mouth of the Rio Pamatuan, near Capones Islands,
and following the imaginary course of the Pamatuan to the headwaters of
the easternmost branch of said river; from thence east, true, to meet a
line running north, true, from Santa Rita Peak; from this intersection
to Santa Rita itself; thence to Santa Rosa Peak, and thence in a
straight line in a southerly direction to the sea at the town of Bagac,
and including said town as well as all adjacent islands, bays, harbors,
estuaries, and streams within its limits, be and the same are hereby
reserved for naval purposes, and said reservations and all lands
included within said boundaries are hereby placed under the governance
and control of the Navy Department.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _November 11, 1901_.

It is hereby ordered that the southwest quarter, section twenty-nine,
and the southeast quarter, section thirty, township one south, range
eighteen west, San Bernardino base and meridian, California, be and they
are hereby reserved for lighthouse purposes, subject to any legal
existing rights.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _November 15, 1901_.

It is hereby ordered that San Nicolas Island, California, be and it is
hereby reserved for lighthouse purposes.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_November 26, 1901_.

From and after January 1, 1901, all enlisted men of the Navy will be
allowed seventy-five cents per month in addition to the pay of their
ratings for each good conduct medal, pin, or bar, issued for service,
terminating after December 31, 1901.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _December 3, 1901_.

From and after January 1, 1902, each enlisted man of the Navy who
holds a certificate as a credit from the Petty Officers' School of
Instruction, Navy Training Station, Newport, R.I., shall receive two
dollars per month in addition to the pay of his rating.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _December 9, 1901_.

From and after January 1, 1902, the classification and monthly pay
of Mess Attendants in the United States Navy shall be as follows:

  Mess Attendants, 1st class                $24
  Mess Attendants, 2d class                  20
  Mess Attendants, 3d class                  16


THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _December 19, 1901_.

Such public lands as may exist on Culebra Island between the parallels
of 18 deg. 15' and 18 deg. 23' north latitude, and between the meridians of 65 deg.
10' and 65 deg. 25' west longitude, are hereby placed under the jurisdiction
of the Navy Department.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_January 17, 1902_.

The attention of the Departments is hereby called to the provisions of
the laws giving preference to veterans in appointment and retention.

The President desires that wherever the needs of the service will
justify it and the law will permit preference shall be given alike in
appointment and retention to honorably discharged veterans of the Civil
War, who are fit and well qualified to perform the duties of the places
which they seek or are filling.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_January 31, 1902_.

All officers and employees of the United States of every description
serving in or under any of the Executive Departments and whether so
serving in or out of Washington are hereby forbidden either direct or
indirect, individually or through associations, to solicit an increase
of pay, or to influence or to attempt to influence in their own interest
any legislation whatever, either before Congress or its Committees, or
in any way save through the heads of the Departments in or under which
they serve, on penalty of dismissal from the government service.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_February 5, 1902_.

As it is desirable in view of the expected visit of his Royal Highness,
Prince Henry of Prussia, to the United States that suitable arrangements
should be made for his reception and entertainment during his sojourn
in the United States, I hereby designate the following named persons to
serve as delegates for this purpose, and do hereby authorize and empower
them to make such engagements, incur such expenses, and to draw upon the
Secretary of State for such moneys as may be necessary with which to
pay the expenses thus incurred, to an amount to be determined by the
Secretary of State.

The Assistant Secretary of State, David J. Hill, representing the
Department of State.

Major-General Henry C. Corbin, Adjutant-General, U.S.A., representing
the War Department.

Rear-Admiral Robley D. Evans, U.S.N., representing the Navy Department,
and to be Honorary A.D.C. to his Royal Highness.

The following officers are detailed to assist the delegates:

Colonel T.A. Bingham, U.S.A., Military Aide to the President; Commander
W.S. Cowles, U.S.N., Navy Aide to the President.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _February 15, 1902_.

In accordance with the provisions of Section 2212 of the Revised
Statutes and by virtue of the authority thereby given, it is hereby
ordered that the office of Surveyor-General in the surveying district
of the Territory of Arizona, be and it is hereby located at Phoenix,
Arizona, and the office of Surveyor-General at Tucson, Arizona, is
hereby discontinued, and the records and business thereof are hereby
transferred to the office of Surveyor-General at Tucson, Arizona.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_March 24, 1902_.

Paragraph 451 of the Consular Regulations of 1896 is hereby amended by
the addition of the following:

  No consular officer shall accept an appointment to office from any
  foreign state as administrator, guardian or any other fiduciary capacity
  for the settlement or conservation of the estate of deceased persons,
  or of their heirs or of other persons under legal disabilities, without
  having been previously authorized by the Secretary of State to do so.


THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _March 26, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that the building known as the "office" and a tract
of land 200 feet square, the center of which shall be identical with
that of the building, and the sides of which shall be parallel with
those of the building in the limits of the Fort Yuma Abandoned Military
Reservation, Arizona, be and they are hereby reserved and set apart for
the use of the Weather Bureau.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_To the Heads of the Executive Departments:_

As a mark of respect to the memory of the Right Honorable Lord
Pauncefote, of Preston, Late Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of Great Britain to the United States, the President
directs that the National flag be displayed at half-mast upon the White
House and other federal buildings in the city of Washington on
Wednesday, March 28, 1902, the day of the funeral.

GEORGE B. CORTELYOU,
  _Secretary to the President_.



WHITE HOUSE, _April 29, 1902_.

_To the Heads of the Executive Departments:_

As a mark of respect to the memory of J. Sterling Morton, formerly
Secretary of Agriculture, the President directs that the National flag
be displayed at half-mast upon the White House and other federal
buildings in the city of Washington on Wednesday, April 30, 1902, the
day of the funeral.

GEORGE B. CORTELYOU,
  _Secretary to the President_.



WHITE HOUSE, _April 29, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that the building known as the "Residence" and the
tract of land bounded on the north, east, and south by the rights of
way grant to the Yuma Pumping Irrigation Company by the act of Congress
approved January 20, 1893 (27 Stat., 420), and on the west by the east
line of the tract reserved by Executive Order of March 26, 1902, for
the Weather Bureau and the extension thereof to intersections with the
rights of way herein mentioned in the limits of the Fort Yuma Abandoned
Military Reservation, Arizona, be and they are hereby reserved and set
apart for the Customs Service.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _April 30, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter and lot 4 of section 32, township one south, range 18 west,
San Bernardino base and meridian, California, be and they are hereby
reserved for light-house purposes, subject to any legal existing rights.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



_May 12, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that such employees of the Executive Departments,
the Government Printing Office, and the Navy Yard and Station at
Washington, D.C., as served in the Military or Navy service of the
United States in the late Civil War shall be excused from duty on
Saturday, the 17th instant, to enable them to attend the ceremonies
incident to the reburial of the late Major-General W.S. Rosecrans.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _May 12, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that upon Wednesday, the 21st instant, such
employees of the Executive Departments, the Government Printing Office,
and the Navy Yard and Station at Washington, D.C., as served in the
military or naval service of the United States in the Spanish-American
War, or the insurrection in the Philippine Islands, shall be excused
from duty at 12 o'clock noon for the remainder of that day, to enable
them to participate in the ceremonies incident to the dedication of a
statue erected to the memory of the Spanish War dead at Arlington.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _June 13, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that the southwest quarter section thirty-four
township twenty-three north, range one east, Willamette Meridian,
Washington, be and it is hereby reserved and set apart for the use of
the Navy Department for the purposes of a target range.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _July 10, 1902_.

No enlisted person in the Navy service of the United States shall be
discharged therefrom prior to the completion of his term of enlistment,
except for one of the following causes: Undesirability, inaptitude,
physical or mental disability, or unfitness.

In every case, the recommendation for such discharge must be made by the
commanding officer of the vessel on which the man may be serving.

Applications for discharges which reach the department except through
the commanding officers of vessels shall be without exception
disregarded.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



OYSTER BAY, _July 19, 1902_.

The act of Congress approved June 14, 1902, having amended the Revised
Statutes of the United States so as to permit of the issuance of
passports to persons owing allegiance to the United States, whether
citizens of the United States or not, and under such rules as the
President shall designate and prescribe on behalf of the United States,
the instructions to the diplomatic officers of the United States and the
United States Consular regulations are hereby so modified and amended as
to permit diplomatic and consular officers of the United States having
authority to issue passports to issue them to residents of the Insular
Possessions of the United States who make satisfactory application. Each
applicant under this provision must state in addition to the information
now required in the application of a citizen of the United States that
he owes allegiance to the United States and that he does not acknowledge
allegiance to any other government and must submit an affidavit from
at least two credible witnesses having good means of the knowledge in
substantiation of his statements of birth and residence and loyalty.
The same fee shall be collected by diplomatic and consular officers
of the United States for issuing passports to residents of the Insular
Possessions as is now required for issuing passports to citizens of
the United States.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _Washington, July 22, 1902_.

By virtue of the authority vested in me by the act of Congress approved
July 1, 1902, entitled "An act authorizing the President to reserve
public lands and buildings in the Island of Puerto Rico for public uses,
and granting other public lands and buildings to the government of
Puerto Rico and for other purposes," Miraflores Island in the Harbor
of San Juan, Puerto Rico, is hereby reserved for use as a quarantine
station or a site for a marine hospital or for both said purposes under
the control of the Public Health and Marine Hospital service of the
United States.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _July 25, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered under the provisions of section 4 of the act of
Congress approved April 12, 1902, "To promote the efficiency of the
Revenue Cutter Service," that the Secretary of the Treasury shall "by
direction of the President" when officers of the Revenue Cutter Service
reach the age limit of 64 years, retire from them active service.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _August 1, 1902_.

From and after July 1, 1902, each enlisted man that has been rated
Seaman Gunner prior to April 1, 1902, or that holds certificate of
graduation from the Petty Officers' Schools, Seaman Gunner Class, shall
receive $2.00 per month in addition to the pay of his rating during
current and subsequent enlistments.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



WHITE HOUSE, _August 9, 1902_.

It is hereby ordered that the south half of the southeast quarter and
the southwest quarter of section 3, township 22 north, range 26 west,
6th principal meridian, Nebraska, be, and they are hereby, reserved and
set apart for the use of the Department of Agriculture for purposes in
connection with experimental tree planting.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

       *       *       *       *       *




INDEX


A.

Acheen or Atjeh.--Population, 531,705.

Adee, Alvey A.:
  Acting Secretary of State, 169.

Africa:
  Repressing liquor trade in, suggestions made by Belgium, 60, 122.

African Slave Trade:
  International Congress at Brussels for abolition of, 60.

Agricultural, Department of:
  Discussed, 87, 152, 329.
  Sugar-beet culture, 41, 53, 111, 152.

Aguinaldo:
  Referred to, 104, 111.

Alabama.--Population (1900), 1,828,697.

Alaska.--Population (1900), 62,592.
  Discussed, 67, 126.
  Education in, preparation for, recommended, 150.
  Legislation, recommended, 32, 97.
  Military Department of, 32.
  Referred to, 32, 84, 150.

Alexander, Gen. E.P.:
  Settlement of question between Costa Rica and Nicaragua by, 124.

Algeria.--Area 184,474 square miles;
  population (1900) about 4,774,042.

Allen Contract Law, amendment of, recommended, 46, 152.

Amelia Island, a seacoast island on the northeast of Florida
  between the mouths of the St. Mary and Nassau rivers.

American Republics, Bureau of:
  Discussed, 47, 78, 133.
  Report of, transmitted and discussed, 47.

Annual Messages of President:
  McKinley, 22, 53, 113.
  Roosevelt, 315.

Arbitration, International:
  Attitude of Great Britain and United States discussed, 12, 30, 129.
  Treaty with Great Britain regarding, discussed, 13, 77.

Argentine Republic.--Area 1,113,849 square miles;
  population (1900), 4,794,149.
  Treaty with, discussed, 122.

Arizona Territory.--Population (1900), 122,212.

Arkansas.--Population (1900), 1,311,564.

Armenians obtaining citizenship in United States and returning
  to Turkey expelled, discussed, 132.

Army:
  Commanding officers and men praised by President Roosevelt, 395.
  Discussed by President--
    McKinley, 82, 146.
    Roosevelt, 343, 395.
  Eulogy on the Army of United States by President Roosevelt,
    won by their gallantry and efficiency in the Cuban and Philippine
    campaigns, 395.

Asia.--Population estimated in 1900 to be 923,367,000.

Attorney-General, Philander Chase Knox, Pennsylvania, born 1853;
  admitted to the bar 1875;
  present appointment April 5, 1901.

Australia.--Population (1901), 3,767,443.

Austria-Hungary.--Population (1900), 45,085,000.
  Claims of, regarding subjects killed in riot in Pennsylvania, 62.
  Expulsion of American citizens, 122.

Autonomous Government for Cuba discussed, 334.


B.

Bahama Islands.--Population (1901), 53,735.

Banks and Banking, special commission to make suggestions
  concerning, recommended, 328.

Banks, National.--The total number of banks organized under the
    act aggregates 5,820. Of these several have since become insolvent
    or gone into liquidation, leaving in April, 1902, a total of 4,423
    in operation, with resources aggregating $5,962,135,452, and a
    circulation of $309,781,740 outstanding.
  Discussed by President McKinley, 25, 55.

Banks, Savings.--There are now (1902), 1,007 such banks throughout
    this country with deposits aggregating $2,518,599,536.

Barbados Island.--Population (1902), 195,000.

Bates, Brigadier-General John C., transmitting his report
    in connection with the treaty effected by him with the Sultan
    of Sulu, 104.

Bavaria.--Population (1900), 6,176,057.

Bear, The:
  Referred to, 48.

Belgium.--Population (1899), 6,693,810.
  Convention with, for regulation slave trade, 60.
  Importations of American products to, restrictions upon, discussed, 60.
  Trade-marks, treaty with, regarding, 122.

Bering Sea Fisheries:
  Claims against Russia, 72.
  Questions with Great Britain regarding, 29.

Bermudas.--Population (1900), 17,535.

Bertholf, Ellsworth P., thanks of Congress to, recommended, 50.

Biographical Sketches of President:
  McKinley, 5.
  Roosevelt, 313.

Boer War.--Attitude of the United States concerning, 68, 104, 126.

Bolivia, diplomatic relations with, 61.
  Insurrection in, discussed, 61.
  War between Chile, Peru, and, 61.

Boston, The, mentioned, 64.

Boxers.--A religious sect in China who were largely responsible
  for the disturbance in that country in 1900. On May 29, 1901, China
  agreed to pay to the Powers, which are Austria-Hungary, Belgium,
  France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, Russia,
  and the United States, an indemnity amounting to 450,000,000 taels
  ($300,000,000) for injuries inflicted by the Boxers. This indemnity
  is to constitute a gold debt re-payable in thirty-nine annual
  installments, due on Jan. 1st of each year up to 1941; interest at 4
  per cent to be payable half-yearly. The securities for the debt are
  the Imperial Maritime Customs, otherwise unappropriated, increased
  to five per cent _ad valorem_, the Navy Customs, and the Salt
  Tax otherwise unappropriated.

Brazil.--Boundary question with Bolivia discussed, 123.
  Relations with, 57.

Bremen.--Population (1900), 224,882.

British Colonies, commercial relations with, 78.

British Guiana.--Arbitration of, boundary questions discussed, 77.
  Tariff laws of, evidence of modification of, proclaimed, 78.

Buffalo, Pan-American Exposition at, 79, 133.
  In order to wipe out the deficit incurred in this enterprise Congress
  voted an appropriation for that purpose amounting to $500,000.

Bulgaria.--Population (1900), 3,733,189.


C.

Cabinet.--By a law which came into force on January 19, 1886, in
  case of removal, death, resignation or inability of both the President
  and Vice-President, the Secretary of State, and after him in the order
  of the establishment of their departments, other members of the Cabinet
  is removed, or a President elected. On the death of a Vice-President
  the duties of the office fall to the President _pro tempore_ of
  the Senate, who receives the salary of the Vice-President ($8,000.00.)

California.--Population (1900), 1,485,053.

Call, Dr. Samuel J., thanks of Congress recommended to, 50.

Canada, Dominion of.--Population (1901), 5,369,666.
  Commission, Joint High, progress of, discussed, 67.

Canary Islands.--Population (1902), 334,500.

Cape Verd Islands.--Population (1900), 147,424.

Caroline Islands.--Dispute between Germany and Spain relating to
  domination of, discussed, 67.
  By treaty of February 12, 1899, these islands, with the exception of
  Guam, the largest of the Marianne which had been ceded to the United
  States in 1898, passed on October 1, 1899, from Spain into the hands of
  Germany. The purchase-price paid by Germany was about $4,000,000. They
  consist of about five hundred coral islets which are small and sparsely
  peopled. The most important product and export is copra.

Census, discussed and recommendations regarding, by President--
  McKinley, 86, 151.
  Roosevelt, 350.
  Referred to, 86, 151, 350.

Centennial Anniversary of Founding of Washington as Capital to be
  held in 1900, 46, 101, 153.

Central America, Greater Republic of, establishment of, discussed, 58.

Chile.--Population (1901), 3,128,095.
  Boundary question with Argentine Republic, 60.
  Commission to settle claims of U.S. against, discussed, 63.

China.--Area of China proper 1,353,350 square miles;
  with dependencies 4,234,910 square miles;
  population 348,000,000;
  of the whole Empire about 399,680,000.
  American citizens in, protection for, discussed, 63.
  Boxer uprising in, discussed, 114, 352.
  Commercial relations with, 63.
  Commission to study conditions in, recommended, 63.
  Conditions in, discussed, 64.
  Disturbances in, discussed, 115, 352.
  Subjects of, in United States, outrages committed on, discussed, 116.
  Troops sent to protect, 116.
  War with Japan; action taken by U.S. regarding, 114.

Citizens of United States:
  Interference with rights of naturalized citizens of Australia, 122.
  Property of, protected in South Africa, 68.

Civil Service, discussed by President--
  McKinley, 12, 37, 102, 152.
  Roosevelt, 347, 403.

Colombia.--Population (1900), about 4,500,000.
  Civil war in, discussed, and action of U.S. regarding, 61, 123.
  Claims of United States against, 61.

Colorado.--Population (1900), 539,700.

Commerce:
  Active co-operation of commerce serves in promoting foreign
    commerce, 157.
  Consular reports, 53, 78, 133, 157.
  Discussed by President--
    McKinley, 12, 56, 78, 132, 133.
    Roosevelt, 319.
  Ecuador, 132.
  Extension of, with foreign powers, referred to, 29.
  Merchant Marine, discussed by President--
    McKinley, 56.
    Roosevelt, 327.
  Nicaragua, 132.
  Reciprocal trade relations with foreign countries, commission for, 29.
  Santo Domingo, 132.
  Trusts discussed, 11, 57, 319.
  With foreign powers, China, 64.

Commerce with Foreign Powers:
  Consular regulations, 407.
  Consular reports on trade and industries,
    referred to, 53, 78, 133, 157, 347.

Concord, The, mentioned, 111.

Congress.--Extraordinary session of, convened by proclamation
    of President McKinley, 167.
  Referred to, 15.

Connecticut.--Population (1900), 908,420.

Consular Reports, on trade and industries of foreign powers,
  referred to, 157, 347.

Consuls of the United States, active co-operation in
    commerce, 157, 347.
  May not act in a fiduciary capacity, 404.
  Reports of consular agents, referred to, 19, 42, 53, 157, 347.

Contagious Diseases:
  Discussed, 271, 278.

Costa Rica.--Population (1899), 310,000.
  Boundary question with Nicaragua, arbitration of award of,
    discussed, 124.

Courts, Consular, regulations for, 264.

Creek Indians:
  Treaty with, discussed, 399.
  Ratified by proclamation, 399.

Crozler, Captain William, Peace Commissioner at The Hague, 80.

Cuba.--Area 35,994 square miles;
  population in 1899 by census, 1,572,797.

  In 1901 by act of Congress, autonomous government was granted to take
  effect in May of that year. It was relinquished by Spain preliminary
  to negotiations at Paris, December 10, 1898, and was advanced to the
  position of an independent state. The armed interposition of the United
  States in its struggle for freedom had the effect of bringing the
  island into close communication with the United States government.
  A convention met November 5, 1900, to decide upon a constitution and
  this was adopted February 21, 1901, according to which the form of
  government of the island is Republican, with a President, Senor Estrada
  Palma, Vice-President, Senor Estevez, a Senate, and a House of
  Representatives. It was upon the adoption of this constitution that the
  United States decided to pass over the government to the Island of Cuba
  as soon as the government of that island should agree that it would
  make no treaty with any foreign power which would endanger its
  independence; to contract no debt greater than the current revenue
  would suffice to pay; to grant the United States the right of
  intervention, and also to give it the right to use its naval stations.
  These conditions were accepted by Cuba June 12, 1901, and the President
  and Vice-President of the Republic of Cuba were formally elected
  February 24, 1902. There are at the present writing some slight
  evidences of dissatisfaction with the present administration, but they
  are of the ordinary political nature.

  Census ordered, 290.
  Constitutional Convention assembled, 145
  Creation of offices in, 263, 265.


D.

Dahlberg, Gustav Isak, recommendation for indemnity to, 154.

Dakota.--North and South Dakota created into a separate Internal
  Revenue District, 282.

Daws Commission, discussed, 35, 86.

Day, William R., Secretary of State, 170.

Debt, Public.--On July 1, 1901, the public debt of the United
  States amounted to $2,143,326,933.89.

Defenses, Public, discussed by President McKinley, 146.

Delagoa Bay Railway, claims regarding, submitted to
  arbitration, 130.

Delaware.--Population (1900), 184,735.

Denmark.--Population (1901), 2,464,770.

Detroit, The, mentioned, 62.

Distilled Spirits, sale of, in Manila, information concerning,
  transmitted, 110.

District of Columbia.--Population (1900), 278,718.
  National celebration of the Centennial Anniversary of the transfer of
    seat of Government to, 46, 101, 152.


E.

Ecuador.--Population (1900), 1,270,000.

Egypt.--Population, 9,734,000.

Elections, Constitutional Convention in Cuba, appointed, 145.
  Not to be held in Hawaii, 264.

Europe.--Population (1900) about 380,000,000.

Executive Departments:
  Appointments and promotions in, order regarding promotions to be given
    veterans in, 403.
  Canvassing for outside support for promotions forbidden, 403.
  Employees in, order permitting to participate in public exercises,
    264, 269, 285, 406.

Expansion, Territorial, foreign policy discussed by President
  McKinley, 19, 31.

Expenditures, Public.--For the year ending June 30, 1899,
    they had increased to $605,072,180.
  Congress warned about, 9.

Experiment Stations:
  Discussed, 46.

Exports.--In 1901 the value of exports in the United States was
  $1,460,462,806 exclusive of gold and silver.

Extraordinary Session of Congress, proclamation convening, 167.


F.

Falkland Islands.--Population (1901), 2,043.

Faure, President, death of, referred to, 64.

Fiji or Feejee Islands.--Population (1901), 117,810.

Finances, discussed by President--
  McKinley, 7, 13. 15, 135, 162.
  Roosevelt, 319.

Five Civilized Tribes, discussed, 33.

Florida.--Population (1900), 528,542.

Foreign Coins.--Value of Alphonsino and Louis fixed by order, 290.

Foreign Import Duties, modifications of tariff laws discussed, 10.

Foreign Policy of the United States, discussed, 12, 19, 51.

Forestry System, inauguration of, discussed, 87.

France.--Population (1901), 38,641,333, and of her colonial
    possessions about 51,000,000.
  Faure, President, death of, referred to by President McKinley, 64.
  Wines, duty on, imported into United States modified by reciprocal
    trade relations, proclamation concerning, 172.

Free-Delivery System extended to rural districts, 148.

French Exhibits and Relations at the World's Fair, Chicago, in
  1893, a reason for the United States participating largely at Paris, 39.

Fugitive Criminals, convention regarding, with Peru, 131.

Fuller, Melville W., member of Board of Arbitration, 129.


G.

Geographic Names, Board on, report of, 159.

Georgia.--Population (1900), 2,216,331.

Germany.--Population (1900), 36,345,014.
  Dispute with Spain regarding Caroline Islands, 67.
  Importation of American products into, discussed, 126.

Government Employees, order permitting to participate in public
  exercises, 264, 269, 285.

Great Britain.--Population (1901), 41,605,323;
  area of the British Empire, including colonies, protectorates, etc.,
    10,161,483 sq. miles, and the population in 1901 400,000,000.
  Boundary dispute of, with Venezuela regarding British Guiana, 77.
  Commerce of the United States, restrictions placed upon by, during
    South African war, 126.

Great Britain--Continued.
  Commercial reciprocal convention concluded with, on behalf of
    colonies, 78.
  Commissioners award in the claims of the United States against, 39.
  Interference with cargoes in neutral bottoms during Boer war by, 126.
  Minister of United States in Pretoria protects British and other
    interests in South Africa, 68.
  Vessels of United States restricted in South Africa, 126.

Greece.--Population (1894), 1,210,625.


H.

Hawaiian Islands.--In accordance with resolution of Congress of
  July 7, 1898, these islands were formally annexed to the United States
    August 12, 1898. The islands were ceded as the Territory of Hawaii on
    June 14, 1900. By the act of April 30, 1900, all persons who were on
    August 12, 1898, citizens of the Republic of Hawaii were declared to
    be citizens of the United States and of the Territory of Hawaii. The
    territorial franchise is granted to residents in the territory for a
    year, registration in the district, and ability to read and write the
    English or Hawaiian language. As a military district the islands have
    been attached to the Department of California.
  Annexation of, to United States, 96.
  Cable connection with, recommended, 146.
  Discussed by President McKinley, 96, 150.

Hay, John. Secretary of State, 182.
  Authorized to confer with Great Britain and Germany concerning
    Samoa, 270.

Honduras.--Population (1900), 587,500.


I.

Idaho.--Population (1900), 161,772.

Illinois.--Population (1900), 4,821,550.

Immigration discussed by President McKinley, 11.

Inaugural Addresses of President--
  McKinley, 7, 162.
  Roosevelt, 314,

India.--Area, 1,559,603 square miles;
  population (1901), 294,266,701.

Indian Appropriation Bill.--Necessity of passing, discussed, 35.

Indian Territory.--Population (1900), 302,060.

Indiana.--Population (1900), 2,416,462.

Indians:
  Action recommended to enable the Iroquois, Delawares, and Abenaki
    in Canada to attend exposition held at Omaha, 45.
  Act to refer claims for depredations by, to Court of Claims, veto, 159.
  Instructions to commissioners engaged with, in Indian Territory, 34.
  Treaty with, ratified by proclamation, 40.
  Five civilized tribes discussed, 33.

Internal Revenue.--During the recent war with Spain there was
  collected in 1901 from the taxes imposed for war purposes $306,871,669.

Iowa.--Population (1900), 2,231,853.

Italy.--Population (1901), 32,450,000.
  Indemnity paid by United States for subjects of, lynched, 156, 158.


J.

Japan.--Commercial relations with, 70, 128.
  Questions with, settled, 27.
  Relations with, 68.


K.

Kansas.--Population (1900), 1,470,495.

Kentucky.--Population (1900), 2,147,174.

Kongo Free State.--Population (1901), about 30,000,000.

Korea or Corea.--Population estimated from eight to
  sixteen millions.


L.

La Abra Silver Mining Company, claim of against Mexico, 129.

Labor, principal of arbitration in, referred to, 46.

Labor, Hours of:
  Referred to, 46, 152.

Laborers, Alien:
  Discussed, 46, 152.

Lands, Public:
  Discussed, 87, 149.
  Disposition of, discussed by President McKinley, 149.
  Opened to settlement, proclaimed, 178, 196, 215, 237, 243, 261, 274,
    277, 286, 289, 290, 371, 382, 384.
  Sale of, discussed by President McKinley, 149.
  Set apart as public reservation by proclamation of President--
    McKinley, 169, 171, 175, 179, 185, 187, 189, 190, 194, 195, 204,
      206, 209, 213, 226, 227, 236, 237, 239, 247, 256.
    Roosevelt, 360, 361, 364, 367, 369, 374, 375, 377, 383, 385, 390,
      392, 398, 397, 400, 401, 402, 403.

Lawshe, Abraham L.--Report of and investigation into expenditure
    of Cuban funds, 155.

Liberia.--The total population in 1902 was 1,500,000, mostly natives.

Library of Congress, referred to, 37.

Life Insurance Companies, American.--Exclusion of, from transacting
     business in Germany, 67, 125.
  Referred to, 37.

Loans, discussed, 9.

Louisiana.--Population (1900) was 1,381,625.
  Lynching in, referred to, 19.
  Sufferers from floods relieved by appropriation, 17.

Low, Seth, Peace Commissioner at The Hague, 80.

Lynchings, discussed, 19, 39, 68, 101, 127, 155, 156, 158.

Lynn Canal, referred to, 126.


M.

McArthur, General, Military Governor of Philippine Islands, 18.

McKinley, William (twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth President of the
    U.S.):
  Advancement and progress of the United States discussed by, 292.
  Agriculture, department of, discussed by, 87.
  Alaska, discussed by, 67, 126.
    Legislation for, recommended by, 32, 97.
  Alien Contract Law, amendment of, recommended by, 46, 152.
  American Republics, Bureau of, discussed by, 47, 78, 133.
  Annual message of, 22, 53, 113.
  Arbitration, discussed by, 13, 30, 77, 129.
  Army, discussed by, 82, 146.
  Bering Sea Fisheries, discussed by, 29, 72.
  Biographical sketch of, 5.
  Buffalo, Pan-American Exposition at, discussed by, 79, 133.
  Census, discussed by, 86, 151.
  China, Boxer uprising in, discussed by, 114.
  Civil Service discussed by, 12, 37, 102, 152.
  Commerce, discussed by, 12, 56, 78, 133, 157.
  Cuban insurrection and policy of the United States regarding, discussed
    by, 19, 41.
  Death of--
    Action of Congress on, 309.
    Announcement of, to Vice-President and reply to, 298.
      To Representatives abroad, 298.
      To the Army, 299.
      To the Navy, 301.
      To the Treasury, 303.
    Certificate of the coroner, 304.
    House Committee named, 309.
    News at the White House, 297.
    Official order of observances, 304.
    Official order of the Army, 300.
    Order of procession, 306.
    Orders to the Army, 303.
      To the Guard of Honor, 307.
      To the Navy, 308.
    Proclamation of, by President Roosevelt, 358.
  Dewey appointed acting Rear-Admiral by, 258.
  Executive orders of, 258.
  Extraordinary session of Congress, 167.
    Senate, 234.
  Extraordinary session of Congress by proclamation of, 167.
  Finances discussed by, 7, 13, 15, 23, 54, 134, 162.
  Foreign policy discussed by, 12, 19, 41.
  Germany, relations with, discussed by, 66, 126.
  Government for Philippine Islands discussed by, 88, 92, 138.
  Harrison, Hon. Benjamin, death of, 235.
  Hawaiian Cable concession, 183.
  Hawaiian Islands, annexation of, discussed by, 26, 96.
    Affairs in, discussed by, 96, 150.
    Cable communication with, discussed by, 52, 126.
  Hobart, Garret P., death of, referred to by, 53.
  Immigration, discussed by, 11.
  Italy, recommendations regarding lynching of subjects of, made by, 68,
    127, 156, 158.
  Japan, Commercial relations with, discussed by, 70, 128.
    Questions with, discussed by, 27.
  Kansas Pacific Railway, claims against, dismissed by, 35.
  Labor, hours of, discussed by, 46, 152.
  Lands, Public--
    Set apart as public reservation, 169, 170, 174, 182, 185, 187, 189,
      190, 194, 195, 206, 209, 213, 226, 231, 236, 239, 241, 251, 256.
    Opened for settlement, 178, 196, 215, 237, 243.
  Lands, Public, set apart as public reservation by proclamation of, 169,
      170, 174, 182, 185, 187, 189, 190, 195, 204, 209, 213, 226, 231, 236,
      241, 251, 256.
    Opened for settlement by proclamation of, 178, 190, 215, 237, 243.
    Revenue derived from, discussed by, 149.
  Last speech of, 292.
  Loans, discussed by, 9.
  Louisiana Purchase Exposition, 257.
  Lynchings, discussed by, 19, 40, 68, 101, 127, 155, 158.
  Manila, cable communication with, discussed by, 46, 70, 136.
  Marshall Day, referred to, 153.
  Mexico, treaty with, discussed by, 71.
  Monetary Commission, discussed by, 21.
  Modification of tariff laws, discussed by, 10.
  Mosquito Indian strip, insurrection in and treatment of American
    citizens, discussed by, 62, 130.
  Navy discussed by, 31, 84, 137, 148.
    Vessels for, construction of discussed and commendations regarding,
      by, 31.
  Nicaragua Canal, discussed by, 28, 63, 130.
  Nicaragua, relations with, discussed by, 27.
    Revolution in, discussed by, 129.
  Ocean cables with Philippines, 46.
  Ozama River bridge claims, referred to, 124.
  Pacific Railway Claims, discussed by, 35, 86.
  Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo, discussed by, 79, 133.
  Paris, France, Universal Exposition at, discussed by, 18, 30, 38, 45, 65,
    108, 113, 124, 152, 154, 158.
  Patent Office, discussed by, 85, 150.
    At The Hague, discussed by, 80, 129.
  Pennsylvania, riots at Lattimer, discussed by, 85, 149.
  Peru, affairs in, discussed by, 129.
  Philippine Islands, affairs in, discussed by, 138.
    Government for, discussed by, 88, 92, 138.
  Postal service, discussed by, 83, 148.
  Proclamations of--
    Cessation of Tariff, Puerto Rico, 254.
    Copyright--
      Netherlands, 212.
      Costa Rica, 205.
  Puerto Rico, legislation for, suggested by, 99, 144.
    Relief for, discussed by, 100.
    Expeditions against, discussed by, 99, 144.
  Questions with Japan, discussed by, 27.
  Reciprocal Commercial Agreement, France, 172.
    Germany, 228.
    Italy, 229.
  Revocation of suspension of port dues, Tobago, 192.
    Trinidad, 193.
  Samoan Islands, affairs of, and policy of United States
    concerning, discussed by, 72, 125, 132.
  Sherman, Hon. John, death of, 233.
  Southern Ute Indians, Colorado, 196.
  Suspension of tonnage dues, Mexico, 168, 186.
    Denmark, 177.
  Thanksgiving, 167, 182, 208, 234.
  The assassination of, 296.
  Transfer of, to United States referred to by, 27.
  Trusts, discussed by, 11, 57.
  Veto messages of--
    Navajo, 108.
  Water boundary commission discussed by, 71, 129.

Macrum, Charles E., Consul at Durban concerning mail of, 104.

Mahan, Alfred T., Peace Commissioner at The Hague, 80.

Maine.--Population in 1900 was 694,466.

Manila, Philippine Islands:
  Cable communication with, recommended, 46, 70, 146.
  Liquor at, sale of, 110.

Marshall Day, referred to, 153.

Maryland.--Population in 1900 was 1,188,044.

Massachusetts.--Population in 1900 was 2,605,346.

Mexico.--Population in 1901 was 12,100,000.
  Claims of Benjamin Weil and La Abra Silver Mining Co. against, 129.
  Convention with, 40.
  Fugitive criminals convention with, for surrender of, 71.
  Lynching of subjects at Yreka, indemnity recommended, 40.
  Relations with, 71.
  Treaty regarding Water boundary commission discussed, 71, 129.
  Treaty with, discussed by President McKinley, 71.

Michigan.--The population in 1900 was 2,420,982.

Minnesota.--The population in 1900 was 1,751,394.

Mississippi.--The population in 1900 was 1,551,270.
  Appropriation recommended for sufferers by flood in, 17.

Missouri.--Population in 1900 was 3,106,665.

Monetary Commission, discussed, 21.

Montana.--The population in 1900 was 243,329.

Morgan City, The, mentioned, 71.

Mosquito Indian Strip, insurrection in, discussed, 62, 130.


N.

Naturalization Laws, discussed, 11.

Naturalized Citizens impressed into military service of foreign
  countries, 122.

Navajo Indians, veto message concerning, 110.

Navy, discussed by President McKinley, 84, 137, 148.

Nebraska.--Population in 1900 was 1,066,300.

Nevada.--Population in 1900 was 42,335.

Newark, The, mentioned, 63.

Newel, Stanford, Peace Commissioner at The Hague, 80.

New Hampshire.--Population in 1900 was 411,588.

New Jersey.--Population in 1900 was 1,663,669.

New Mexico.--Population in 1900 was 195,310.

New York.--Population in 1900 was 7,268,894.

Nicaragua, boundary line with Costa Rica, arbitration of,
    referred to President of United States and award of, discussed, 124.
  Diplomatic relations with, 27.
  Revolution in, discussed, 129.
  Rupture with Costa Rica amicably settled, 123.

Nicaragua Canal, discussed, 28, 63, 130.

Nicaragua Canal Commission, discussed, 63.

North Carolina.--Population in 1900 was 1,893,810.

North Dakota.--Population in 1900 was 319,146.

Norway.--Population in 1900 was about 2,000,000.


O.

Ohio.--Population in 1900 was 4,157,545.

Oklahoma.--Population in 1900 was 398,331.

Otis, Elwell S., communications with Aguinaldo, 111.
  Proclamation to Philippines issued by, 104.

Ozama River, building bridge over, at Santo Domingo City
  by American citizens, 124.


P.

Pacific Railroads, indebtedness of, commission to settle, 86.
  Kansas Pacific, sale of, discussed, 87.
  Union Pacific, sale of, discussed, 56.

Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo, 79, 133.

Paris, France, Universal Exposition at, discussed, 18, 30, 38,
  44, 65, 110, 113, 124, 152, 154, 158.

Patent Office discussed, 85, 150.

Peace Congress at The Hague, 80, 129.

Pennsylvania.--Population in 1900 was 6,302,115.
  Conflict at Lattimer, claims of Austria-Hungary regarding subjects
    killed in, 60.

Pensions discussed, 85, 149.

Philadelphia, commercial museum at, 80.

Philippine Islands:
  Affairs in, discussed by President--
    McKinley, 138.
    Roosevelt, 335.
  Aid to loyal natives in, 336.
  Civil Service extended to, 348.
  Commission made the superior authority in, 394.
  General Chaffee relieved of civil duties in, 394.
  Government for, discussed by President--
    McKinley, 88, 92, 138.
    Roosevelt, 335.
  Granting of franchise in, to be encouraged, 337.
  Independence to, danger of, 336.
  Pardon and amnesty to insurgents in, 351.
  Thanks to army in, 395.

Plague, The, regulations to prevent introduction of,
  into United States, 129.

Portugal, claims of United States against, 130.

Postal Service discussed, 83, 148.

Puerto Rico:
  Expeditions against, 99, 144.
  Legislation for, 99, 144.
  Relief for, 100.


Q.

Quarantine Regulations discussed, 35.


R.

Rhode Island.--Population in 1900 was 428,556.

Russia.--Claims of United States against, 72.

Roosevelt, Theodore (twenty-seventh President of the United
    States):
  Agriculture discussed by, 329.
  Anarchy discussed by, 317.
  Annual message of, 315.
  Army discussed by, 343.
    Eulogy on, by, 395.
    Improvement of, suggested by, 344.
    Veterans praised by, 346.
    West Point referred to by, 328.
  Banks and Banking discussed by, 328.
  Biographical sketch of, 313.
  Cable communication with Hawaii and the Philippine Islands, 337.
  Census discussed by, 350.
  Charleston Exposition referred to, 349.
  China--
    "Open door" discussed by, 353.
    Uprising in, discussed by, 352.
  Civil Service discussed by, 347.
    Extension of the, to the Philippine Islands and Cuba, 348.
    Officers and employees forbidden to seek outside influence
      in promotion, 404.
    Veterans to have the preference in appointment and promotions, 403.
  Clayton-Bulwer Treaty referred to by, 338.
  Commerce discussed by, 319.
  Consular Corps--
    In relation to commerce, 347.
    Members of, forbidden to act in a fiduciary capacity for others, 404.
    Permitted to issue passports in the Insular possessions of
      the United States, 407.
  Creeks, treaty with, ratified by proclamation, 399.
  Cuba--
    Fair treatment accorded to, by the United States, referred to, 357.
    Reciprocal exemption of vessels from tonnage dues proclaimed, 392.
    Reciprocal reduction in tariff recommended by, 334.
    Reciprocity with, urged by, 356.
  Death of President McKinley--
    Announcement of and reply to by, 298.
    Proclaimed by, 358.
    Referred to by, 315.
  Department of Agriculture discussed by, 330.
  Eulogy of the Army of the United States by, 395.
  Executive orders of, 401.
  Expenditure discussed by, 328.
  Filipino Insurgents, pardon and amnesty declared by, 392.
  Forest reserves discussed by, 329.
  Germany--
    Death of Empress Dowager Frederick referred to, 354.
    Sympathy with the United States on the death of McKinley, 354.
  Glass, John, act for relief of, vetoed by, 354.
  Government employees, permission given to participate in
     public exercises, 406.
  Great Britain, negotiations with, on Nicaraguan Canal referred to, 338.
  Hawaii--
    Affairs of, discussed by, 334.
    Cable Communication with, discussed by, 337.
  Henry, Prince of Prussia, committee on reception and entertainment
      of, appointed by, 504.
  Immigration--
    Discussed by, 333.
    Laws should be amended, 325.
  Inaugural address by, as Vice-President, 314.
  Indians--
    Affairs of, discussed by, 348.
    Necessity of education of, 348.
  Interstate Commerce Law discussed by, 324, 328.
  Isthmian Canal discussed by, 337.
  Irrigation discussed by, 331.
  La Abra Claims referred to, 353.
  Labor discussed by, 323.
  Lands, arid, discussed by, 332.
  Lands, public--
    Discussed by, 331.
    In Puerto Rico, legislation for, recommended, 334.
    Opened to settlement by, 371, 382, 384.
    Set apart for public reservations by proclamation, 315, 360, 364,
      367, 369, 374, 375, 377, 383, 385, 390, 397, 402, 403, 405,
      406, 407, 408.
  Library of Congress referred to, 350.
  Louisiana Purchase Exposition, duration of, fixed by proclamation, 389.
  McKinley, death of--
    Proclaimed, 358.
    Referred to, 315.
  Martinique, recommending appropriation for the relief of sufferers
    in, 355.
  Merchant Marine discussed by, 327.
  Monroe doctrine referred to, 338.
  Morton, J. Sterling, mark of respect to be paid on the death of, 405.
  Naval Reserve, national, suggested by, 343.
  Navy--
    Discussed by, 339.
    Rating and pay of petty officers and men established in the, 401,
      403, 408.
    Regulating discharge from, 407.
    Retirement of men in, order regarding, 408.
  Oath of office administered to, 298, 314.
  Pardon and amnesty to Philippine insurgents proclaimed, 392.
  Pan-American Exposition referred to, 349.
  Pauncefote, Right Honorable Lord, mark of respect to be
      paid on death of, 405.
  Peace conference at The Hague, referred to, 338.
  Postal Service discussed by, 351.
  Philippine Islands--
    Affairs in, discussed by, 335.
    Aid to loyal natives in, recommended, 336.
    Civil service to be extended to, 348.
    Commission made the superior authority in, 394.
    Gen. Chaffee relieved of his civil duties in, 394.
    Government in, discussed by, 335.
    Granting of franchise in to be encouraged, 337.
    Independence to, danger of granting, 336.
    Pardon and amnesty to insurgents in, proclaimed, 351.
  Proclamations of--
    Cuban reciprocity in exemption of vessels from tonnage dues, 302.
    Day of mourning and prayer proclaimed, 358.
    Death of President McKinley, 358.
    Eulogy on the Army of the United States, 395.
    Louisiana Purchase Exposition, time for holding, fixed, 389.
    Pardon and amnesty to the insurgents in the Philippine Islands, 392.
    Puerto Rico legislation for public lands, 334.
    Ratifying treaty with the Creeks, 399.
    Thanksgiving, 359.
  Railways referred to, 329.
  Reciprocity discussed by, 326.
  Secretary of Commerce and Industries, appointment of, recommended, 323.
  Sharretts, Thaddeus S., commissioned to effect changes in foreign
    duties, 401.
  Shipping discussed by, 327.
  Smithsonian Institution referred to, 350.
  Tariff system discussed by, 326.
  Thanksgiving proclamation, 359.
  Thanks of, to the Army in Cuba and the Philippines, 395.
  Treaty with the Creeks ratified by, 399.
  Trusts discussed by, 319.
  Veto message for the relief of John Glass, 354.
  Victoria, Queen of Great Britain, death of referred to, 354.


S.

Samoan Islands, affairs of discussed, 72, 125, 132.
  Government of discussed, 62.
  Insurrection in discussed, 72, 124.
  King of, death of, 72.

Santo Domingo, claim of United States against, 124.
  Revolution in, referred to, 124.
  War in, discussed, 62.

South Carolina.--Population in 1900 was 1,340,316.

South Dakota.--Population in 1900 was 401,570.

Specie Payments discussed, 24.

Sulu, Sultan of, treaty with, 105.

Sweden and Norway, king of, arbitrator in Samoan affairs, 132.


T.

Taft Commission discussed, 156.

Tellefsen, Captain B., claim of, against United States, 40.

Tennessee.--Population in 1900 was 2,020,616.

Tewkesberry, Samuel, claim of, vetoed, 159.

Texas.--Population in 1900 was 3,048,710.

Thanks of Congress:
  Tender of, recommended to--
    Bertholf, Ellsworth P., 50.
    Call, Dr. Samuel J., 50.
    Jarvis, David H., 50.
    Tuttle, Captain Francis, 50.

Tice, Isaac P., administrators of, act for relief of, vetoed, 41.

Trade-Marks, treaty regarding, with Belgium, 122.

Trusts, evils of monopolies discussed, recommendations
  regarding, 11, 57.

Turkey.--American citizens, injuries inflicted upon in, 76.
  Armenian subjects of, referred to, 132.
  Commercial relations with, 76, 132.
  Naturalization, treaty with, discussed, 76.

Tuttle, Captain Francis, thanks of Congress to, recommended, 50.


U.

United States.--The total population in 1900 was 76,303,387.

Utah.--Population in 1900 was 276,749.


V.

Venezuela.--Boundary dispute with Great Britain regarding British
    Guiana, arbitration of, discussed, 77.
  Claims of United States against, payment of, 41.
  Revolution in, discussed, 77.

Vice-Presidents of United States.--Five Vice-Presidents have
  succeeded to the Presidency by reason of the death of the President;
  viz: John Tyler, who succeeded William Henry Harrison in 1841; Millard
  Fillmore, who succeeded Zachary Taylor in 1850; Andrew Johnson, who
  succeeded Abraham Lincoln in 1865; Chester A. Arthur, who succeeded
  James A. Garfield in 1881, and Theodore Roosevelt, who succeeded
  William McKinley in 1901.

Virginia.--Population in 1900 was 1,854,184.


W.

Walker, John G.--Chairman of Nicaraguan Canal Commission, 63.

Washington.--Population in 1900 was 518,103.

Washington, George.--Centennial anniversary of death of,
  December 14, 1899, referred to by President McKinley, 103.

Washington City.--Centennial anniversary of founding of,
    for capital, held in 1900, discussed, 101, 153.
  Memorial Bridge across the Potomac, appropriation recommended for, 101.

Whaling fleet relieved by "Bear" under Captain Francis Tuttle, 48.

White, Andrew D., Peace commissioner at the Hague, 80.

Wisconsin.--Population in 1900 was 2,069,042.

Worcester, Dean C., member of Commission, Philippine Islands, 90.

Wyoming.--Population in 1900 was 92,531.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Compilation of the Messages and Papers
of the Presidents, by Theodore Roosevelt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEODORE ROOSEVELT ***

***** This file should be named 13891.txt or 13891.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/8/9/13891/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Garcia and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
