The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sunny Side of Diplomatic Life, 1875-1912
by Lillie DeHegermann-Lindencrone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sunny Side of Diplomatic Life, 1875-1912

Author: Lillie DeHegermann-Lindencrone

Release Date: November 4, 2004 [EBook #13955]
[Date last updated: July 30, 2006]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUNNY SIDE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





THE SUNNY SIDE OF
DIPLOMATIC LIFE

1875-1912



By

L. DE HEGERMANN-LINDENCRONE

Author of "In The Courts of Memory"



ILLUSTRATED WITH PORTRAITS, FACSIMILES, ETC.



Harper & Brothers Publishers
New York and London
MCMXIV

1913, 1914 By Harper & Brothers
Printed in The United States of America
Published October, 1914




[Illustration:
LILLIE DE HEGERMANN-LINDENCRONE
Reproduced from the portrait painted in 1880 by B.C. Porter.]




CONTENTS

                                                  PAGE

NOTE                                               vii

THE ALPHABET OF A DIPLOMAT                          ix

WASHINGTON, 1875-1880                                1

ROME, 1880-1890                                     89

STOCKHOLM, 1890-1897                               201

PARIS, 1897-1902                                   237

BERLIN, 1902-1912                                  277




ILLUSTRATIONS


LILLIE DE HEGERMANN-LINDENCRONE          _Frontispiece_

MRS. U.S. GRANT                          _Facing p._ 6

SARAH BERNHARDT                               "     12

DOM PEDRO                                     "     12

HENRY W. LONGFELLOW                           "     50

JAMES G. BLAINE                               "     50

OLE BULL                                      "     82

QUEEN MARGHERITA                              "    102

KING VICTOR EMANUEL                           "    106

TWO YOUNG QUEENS                              "    130

THE PALACE, MONZA (FRONT)                     "    136

PALACE AND GARDENS                            "    136

NOTE FROM F. LISZT                            "    152

AALHOLM. BUILT IN 1100                        "    168

INSCRIPTIONS IN ONE OF THE ROOMS AT AALHOLM,
BEARING THE DATE 1585                         "    168

FRANCESCO CRISPI                              "    198

KING OSCAR                                    "    212

THE KING OF SWEDEN                            "    220

THE RIKSDAG OF SWEDEN                         "    224

FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM GRIEG                "    230

A LETTER IN ENGLISH FROM KING OSCAR           "    234

JULES MASSENET AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS CAREER    "    246

A NOTE FROM MASSENET                          "    248

FELIX FAURE WHEN PRESIDENT OF FRANCE          "    252

LINES FROM "LA PRINCESSE LOINTAINE" WITH
ROSTAND'S AUTOGRAPH                           "    260

BJOERNSON                                      "    270

THE EMPRESS OF GERMANY ON HER FAVORITE MOUNT  "    280

EMPEROR WILLIAM IN THE UNIFORM OF THE GUARDS  "    280

TWO VIEWS OF ROYALTY                          "    282

THE THRONE-ROOM OF THE ROYAL PALACE, BERLIN   "    290

QUEEN LOUISE OF DENMARK                       "    296

THE ROYAL PALACE AND LUSTGARTEN, BERLIN       "    306

COUNT HATZFELDT                               "    326

THE EMPEROR IN 1905                           "    332




NOTE


MADAME DE HEGERMANN-LINDENCRONE, the writer of these letters, is the
wife of the recently retired Danish Minister to Germany. She was
formerly Miss Lillie Greenough, of Cambridge, Massachusetts, where she
lived with her grandfather, Judge Fay, in the fine old Fay mansion,
now the property of Radcliffe College.

As a child Miss Greenough developed the remarkable voice which later
was to make her well known, and when only fifteen years of age her
mother took her to London to study under Garcia. Two years later Miss
Greenough became the wife of Charles Moulton, the son of a well-known
American banker, who had been a resident in Paris since the days of
Louis Philippe. As Madame Charles Moulton the charming American became
an appreciated guest at the court of Napoleon III. Upon the fall of
the Empire Mrs. Moulton returned to America, where Mr. Moulton died,
and a few years afterward she married M. de Hegermann-Lindencrone, at
that time Danish Minister to the United States, and later periods his
country's representative at Stockholm, Rome, Paris, Washington and
Berlin.




THE ALPHABET OF A DIPLOMAT


_Ambassador_             A man, just a little below God.
_Attache_                The lowest rung of the ladder.
_Blunder_                How absurd! Why, _never_!...
_Chancellery_            The barn-yard where he is plucked.
_Chief_                  The cock of the walk.
_Colleagues_             A question merely of time and place.
_Court_                  Where one learns to make courtesies.
_Decorations_            The balm for all woes.
_Dinners_                The surest road to success.
_Disponsibility_         The Styx, whence no one returns.
_Esprit_ (_de corps_)    The corps is there, but where is the _esprit_?
_Etiquette_              The Ten Commandments.
_Finesse_                A narrow lane where two can walk abreast.
_Friendships_            Ships that pass in the night.
_Gotha_ (_almanack_)     The Bible of a Diplomat.
_Highness_               _His_, _Her_, make a deep courtesy.
_Ignoramus_              A person who does not agree with you.
_Innuendo_               An obscure side-light of truth.
_Joke_                   Something beneath the dignity of a diplomat
                           to notice.
_Knowledge (private)_    _News_ which every one already knows.
_Legation_               Apartments to let.
_Letters_ (_de creance_) The first impression.
_Letters_ (_de rappel_)  The last illusion.
_Majeste_ (_lese_)       Too awful to think of.
_Majesties_              Human beings with royal faults.
_Nobodies_               People to be avoided like poison.
_Opulence_               When in service.
_Pension_                Too small to be seen with the naked eye.
_Poverty_                When out of service.
_Quo_ (_status_)         Diplomatic expression, meaning in French,
                           _Une jambe en l'air_.
_Ruse_                   A carefully disguised thought as transparent
                          as a soap-bubble.
_Secretary_              Furniture easily moved.
_Traditions_             A door always open for refuge.
_Traites_ (_de paix_)    A series of dinners paid for by a lavish
                           government.
_Uniform_                A bestarred and beribboned livery.
_Visits_                 The most important duty of a diplomat.
_Wisdom_                 Good to have, but easily dispensed with.
_Xpectations_            A tree which seldom bears fruit.
_Yawn_                   What a diplomat does over his _rapports_.
_Zeal_                   Something a diplomat ought never to have too
                           much of.




THE SUNNY SIDE OF DIPLOMATIC LIFE




WASHINGTON, 1875-1880




WASHINGTON, _November, 1875_.

Dear Mother,--After my hurriedly written letter of the 24th you will
know that we have arrived here safely. My first introduction to my
first post as diplomat's wife was made unwittingly by a gentleman
walking with a friend just behind me. "Who is that gentleman?" said he,
indicating Johan. "That? That is the Minister of Denmark." I,
struggling with an arm-load of flowers culled from well-intentioned
friends at different stations on the road, my maid and Johan's valet
bringing up the rear with the overflow of small baggage, passed
unnoticed. Now we are quite established here, and I have already
commenced my diplomatic duties. There seems to be no end of
card-leaving and card-receiving, and a list of rules on etiquette (the
Ten Commandments of a Diplomat) as long as your arm. I never knew of
anything so confusing. I try to remember the things that I must do and
the things that I must not do. How many cold shower-baths of reproval
have I already received; how many unruly things have I already done! We
are invited to many dinners, luncheons, and entertainments of all
kinds. I am knee-deep in engagements, actually wading in them. The
engagement-book you gave me is already overfilled.

We were very much amused at the collection of newspaper cuttings you
sent us. Johan thought the one describing him as "a massive blonde of
magnificent proportions, whose pure heart and clean hands had won all
hearts in Washington" [previous to winning mine], was much too
personal. "The medals [his prized decorations] were not his fault, and
should not be laid up against him; and as for the gold key which he
wears on his back, it is considered a great honor, as few Danes have
had it conferred on them, being, as it is, the key of the king's own
bedchamber, and giving the wearer the privilege of entering there when
he likes."

Another one which amused us says "the bride is to be congratulated on
having annexed as fine a specimen of a viking as any one could desire,
and, although she has not secured a golden crown for her marble brow,
she has secured a name that ought to be good for a '_three-bagger_' on
any diamond, and that just to see it written on a hotel register makes
any hotel clerk faint." Johan asked me what a "three-bagger" was, but I
could not tell him. Then the worst one! "Mr. de Hegermann is envoy
extraordinary and parson to his Danish 'nibs.'" Johan was horrified at
this _lese majeste_. We looked the word "nibs" out in the dictionary,
only to find that in cribbage "nibs" means the knave of trumps. This
made matters worse; to call his sovereign a knave--even of
trumps--seemed too disrespectful.

It was very nice of Norris, your Cambridge grocer, to placard the fruit
in his shop window in our honor. "Lindencrone beauties" and "the Danish
pair" show a certain amount of humor which ought to be applauded. Such
a pun goes to my heart. I hope you encouraged him by buying them all
and can tell me what a "Danish pair" looks like.

It would take more than one letter of mine written on foolscap paper to
tell you of our colleagues and friends. I can do it in sections when I
have time. But, oh, when can I get the time!

       *       *       *       *       *

I have had my "audience" (Johan calls it an "audience"; I call it a
"call on Mrs. President Grant at the White House"). There was nothing
formal or formidable about it. Mrs. Grant and I sat on the sofa
together and talked generalities. Johan could not tell me what to
expect. He said _his_ audience with the President had been a surprise,
unprecedented by anything he had ever seen. As it was his first post as
Minister, he had pictured to himself that it would be somewhat like the
ceremonies abroad--very solemn and impressive. Of course he was in his
red gala uniform, with all his decorations. A hired landau brought him
to the steps of the White House, which he mounted with conscious
dignity. His written speech, nicely folded, he carried in his hand. In
Europe there would have been a crowd of gorgeous chamberlains to
receive him, but here he found a negro, who, on seeing him, hurriedly
donned a coat and, with an encouraging wave of the hand, said: "Come
right along in, sir. I'll let them know you're here, sir." Johan was
shown into a room and waited with patience until the President and Mr.
Hamilton Fish came in. Mr. Grant was dressed in a gray walking-suit and
wore a colored tie; and Mr. Hamilton Fish (Secretary of State) had
evidently just come in from a walk, as his turned-up trousers
signified.

Johan read his speech, and the President answered by reading, with some
difficulty, a paper which Mr. Fish handed to him at the last moment.
After this exchange of formalities Johan shook hands with the
President, and without further ceremony he left the room, the door this
time being opened by a white servant in black clothes. Mr. Fish at
parting casually observed that the weather was fine.

I was officially presented on their reception days to the wives of all
the Ministers, and made my visits to the members of the _Corps
Diplomatique_. We were invited to dinner at the White House--a dinner
given to the _Corps Diplomatique_. I was taken in by M. de Schloezer,
the German Minister, and sat between him and Sir Edward Thornton (the
English Minister), who sat on the right of Mrs. Grant. We were opposite
to the President. I noticed that he turned his wine-glasses upside
down, to indicate, I suppose, that he did not drink wine during dinner.
Afterward we amused ourselves by walking in the long Blue Room. The
President disappeared with some of the gentlemen to smoke and was lost
to view. The company also faded gradually away. Mrs. Grant did not seem
inclined to gaze on us any longer, and appeared to be relieved when we
shook her outstretched hand and said "Good night."

A dinner to which we went, given by the Schiskines (the Russian
Minister) in honor of the Grand-Duke Constantine of Russia, was most
delightful. The Grand Duke is very charming, natural, with a sly
twinkle in his mild blue eye. He has a very handsome face, is extremely
musical, and plays the piano with great _finesse_, having a most
sympathetic touch.

[Illustration:
MRS. U.S. GRANT
From a photograph taken about 1876, when she was mistress of the White
House.]

[Illustration:
SARAH BERNHARDT
From a photograph taken at the time of her visit to Boston.]

After dinner we darned stockings. This sounds queer, but nevertheless
it is true. The Schiskines had just bought a darning-machine. They paid
eighty-six dollars for it; but to darn, one must have holes, and no
holes could be found in a single decent stocking, so they had to cut
holes, and then we darned. The Grand Duke was so enchanted with this
darning that he is going to take a machine home to the Grand Duchess,
his august mother.

The darning done, we had some music. M. de Schloezer improvised on the
piano, and after the Grand Duke had played some Chopin I sang. M. de
Schloezer went through his little antics as advance-courier of my
singing: he screwed the piano-stool to the proper height (he thinks it
must be just so high when I accompany myself); he removed all albums
from sight for fear people might be tempted to glance in them; he
almost snatched fans from the hands of unoffending ladies, fearing they
might use them; no dogs were to be within patting distance, _and no
smoking_; he turned all the chairs to face the piano so that no one
should turn his back to it. These are all heinous crimes in his eyes.
He would, if he could, have pulled down all the portieres and curtains,
as he does in his own house when I sing there. What must people think
of him?

You ask me, "What kind of a cook have you?" Don't speak of it--it is a
sore subject! We have the black cook from the White House (so her
certificate says). She is not what our fancy painted her. Neither is
the devil as black as he is painted (I don't know why I associate them
in my mind). We had painted this cook white. I shudder to think how the
White House must have lived in those years when she did the cooking.
Our dinners are simply awful. Although she has _carte blanche_ to
provide anything and everything she wants, our dinners are failures. I
look the fact in the face and blush. Our musical parties are better
when I do the cooking and Johan does the serving--I mean when I sing
and he fills the gaps. The diplomats groan. "Think," they say, "what a
finished cook would do with all the delicious things they have
here--all these wonderful birds and meats and vegetables, and only the
one sauce!"

The charity concert, of which I was _dame patronesse_, went off with
success. We made a great deal of money. M. de Schloezer paid twenty
dollars for his ticket. My chorus covered itself with glory and was
encored. As the concert finished at ten, we adjourned to the Zamaconas'
(Minister of Mexico) first ball, and I hope, for them, their only one.
It was one of those _soirees_ where people appropriate the forks and
spoons. It cost, they say, ten thousand dollars. The assemblage was
promiscuous, to say the least. Every one who asked for an invitation
got one, and went. The Minister had hired the house next the Legation,
and cut doors into it so that there should be plenty of room, but even
then there was not sufficient space to contain the crowd of
miscellaneous guests. There were two orchestras, but no one wanted to
dance. Every one wandered about through the rooms or lolled in the
grottoes, which were lighted with different-colored lamps. In every
corner were fountains of cologne, around which the gentler sex stood in
crowds saturating their handkerchiefs--some of which had cross-stitch
initials in red thread. Mirrors were placed at the end of each room to
prolong the vista. "Mexico," in enormous letters formed by gas-jets,
stood over the entrances. And as for the supper, it was in a room out
of all proportion to the gathering! There was no question of getting
into it; only prize-fighters and professional athletes could elbow
their way through the crowd. The waiters had long since disappeared,
frightened at their formidable task. The chairs intended for the guests
were utilized as tables on which to put unfinished plates of food and
half-empty glasses. Everything that was not spilled on the floor was
spilled on the table. Such things as bonbons, cakes, etc., that could
be stowed away in pockets, vanished like magic. Gentlemen (?) broke the
champagne-bottles by knocking them on the table, sending the contents
flying across the room. The lady guests drew out the silver skewers
which ornamented the _plats montees_ and stuck them in their hair as
mementoes of this memorable evening.


WASHINGTON, 1876.

Dear Aunt,--The best way I can spend this Ash-ful Wednesday is to write
a penitent letter to you and beg you to forgive my long silence; but if
you could imagine what a life we have been leading, I think that, being
the being you are, you would make excuses for a niece who gets up with
the sun and goes to bed with the morning star. When that morning star
appears I am so tired I can think of nothing but bed and the bliss of
laying my diplomatic body down to rest.

Dear old Mr. Corcoran (almost blind now) gave a unique banquet in
honor of Johan and me. We went first to the theater to see "Rip Van
Winkle" played by Jefferson. It was delightful, though I cried my
eyes out. From the theater we went to Mr. Corcoran's house for a
roasted-in-the-shell oyster supper. Johan, who had never before
attended such a feast, thought he had got loose among a lot of
milkmaids and firemen, each with his bucket and pail, and when he saw
the enormous pile of oysters brought in on platters he wondered how
many "r's" March had in her. However, like a lamb he sat next to his
pail, and after having consumed about a bushel himself he became quite
expert at opening the oysters and throwing the shells in his pail. It
was a most amusing and original evening, and the amount of
oyster-shells we left behind us would have paved the way to the
Capitol.

Another original entertainment I must tell you about. We received a
note from General Burnside (Senator from Rhode Island): "Will you come
to my codfish dinner on Thursday next?" We of course accepted and went.
General Burnside and Senator Anthony are great friends and live
together. I never could understand, and never dared to ask, why such a
little state as Rhode Island needed two Senators. However, that is
neither here nor there. The other guests were Mr. Bayard, Mr. Blaine,
Mrs. Blaine, Mrs. Lawrence, General Sherman. According to the rules of
a codfish dinner, every one was provided with the same amount of boiled
codfish, hard-boiled eggs, beets, carrots, and potatoes, and every
English sauce ever made. Every one made his own mixture, which was
passed about and "sampled." The lucky person who got the greatest
number of votes received a beautiful silver bowl. The dining-room was
arranged as if it were a camp. There were no ornaments of any kind, and
we sat on little iron tent-chairs. You may imagine after we had
finished with the codfish that our appetites were on the wane, and we
felt that we had dined sumptuously, if monotonously, when, lo! our
genial host surprised us with an enormous turkey (reared on his own
estate), twenty-seven pounds in weight, with its usual accompaniments
of cranberry sauce, sweet-potatoes, and so forth. Mr. Blaine and Mr.
Bayard were fountains of wit.

Then another entertainment, a sort of _mardi-gras maigre_ feast, was a
champagne tea given for us at the Capitol by Mr. Blaine. He had invited
a great many of the Senators and the Ministers, his wife, and some
other ladies. These mighty people talked politics and had prodigious
appetites. Sandwiches and cake disappeared in a hazy mist, and they
drank oceans of champagne. They took cocktails before, during, and
after! I amused myself--as I can't talk politics, and would not if I
could--by noticing the ingenuity and variety of the spittoons placed
about in convenient spots. The spittoons that tried to be pretty were
the most hideous. I liked best the simplicity of the large, open,
ready-to-receive ones filled with clean, dainty sand. There was no
humbug about them, no trying to be something else; whereas the others,
that pretended to be Etruscan vases or umbrella-stands or flower-pots,
were failures in my eyes. Why are they ashamed of themselves? Why do
they call themselves by the graceful name of "cuspidor"--suggestive of
castanets and Andalusian wiles? Why such foolish masquerading?
Spittoons will be spittoons--they risk not being recognized. I said as
much as this to Mr. Blaine. "You are right," he said, "to fight their
battles. Did you ever hear the story about the Western man who was not
accustomed to such artistic objects, and said in one of his spitting
moods, 'If you don't take that darned thing away I'll spit in it'?"

I forgot to tell you that the Emperor and Empress of Brazil are here
"doing" Washington--doing it so thoroughly that they have almost
overdone it. The Brazilian Minister is worn out. Every day he has a
dinner and an entertainment of some kind. The Emperor wants to see
everything and to know everybody. No institution is neglected, and all
the industries are looked into thoroughly. He goes to the Senate very
often and sits through the whole _seance_, wishing to understand
everything. He always tries to get hold of the people who can give him
the most information on any subject. Dom Pedro is most popular; one
sees him everywhere. At the ball at the English Minister's for their
Majesties, a gentleman presented to the Empress said, "_Je suis le
Senateur qui parle frangais_." The Empress said to Johan, "I beg of you
to keep near me and talk to me so that the '_Senateur qui parle
francais_' may be discouraged in his pursuit."


PHILADELPHIA, 1876.

My dear Aunt,--Is your heart melted with pity, or does it burst with
national pride, and do you disregard such trifles as heat and
exhaustion? I told you in my last letter that the diplomats were
invited _en bloc_ (at the country's expense) to be present at the
opening of the Centennial Exposition. The country provided good rooms
for us at this hotel, where we are invited to spend two days: one of
those days was the day before yesterday, and I think that the other
will be enough for me, for anything more awful than the heat at the
present moment cannot well be conceived. It is as if Philadelphia had
said to its friends, "You provide the exposition, and we'll provide the
heat." There were carriages placed at our disposal for the opening, and
we drove out to the grounds in great style. We were welcomed at the
entrance by some officials and ushered to our seats on the red-hot
platform draped with flags. President Grant then entered, accompanied
by all his Ministers. After the opening speech by the President all the
church-bells in the city began ringing, cannons were fired, the
orchestra burst forth with national hymns--"Star-spangled Banner" and
"Hail, Columbia." People waved handkerchiefs, and the display of
patriotism was overpowering. In coming out, after the President had
left the tribune, the crowd filled in after him, and we had to fight
our way out as best we could.

[Illustration:
DOM PEDRO
Emperor of Brazil.]

The heat, which no thermometer could register--and there was no shade
for the thermometer to register in--and the crowd were something
fearful. People were almost crushed to death, and those who did the
most crushing were the fat policemen, who stood in every one's way and
on every one's toes and barred the whole procession. Johan looked like
an enormous poppy in his red uniform; the sun blazing through the glass
roof almost set him on fire (the diplomats were begged to come in
uniform, and that meant coats padded and buttoned up to the chin).
Johan tells fabulous stories of the number of stout old ladies he
saved, who all threatened to faint away on his decorations. He says he
carried them bodily through the crowd and deposited them on the grass
outside and went back for more. I was miraculously saved. I clasped my
arms around the fat body of a policeman and whispered endearing words
with a foreign accent to the effect that a foreigner who had come there
at the invitation of the country ought to be saved at any cost. He
thought so too, and was very kind and sympathetic, but as I clung to
his padded coat and felt his scorching buttons I wondered whether it
were better to die crushed than to suffer suffocation. However, we were
all saved; even Johan's chamberlain key clung to his back, and his
decorations actually stayed in their places, which I think was
wonderful, considering the stout ladies. My dress left a good deal of
itself behind--only the front breadth held it onto my person; the back
breadths were trampled on as far up as people could trample and were
dirty beyond words.

A large dinner was prepared for us, where patriotic toasts were drunk
galore.

We went out to the grounds the next day and rolled about in what they
call "rolling-chairs," and had things explained to us by some nice
gentlemen with gold-braided caps.

We will go once more to see what we left unseen, and then I turn my
head toward Cambridge.


WASHINGTON, _March, 1877_.

The question of the annual _diner diplomatique_ was cleverly managed by
Mr. Evarts. Mr. Hayes wanted to suppress wine and give tea and mineral
water, but Mr. Evarts put his foot down. He said that the diplomats
would not understand an official dinner without wine, and proposed,
instead, a _soiree musicale_--in other words, a rout. The diplomats had
a separate entrance (a novelty) from the garden side. There was an
orchestra at the end of the Blue Room which drowned conversation when
you were near it. I noticed that most of the young ladies found it too
near, and sought other corners.

The supper _ne laissait rien a desirer_, and there was a sumptuous
buffet open the whole evening; punch-bowls filled with lemonade were
placed in the different _salons_. On the whole, it was a great success.

I think that the teetotality of the White House displeases as much our
country-people as it does the foreigners. At one of our musical parties
Mr. Blaine came rather late, and, clapping his hands on Johan's
shoulder, said, "My kingdom for a glass of whisky; I have just dined at
the White House." Others call the White House dinners "the life-saving
station."

Mrs. Hayes was very nice to me. She sent me a magnificent basket of
what she called "specimen flowers," which were superb orchids and
begonias. On her card was written, "Thanking you again for the pleasure
you gave me by your singing."


WASHINGTON, _March, 1877_.

My dear Mother,--We are now having a visit of the Queen of the Sandwich
Islands. I suppose in Europe she would show to great advantage, but
here her blackness is at a low premium. There was a large reception for
her Royal Blackness at the White House, where all the diplomats were
present. The queen talked with people with the aid of an interpreter.
Her remarks necessarily being restricted, she said about the same thing
to every one. She was bristling with jewelry, and the large white
pearls on her broad, black bosom took on extra splendor. Robert (our
colored valet), who was waiting in the corridor, caught sight of her as
she walked by, and remarked, when he reached home, to my maid that he
was "surprised that they should make such a fuss over a colored
person"; and he attempted to turn his flat nose in the air; but, as it
is not the kind that turns, it refused.

Robert wears a conspicuous decoration in his buttonhole whenever we
have a dinner. The first time Johan noticed it he almost fainted away,
as he knows every decoration under the sun, and, thinking it looked
like the _Legion d'Honneur_, he proposed to question Robert about it;
but Robert eluded the master's clutch as the door-bell was ringing.
Johan was considerably disturbed until he learned the truth, which was
that Robert belonged to a reading-club--a Browning and Tennyson
club--and this was its badge. Our colleagues thought he was the
Minister from Hayti!


WASHINGTON, _Spring, 1877_.

Dear Mother,--I must tell you the honor which has been conferred on me.
I have been admitted into the enchanted circle of the Brain Club. I am
an honorary member. Mrs. Dahlgren is the president, and I suppose all
the set of intellectuals, "_Les elus des elus_" belong to it. I have
only been twice to the meetings. I think I am a failure as far as
brains go, but the members like my singing, and I am only called upon
to take an active part when the members are falling off their chairs,
trying with literary efforts to keep awake.

The first meeting was a ghastly affair. The subject to be discussed was
the "Metamorphosis of Negative Matter." You may imagine that I was
staggered. I had no more idea what negative matter was than the
inhabitants of Mars. They took us alphabetically. When they got to "H,"
Mrs. Dahlgren (who, as president, sat in a comfortable chair with arms
to it, while the others sat on hard dining-room, cane-bottomed chairs)
turned to me and said, "Has Mrs. _Hegermann_ anything to say concerning
the Metamorphosis of Negative Matter?" I had on my blue velvet gown,
and thought of it fast becoming chair-stamped, and I wondered if
negative matter would comprise that. However, I wisely refrained from
speech, and shook a sad smile from my closed lips.

"H" to "K" had a great deal to say. Every one looked wise and wore an
appearance of interest. They slid down to "L." Then Mrs. Dahlgren said,
"Has Mrs. _Lindencrone_ anything to say on the Metamorphosis of
Negative Matter?" I answered that I had not discovered anything since
the last time they asked me. They were not accustomed to one lady
having two names, each beginning with a capital letter.

The members had a beautiful time when they got to "R." Up rose a gaunt
female who knew all about it and seemed positive about the "Negative"
part. We were pulled suddenly up to time, and some one turned upon poor
me and asked if I agreed. I answered hastily, "Certainly I do." Dear
me! What had I said? Half the company rose with a bound. "Do you,
really?" they asked in chorus. "That is more than we do. We cannot at
all agree with a theory which is utterly false from the base." How I
wished I knew what the false base had been. Was it the Negative, or the
Metamorphosis, or the Matter? I murmured humbly, hiding behind a lame
neutrality, that I had mistaken the cause for the effect. They all
turned and looked at me with fierce eyes. I think they were staggered
at this colossal utterance, for they gave up discussing, and "S" to "Z"
never had a chance to say anything. Then they adjourned to the
supper-room. After having eaten scalloped oysters and chicken salad, no
more questions were discussed.

I was asked to sing. I am afraid that I am only looked upon as a bird
on these mighty occasions. On the piano-stool I felt myself safe, and I
sang. In the middle of my song some heavy person leaning against a
shaky bookcase uprooted it, and it fell with a crash on the floor. I
halted midway in my song. People rushing in from the supper-room asked,
"What is the matter?" "Negative," answered Miss Loring, quick as
thought, at which they all laughed. Mr. Brooks, to cover the confusion,
said in a loud voice, "This is not the first time Madame Hegermann has
brought down the house." There was more laughter, and I sat down again
at the piano and sang "Tender and True," an exquisite song written by
Mrs. Lincoln about a young soldier killed during the war, who wore to
the last a knot of blue ribbon his sweetheart had given him.

M. de Schloezer is bubbling over with joy, for he has the famous
pianist, von Buelow, staying with him at the German Legation. He says
von Buelow is most amiable about playing, and plays whenever he is
asked. His technique is wonderful and perfect. The ladies in Washington
are wild over him, and figuratively throw themselves at his feet. He is
giving two concerts here, and everybody has taken tickets. M. de
Schloezer gave last evening one of his memorable dinners, followed by
music. I know two people who enjoyed it--Schloezer and myself. Schloezer
was going to ask Julian Sturgis, but Julian Sturgis had on some former
occasion crossed his legs and looked distrait or had shown in some such
trivial manner that he was bored, which so exasperated Schloezer that he
barred him out, and invited Mr. Bayard instead, who perhaps loved music
less, but showed no outward signs of boredom.

Von Buelow is not only a wonderful pianist, but a very clever man of the
world. He sent me a book written by Wagner about music and wrote on the
first page "_Voici un livre qui vous interessera. De la part du mari de
la femme de l'auteur_." Clever, isn't it? You know that Madame Wagner
is the daughter of Liszt. She ran away from von Buelow in order to marry
Wagner.

Buelow dedicated a song to me, called "Adieu." It is pretty enough to
sing when he plays the accompaniment, but otherwise I do not care for
it. I sang it after dinner, and every one said it was charming, but I
had the feeling that the ladies were more interested in my toilette
than in Buelow's song. I don't blame them, for my dress _is_ lovely
(Worth called it "_un reve_"), but I fancy I look like a Corot autumn
sunset reflected in a stagnant lily-pond. It is of light salmon-colored
satin, with a tulle overskirt and clusters of water-lilies here and
there. I could have bought a real Corot with the same money.

Mr. Blaine, who is at present Speaker of the House, and Mr. Roscoe
Conkling, one of the Senators from New York, are the two most prominent
members of the Republican party, but are personally deadly enemies.

Mr. Blaine is an excellent talker, very popular with the ladies. In a
drawing-room, he is generally found in a corner, quoting poetry (a
specialty of his) to some handsome lady. He knows all the poetry in the
world! They say that he is the best Speaker the House has ever known;
it is quite wonderful to see the rapidity with which he counts the Ayes
and Noes, pointing at each voter with the handle of his club. He grasps
a situation in an instant, and gives a quick retort when he thinks it
is deserved. Roscoe Conkling is quite a different type. He is very
dignified and pompous--perhaps a little theatrical; not at all a
society man, and, though he may be less vain than Mr. Blaine, he has
the appearance of being more so.

The foreign Ministers have the "right of the floor," which means they
have the right to enter the House of Representatives when they like. On
one great occasion a member of the House offered M. de Schloezer his
seat, which happened to be between two members who suddenly got up and
began the most heated discussion over Schloezer's head. He found the
situation dangerous and wished himself elsewhere. He said he felt like
the Biblical baby when the two mothers were wrangling before the great
Solomon. However, the storm spent itself in words, and fortunately the
disputants did not come to blows.

Johan says he was very much struck the first time he went to Congress
by seeing two opposing members, after bitterly attacking each other for
hours, walk quietly away arm-in-arm, obviously the best of friends.

A little incident which occurred in the Senate amused Johan very much.
Roscoe Conkling begged a colleague sitting next to him to read out loud
something he wished to quote in his speech while he paused to draw a
breath. The colleague read, and Conkling, without a word of thanks,
took back the book; but when a colored man brought him a cup of tea
(which he always takes during his speeches) he stood up and in a very
loud voice, making a solemn bow, said, "I thank you, sir!"

I call that coquetting with the gallery, don't you?

We have been invited to take a trip to California by the railroad
company. We can transport ourselves to Omaha; then all our expenses are
to be defrayed by the lavish company. We have all accepted. Who could
refuse such a tempting invitation?


CALIFORNIA, _Spring, 1877_.

Dear M.,--The rendezvous was to be at the third station before reaching
Omaha, where we really did all meet. On arriving at the next one, some
of the party asked the conductor how long the train would stop, and he
answered, "Twenty minutes"; so off they started on foot to see the
town. We wise ones stayed in the train, which also started off, leaving
our truants behind, but their bags remained with us.

When they returned to the station, before the twenty minutes had
expired, they found the train gone! They hired a special train at great
expense and delay, hoping to overtake us at Omaha. But before they
reached Omaha an official appeared and said that he had received a
telegram from headquarters at Chicago, acknowledging that the conductor
had been at fault in starting a little earlier than he had said;
therefore the company felt itself responsible and insisted on refunding
the money the extra train had cost.

Where else but in America are mistakes so quickly and nicely remedied?
Perhaps in this instance it could be explained by the fact that one of
them was a prominent member of the Republican party, and the other no
less than the Assistant Secretary of State. We were glad to receive our
penitent wanderers, who promised to be more careful another time. We
slept at Omaha, which is the jumping-off place, and to-morrow morning
early we are going to "jump." We have already traveled seventeen
hundred and fifty miles, and have not yet begun our real trip. Omaha
has still wooden sidewalks and muddy roads; the post-office,
school-house, and churches are all built on a grand scale, and the
streets laid out in squares and broad avenues. Probably they have
already designs for a grand-opera house. One can see FUTURE written all
over it.

Mr. Cadwalader had bought in Philadelphia the best comestibles that it
could provide, and had them stowed away in big hampers and put in the
baggage-car. When the train stopped an hour for food, which it did
three times a day, we preferred to spend that hour looking about us and
(as Mr. Kasson said) stretching our legs rather than going into the
overcrowded eating-rooms, which were reeking of food, loud talk, and
ravenous passengers. The stations were always low wooden buildings with
a piazza; sometimes no other houses were to be seen. On wooden boxes
were enthroned the loafers, who must have ridden miles just to see
passengers get in and out of the train. To show how kind these rough
people must be when they are not engaged in killing people, chickens
foraged about between their huge boots, and I saw a dog quietly asleep
within an inch of a kick. As soon as the train started we went into the
baggage-car and, seated about on the trunks, enjoyed our delicious
feast.

We occupied almost one entire parlor-car. There were only two extra
seats, and those were filled by two men surrounded by a mountain of
newspapers and magazines of all kinds. I said, nodding toward one of
these, "What a handsome man that is!"

"Do you know who it is?" asked Mr. Cadwalader.

"No. How should I?"

"That is the famous scout, Buffalo Bill."

"Really!" I exclaimed. "I had fancied him quite different from that. He
looks like the pictures of Charles the First. His eyes are so soft, and
he has such lovely brown curls and a could-not-hurt-a-fly look about
him."

"Well," said Mr. Cadwalader, "he has killed more men than he can count
on his fingers when he tries to go to sleep."

"I can't imagine it," I said, gazing with admiration at Buffalo Bill's
fine and kind face and splendid figure. "His friend does not look so
amiable."

"I should think _not_. That is the celebrated Mr. Holmes of Texas. He
is a terror in this part of the world."

"He looks it," I said. "See all the pistols he has about him. I can see
one in his coat pocket, and one in his vest pocket, and..."

"And many under his coat which you can't see."

Just at that moment the "terror" got up, and, lo! a pistol fell out of
his clothing on to the floor. Fortunately, it did not go off, but it
frightened us almost out of our senses (the ladies, of course). Buffalo
Bill picked up the weapon and handed it back to Mr. Holmes, who put it
quietly in his pocket, seeming rather abashed.

Buffalo Bill and his friend walked down the middle of the car, and we
were somewhat agitated when he stopped in front of Johan and said in a
soft, cooing voice, "Would you take a drink with me, sir?"

We gasped when we saw Johan shake his head and say politely with a
smile, "No, thank you." We expected a volley of pistol-shots and the
speedy wiping out of us all, but Buffalo Bill merely gave Johan an
inquiring look and a tired but sarcastic smile.

Mr. Cadwalader said, hurriedly, to Johan, "Go, for Heaven's sake!"

Johan hastened to follow the good advice and Buffalo Bill, and said
with diplomatic artifice, "On second thoughts, sir, I will not refuse
your invitation, as I am a little thirsty." On which the three
gentlemen went out together.

Johan came back refreshed and radiant. Never had he seen or talked to
such a delightful person. Buffalo Bill had offered him some of his own
favorite brand of whisky, which Johan found very good.

Johan asked B.B. later, being on more familiar terms, "Would you have
been offended if I had refused to drink with you?"

B.B. answered, "If I had not seen that you were a foreigner I should
not have liked it," meaning, I suppose, bloody murder and sudden death.

B.B. said the reason why he had chosen Johan out of the rest to drink
with was that Johan looked so like the Grand-Duke Alexis, for whom he
had been a guide on the prairies some years ago.

General Taylor, son of the former President, joined us at Cheyenne.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have just passed thirty snow-sheds at Rock Creek, and have seen some
wolves and some antelopes roaming about. We looked for buffaloes, but
the only buffalo we saw was the mild Bill, who sat quietly reading a
magazine, looking at us with his soft-brown eyes.

We were very high up in the Rocky Mountains. All around us was snow,
and the view of the blue mountains, the tops of which were quite white,
looked beautiful in the distance. There were some Indians on horseback
drawn up in file as the train went by. They had all their war-paint on,
were covered with picturesque blankets, and their feather head-dresses
reached over their horses' backs; they had buckskin leggings covered
with beads, which made them look very picturesque. They looked stolidly
and indifferently at us while we stared at them admiringly from the car
windows. The prairie-dogs looked like squirrels "sitting up so cute,"
as Miss C. said, "dodging in and out of their holes."

At one of the stations a whole band of Indians climbed into the train
with guttural war-whoops and invaded the baggage-car. We thought we
were being "held up," but they behaved themselves very well. The
thought of Buffalo Bill, to say nothing of Mr. Holmes of Texas with his
pistols, reassured us; and the only difference that the presence of the
Indians made to us was that we avoided the baggage-car for our midday
meal.

At another station a quantity of loafers, mostly Indians, smelling
dreadfully of whisky, surrounded us and begged for money. Among them an
old Indian woman who looked like the witch of Endor (they said she was
over a hundred years old) stretched out a long, bony, orang-outang arm,
and when we gave her a few cents the old thing actually grinned with
joy. It was painful to see this creature with the accumulated look of
greed on her withered old brown face.

Our baggage-master always kept his hat on, slouched at a tremendous
angle. We wondered how it could keep on unless it was pinned to his
ear. Mr. Kasson begged us to pretend not to notice it, because the man
was very sensitive on the subject. He told us his story. The man had
been fishing with some friends, near an Indian settlement, when the
Indians attacked them and killed the others outright. The
baggage-master saved his life by "playing 'possum" (as Mr. K. called
pretending to be dead), and the Indians scalped him with a broken tin
can. If he had made the slightest movement they would have despatched
him. How horrible! We wondered if it could be true!

To-morrow "the distinguished party" mentioned in the paper are going to
arrive at Salt Lake City. I will write from there unless I am snatched
up by some craving widower, if there exists such a thing as a
widower--or by some husband with too few wives.

       *       *       *       *       *

A wild desire possessed us to sit on the cow-catcher in order to get a
better view of the canon. The engineer refused at first, but gave in at
last. He said it was most dangerous.

"You might," he added, "scoop up a Chinaman, or some animal straying on
the rails."

"How exciting!" we cried. "Who but a chosen few have the luck to scoop
up a live Chinaman?"

Johan had the worst place, and therefore the least chance of getting
the Chinaman. He sat up on a little iron seat attached to the boiler,
holding on to the piston for dear life, and every time the whistle went
off--and it went off very often--he nearly did the same. The fireman
was obliged every other minute to whistle to frighten the cows away
from the track. We others were more fortunate, having only to balance
ourselves and clutch our neighbor. The least jar would have capsized us
all. The Chinamen working on the railroad gazed at us in wonder; but we
did not scoop any of them in, nor did we get any cows. The long tunnels
were nasty and damp, and we were glad to breathe the fresh air again
after having passed through them. After a ride of half an hour we got
off our cow-catcher at the next station, feeling rather proud of the
_bravoure_ we had shown, but, all the same, thankful to be safe and
sound.

Salt Lake City is such a pretty place, so beautifully situated. The
great mountains capped with snow surround it and send the clearest
mountain streams down through the streets. No town could be better
drained than this one.

The lake is eighty miles away, and salted to exaggeration. Out of four
quarts of water one can obtain one quart of salt. We thought of taking
a bath in it and being sent home pickled and cured--of traveling.

We met on the train a Colonel Hooker, citizen of Utah. He introduced
himself to us and gave us free passes on the railroad where the Mormon
line branches off; so he must be some one of importance.

He telegraphed to announce our arrival at the hotel, and we flattered
ourselves that all Mormondom would be agog. We did not, however, notice
any great animation as we drove up to the hotel, and felt rather hurt
that we did not create more of a sensation.

We had introductory letters to Brigham Young. The next day being
Sunday, we went to the Tabernacle to attend their religious service.
Happily, Brigham Young had returned the night before from St. Joseph,
where he had sojourned with the "faithful." The Tabernacle is an
enormous building which, we were told, can hold fourteen thousand
people. It was filled to overflowing. The seating for the members was
arranged in a semicircle of tiers, the minor elders sitting in the
lowest seats. As the tiers mounted there were fewer seats and therefore
fewer elders, and so on, until the highest point was reached, where the
high priest--Brigham Young--sat alone in his glory. On the opposite
side was the magnificent organ built in Boston. When they began
building the Tabernacle, gigantic as they intended it to be, they did
not know that the organ which had been ordered from Boston (probably
wrong measurements had been sent) would be bigger than the Tabernacle.
When it arrived they found that, instead of the organ having been made
for the Tabernacle, the Tabernacle would have to be made for the organ.

To celebrate the Prophet's return they had the communion service.
People all stayed in their pews, and the bread, cut in good healthy
pieces, was handed about in bread-baskets; after which pitchers with
ice-water were passed, and the water was poured in goblets, which were
placed before the people. Brigham Young gave his flock a tremendous
rating with lowering eyebrows and a thunder-cloud in each eye, and the
flock trembled as one man. He said that during his absence they had not
behaved themselves as they ought to have done. They had not only been
found swearing and drunk, but they had mingled breath with the
Gentiles. We feared he referred to Colonel Hooker, whose breath had
mingled--the finger of wrath seemed to point that way. We felt very
sorry for our companion and sat huddled together, a humiliated group of
Gentiles, trembling to meet the glance of the wrathful Prophet.

After the service we were all received at Brigham Young's house, where
he seemed to be expecting us. He looked like any old Vermont farmer,
with his white fringe of beard under his fat, puffy cheeks, and his
thick, jet-black eyebrows over his keen eyes. He talked to us about his
mission in this world and told us about the hardships his people had
borne when they came to St. Joseph, which was the first place they
"struck" after their tramp over the desert, where most of the men died.
It was there he received a mysterious message from on high telling him
that bigamy would be pardonable under the circumstances. He told Johan
that the Danes were some of his best subjects. Johan made his most
diplomatic bow, as if he thought that this compliment to his nation
ought to be acknowledged. We heard after that Brigham Young had said
this because the Danes were known to take the most wives and ask no
questions.

It seems that B.Y. is almost a widower now, poor man. He has only
twenty-seven wives. Amelia reigns supreme just now; the others sit
forlorn in rocking-chairs in their empty parlors, biting their nails
and chewing the bitter gum of envy.

Johan thought we ought perhaps to demand an official "audience" of
Amelia, but the others repulsed this inspiration. It was amusing to
walk by Brigham Young's big house, a long rambling building with
innumerable doors. Each wife has an establishment of her own,
consisting of parlor, bedroom, and a front door, the key of which she
keeps in her pocket.

We walked about after luncheon, and Colonel Hooker drove us through the
streets and up the hill to show us the view, which was magnificent
beyond words.

We left Salt Lake City next day with regret.

It was telegraphed to Reno that we were to arrive there, to be treated,
escorted, and transported to Virginia City free of charge. They began
the treating by giving us an excellent breakfast at the hotel. They
asked us ladies if we wanted to go down the shaft with the gentlemen to
see the famous silver-mine. We cried "Yes" with enthusiasm.

A dressing-room was put at our disposal, and the clothes we were to
wear were neatly placed in piles. There were miners' jackets, miner's
leather trousers, and felt hats. We chose the suits best fitting our
different anatomies, and dressed. My choice fell on a boy's rather
clean suit. We felt very rakish in the dressing-room, but very sheepish
when we joined the gentlemen outside. In going down the shaft we had to
stand on the platform of the cage, which had neither railing nor
support of any kind. We went down thirteen hundred feet and stepped out
into the alleys of the shining ore. After walking for what seemed
miles, they showed us a hole and a shaft. We looked down a hundred feet
deeper, where the men who were working were almost naked. The
thermometer was fabulously high. There was a tank of cold water where
the men who worked could plunge every two minutes out of the five. The
air beginning to be rather oppressive, we requested to be taken up to
our mother Earth. How glad we were to breathe the fresh air. A bath was
awaiting us, and when we became ladies again we were taken all over the
works, and saw the process of making silver bricks out of the walls we
had been walking between, the beating of the metal, the sifting and
weighing, and finally the silver bricks. They have 2,000 men working
day and night. They are 1,400 feet below the surface now, and hope to
go lower. The "pocket" is 175 feet long, but the poor stockholders'
pockets are empty, for all that. (I am a stockholder and ought to
know.)

Each lady was presented with a bag of silver ore-rocks they seemed to
me. My bag had "500 dollars" written on it, in fun, I am sure. I left
it at the hotel, as it was too heavy to carry.

We left Virginia City that evening for Carson City and slept there,
glad to shake off the silver dust from our weary feet. The next day at
7 A.M. two carriages, one with four horses and the other with two, were
before the door, and we drove up the mountain, took the little
narrow-gage railroad which is there to carry the logs down to the lake.
Sitting on the front logs, we rode down the mountain. The big beams of
timber are brought to the mines in order to prop up the places where
the ore has been taken out. These logs do a lot of traveling. They are
cut on the other side of Lake Tahoe, dragged over the lake by a tug,
sawed the right length by a sawing-mill, then carried up the mountain
by this railroad and floated down by means of a wood trough, three feet
wide, for twenty-two miles to another railroad, thence to Virginia
City.

A steam-launch was waiting for us, and we cruised about this lovely
lake, which is of the bluest water and the greenest shadows you ever
saw. One sees a hundred feet down; the water is as clear as crystal. J.
talked fishing with the pilot, who promised to take him out fishing
with him. He caught a beautiful rainbow-trout (as they are called here)
from the launch. When he gets home he will tell you how big the biggest
fish was he lost.

We arrived at San Francisco at two o'clock. One of the men brought me
some splendid cherries, big as plums, and Johan's consul met us on the
ferryboat. This last was in a great hurry to get back to his home, as
he did not know whether it was a boy or a girl.

We were driven to the Palace Hotel, which is very fine. Each of us had
a complete apartment, _salon_, bed, and bathroom. Having been five days
and nights in the train, you may imagine we were tired. I was not only
tired, but dizzy and glad to go to bed.

Senator Sharon, who owns this hotel, sent us word begging us not to
make any engagement for Saturday and Sunday next, as he intends
inviting us to his country place. No bill is to be presented to us
here. We are not expected to pay for anything. We are his guests, and,
strange to say, not one of us knows him, excepting, of course, Mr.
Kasson.

The drive out to the cliffs is enchanting. I had never seen a live
sea-lion before, and here were thousands of them, barking, diving in
the water and wriggling out of it, and basking in the sun on the rocks.

General McDowell took us out for an early tour the next day in his
steam-launch. At five o'clock there was a dense fog covering
everything, but suddenly it lifted as we approached. We made the circle
of the Angel Island, then landed in a paradise of flowers. I don't
think I ever saw such flowers as these. The heliotropes looked as big
as cauliflowers, and I saw an ambitious and enormous tomato resembling
a pumpkin, on the top of a veranda. The fuchsias were as large as
dinner-bells, and when the sun rose over the bay no words can describe
how beautiful it was--like one of Turner's pictures, only more
exaggerated.

I think if I am going to be an angel, as I certainly am, instead of
going to Paris when I die, I should prefer to go to this angelic
island.

We ladies were invited by a well-known Chinese tea merchant to a
Chinese feast. The table looked rather bare, having only a teacup and a
plate before each person. The cups are double, the smaller one being
placed on the other to keep in the tea-leaves. After drinking the pale
water in which the leaves have soaked, we were served the viands. Each
dish is brought in separately and put on the table. Every one of them
is a _ragout_ of some kind. The Chinaman dives in with his chopsticks,
and aims for the best piece he sees. Everything is eaten from the same
plate--indeed, why should the plate be changed, since everything tastes
and looks alike? I waited in vain for birds'-nest pudding, but I could
probably not have distinguished it from the other _ragouts_ if it had
been there.

The gentlemen went off on a purely masculine tour, with a policeman in
tow. They wanted to see opium-dens and slums. They never told us a word
of what they did see--the mean things! Philip V.R., accompanied by an
American policeman, took us to a Chinese theater in the evening. I was
so nervous I hardly dared to look about me.

The dusky mass of uncanny Chinamen with their shaved heads and their
black pigtails sitting underneath us in the parquet was not pleasing,
and the stage was merely a platform where some privileged of the
audience sat unconcernedly. The scenery was--screens. How easy to
shift. We had the policeman of course; but, though he kept a vigilant
eye on us to prevent anything from happening in the way of an assault,
as frequently happens here, the idea of fire frightened us to such a
degree that our one wish was to get away. The upper gallery in which
our box was situated was so low that you could touch the ceiling with
your hand. The gas-jets had no globes, and the flickering flames
suggested everything that was horrible. If there had been a fire no one
could possibly have been saved. We felt no interest in the play. It had
begun a month ago; the hero had not yet advanced further than his
childhood. Perhaps next year when he grows up the play will be more
interesting.

Nougats and other sweets, which looked as if they had circulated since
the hero of the play was born, were passed about to the spectators. We
were glad to reach the hotel in safety and bid our nice American
policeman good night.


SAN FRANCISCO, _May, 1877_.

My dear Aunt,--The letters of introduction we brought to San Francisco
have already procured us many invitations.

We were at a dinner last night, which Governor Stanford gave us. He has
only twenty-five millions--hardly worth mentioning. Each of us ladies
had a millionaire to take us in to dinner. Mine was most amiable. He
passed all the other millionaires _en revue_; I wish I could remember
all he said about them, but I only have a sort of vague recollection
that every millionaire had come to San Francisco with only fifty cents
in his pocket, and that all the millionaires' wives had gone, in former
days, about in the streets of San Francisco selling milk or thread and
needles. I was not spared the history of any of them. Mr. S. himself
told me that he had made his fortune first in hosiery, and then he
invested his money in stocks.

There were thirty people present, divided thus: distinguished party,
ten; millionaires, twenty.

Every conceivable bird, alive or mechanical, was heard during this
repast; besides, there were musical boxes at each end of the room,
which made a tremendous confusion. I know to a cent how much this house
cost--one million two hundred thousand dollars, my neighbor told me. It
is a great, white, wooden, square house with a veranda around it,
perched up on a sandy hill without any garden and without a view of any
kind, and certainly without the least beauty.

The picture-gallery, which really has some fine pictures, cost four
hundred thousand dollars.

They had had Italian workmen brought especially from Italy to put down
the mosaic pavement in the hall, which was huge. We wandered through
all the rooms, each one in a different style and epoch, and all in bad
taste. I looked about in the so-called ballroom for a piano, and was
surprised at not seeing one there; but I noticed several in the other
rooms, decorated in the style of the room. They were in every color of
wood and charged with brass ornaments. Evidently they were there _as
ornaments, not to be used_. Some one must have said to Mr. S., "You
must have a piano." And he must have answered: "Certainly. Of course we
must. Let us have one in each room, by all means."

The servants all had mustaches and hair curled with tongs. I saw the
eyebrows of my party go up at an angle when the servants offered them
Johannesburg in gold cups, and still higher up when they saw the
mustached waiters pouring white wine in glasses which were previously
filled with red wine and alternated indiscriminately.

We were taken up-stairs to see Mrs. S.'s bedroom. It was worthy of an
empress, having point-lace coverlids, satin down quilts trimmed with
real Valenciennes.

What struck me the most in all this splendor was that so much money
should have been expended in furnishing a perishable wooden palace
which any tuppenny earthquake or fire could demolish in a moment.
Another thing I noticed was that, though everything else was so
handsome and costly, the glass and porcelain were of the most ordinary
kind.

We enjoyed ourselves immensely and compared notes when we reached the
hotel. Barring our individual millionaire, we hardly spoke to the
others. We were simply insignificant meteors passing hastily in their
midst.

Well, we went to the Senator's country place. A carriage with four
horses was waiting for us at the station, and we drove up in fine style
to the millionaire's mansion, where some Irish servants with baggy
trousers, tumbled cravats, and no gloves opened wide the doors,
ushering us into a large hall, where a gentleman whom we guessed was
our host came forward to greet us.

We were glad that we were going at last to make his acquaintance. He is
a millionaire and a Senator. That is all I can say about him at
present, except that he is extremely hospitable. He did not know one of
us from the other, except Kasson. He knew we were a "distinguished
party" because the papers said so. When we were being dealt out to our
rooms there was great confusion. Senator Sharon had an ancient _dame de
compagnie_--the head priestess--who made it a particular point to
dispose of Miss Clymer before any of the rest of us. She said, "Which
of these gents is your husband?" At which Miss C. blushed and found no
other answer than, "_None_." J. and I finally secured the same room,
because when Mr. S. in a moment of despair said, with an
all-comprehensive wave of his hand, "Gentlemen, please take your
wives," J. and I paired off. The Senator did not notice this little
detail, for when dinner was announced he said to J., "Will you please
take that young lady in to dinner?" pointing to me. Johan explained in
which relation he stood to the young lady. The Senator was not in the
least surprised, and merely answered: "Is that so? Well, then, take
some one else."

A semi-millionaire took me in. He told me all his early life of poverty
and threw in various reminiscences. I never knew the like of
millionaires for telling you of their former miseries. They always do!
When the ancient dame saw Mr. Kasson and me talking after dinner, she
said to us with a kittenish smile, "Husbands and wives mustn't talk
together." Hopeless! We did not even try to explain. The evening was
forlorn. There were many dreary drawing-rooms, horribly furnished, but
brilliantly lighted. A brawling musical box was supposed to enliven us.
We talked in that desultory way that one does with people whom you meet
for the first time and never want to meet again. Some of the
millionaires hovered among us, but failed to impress us either with
their past or present fortunes. Oh, joy! Bedtime came at last.


_May 17th._

I have just had time to scribble these few words before the post comes
for my letter.

We have been driving about, admiring landscapes, one another, every one
else, millionaires! Everything that money can do to spoil Nature has
been done here, but Nature will have her own way in the end; and in
spite of the millionaires' millions and the incongruity of everything,
we cannot but admire this beautiful and wonderful country.

Before our departure the Senator actually knew us one from the other.
He said to me, struggling with my names, "Well, Mrs. _Lindermann
Hegercrone_, I am very sorry you are going."

       *       *       *       *       *

We started on visit No. 2--this time to Mr. Lathrop's beautiful place
in Menlo Park. The grounds are perfectly laid out. Flowers of all kinds
arranged in parterres, clusters of trees such as I had never seen
before, roses as big as sunflowers, and the beautiful sparkling lake in
front of the window and the blue mountains in the distance, made the
place a perfect paradise. The stables were extra fine, the floor and
ceiling being inlaid in two kinds of wood found only in California. The
room where the bridles were kept had such beautiful polished panels
that they shone like mirrors. There must have been harnesses for twelve
horses hanging on the walls. Mr. L. gave me a box made of the thirty
different kinds of wood found in California.

The following day we drove with four horses to Mr. Rathbone's, who also
has a gorgeous place. His picture-gallery is worthy of a Rothschild.

       *       *       *       *       *

We left San Francisco for Los Angeles; the directors of the road put
everything at our disposition as usual. We had a _salon_, bed, and
dressing-rooms in one car, and Miss Cadwalader and Miss Clymer had
similar ones in another. There were kitchen, dining and reading rooms
for the whole party, which had now grown to be sixteen in number,
Senator Conover and his wife and some officers going with General
Taylor to Fort Yuma having joined us.

We went to Santa Monica, which is the fashionable watering-place of
these parts. Here we drove on the beach, which is thirty miles long. A
gentleman of Los Angeles was attached to our party and showed us the
sights. We saw all kinds of ranches--orange, grape, and bee ranches.
Then we drove to a Mexican settlement, where they gave us a gorgeous
dinner, really worthy of more time than we could give it, for we had to
leave at five o'clock for Los Angeles, where we dined again.

The next day we started off on another tour. We drove through
twenty-five miles of banana, pineapple, pomegranate groves and
vineyards. We tasted all the wines and fruit-syrups, and drank native
port and champagne. We had a special train and arrived at Merced the
next morning, to start on our Yosemite Valley tour.


_May 20th._

Just our luck! The first rain for four months pours down to-day. We
drove, nevertheless, from 7 A.M. until 6 P.M. (only stopping for our
meals), over barren, sandy, and desolate country. We saw whole flocks
of sheep dead and dying by thousands from want of care and drought. We
(seven and the driver) were packed away in an open three-seated wagon
with four horses, and drove over the dreariest road one can imagine. We
passed continually places where the ground was all upturned, evidently
either worked-out or abandoned gold-diggings. It was very pathetic when
one thought of the work, time, and hopes wasted there. At twelve
o'clock we reached Hunter's (the name of the hotel), and then we drove
over more dismal plains still to a hotel called Clark's. It must
originally have been a lovely place, but now it is spoiled by the
gold-diggings. Here we stayed all night in a very rough kind of tavern.
During the night we heard the howls of wolves and jackals very near the
hotel, which was not pleasant. We started at five o'clock the next
morning in a big, open _char-a-bancs_, and went through the most
beautiful forest. The trees are all from one hundred and fifty to two
hundred feet high, and from six to seven feet in diameter; hardly any
smaller trees among them. And such wonderful ferns! And the ice-plants!
This has a brilliant red stalk and flowers coming from under the snow.
We were so high up that there was snow on the ground all about us. The
trees are perfectly beautiful. The mansanilla, the branches of which
are like red coral, and the leaves the lightest of greens, the
California laurel, and many others of which I do not know the names,
were too beautiful. The white pine has cones one and a half feet long.

We drove up for four hours through the forest, until we reached the
height of five thousand feet. Here was a magnificent view, as you may
imagine. Then we began going down. That was something dreadful! The
driver, with his six horses, drove at a diabolical rate, one foot on
the brake, the other planted against the dashboard to keep his balance,
holding a tremendously long whip in one hand and the six reins in the
other. I shut my eyes and said my prayers. I cannot find words to
describe my emotion when I saw the precipice on one side and the
mountain on the other, especially when we came to a sharp corner and
looked in front, when we actually seemed to be going into space.

We arrived exhausted at the Yosemite Valley, where the feeling of
repose at being on flat ground and driving through those green pastures
surrounded by the six-thousand-feet-high mountains was delicious. We
found the hotel large, comfortable, with a good many other visitors.
The _table d'hote_ dinner was well attended. Outside the hotel we spied
an Indian lurking about. They told us that he was the last of the
Yosemite tribe; he boasted that he had never spoken to a white man. I
am sure no white man would ever care to speak to such an
uncouth-looking tramp as he was, dressed in ragged clothes and wearing
shabby boots, playing hide-and-seek in the most undignified manner, and
utterly unworthy of the traditional Cooper Indian.

J. had time to put in a little fishing. The last of the Yosemites
dodged behind the trees, watching him and probably envying him the lone
minnow which was brought back in triumph.

The next morning we mounted horses and donkeys and rode up to Cloud's
Rest to see the glorious view over the whole Yosemite range. Our horses
picked their way most carefully over the stones and water puddles. J.
had a donkey who pretended that he was weak in all his four legs. When
he went up the mountain his fore legs stumbled at every moment,
inviting J. to get off and lead him, and when he came down the mountain
his back legs gave way and he sat down, so that J. could not help
getting off. The result was that J. had to lead him both up and down
and could have dispensed with his services entirely.

The Bride's Veil falls six thousand feet in a straight fall, becoming
only a tiny spray and a fine mist before it reaches the rocks at the
bottom.

Bright and early the next morning we drove to see Mirror Lake, which
was really like a mirror. The air was deliciously fresh and fragrant
with spring flowers. We bought some photographs and turned them upside
down. The lake and mountains were so mirrored that you could not see
which was top or bottom.

The next day being Sunday, we thought we would stay quietly in Yosemite
Valley, enjoying the rest and beauty of our surroundings. The hotel was
good, and the place was enticing. Here it was that the funniest thing
happened we had yet encountered. A deputation of one knocked at our
door at an early hour this morning. We had just finished a plain Sunday
breakfast of hash, fried potatoes, corn cakes, griddle-cakes, and syrup
fresh from the white-pine trees. But I am digressing, and the man is
still knocking at our door. J. opened it and let him in. With many hums
and haws he said that he had been sent to ask J. if he would read the
prayers and preach a sermon in the drawing-room of the hotel, "its
being Sunday and you being a minister."

J. was a little aghast, not exactly understanding, while I was shaking
with laughter at the other end of the room, and would not have
interfered for worlds for fear of losing a word of the dialogue.

"I read the gospel!" cried J.

"Yes, sir. You're a minister, ain't yer?"

"Well, yes, I am, but not the kind you mean."

The little man said, condescendingly: "We are not particular as to
sect. Whether you're a _Baptist_ or _Methodist_, it makes no difference
as long as you will preach."

J. had difficulty in explaining in his best English that preaching was
not a specialty of his. He did not add that all he did in that line was
to administer occasionally a mild _savon_ which he kept only for family
use when we washed our linen at home.

The abashed ambassador left us, shaking his head, and evidently
wondering why a minister, whether from Denmark or Lapland, couldn't
preach, any more than a doctor who was a doctor couldn't practise.

You may be sure that this episode gave us plenty to laugh about to last
all that beautiful day in the valley of Yosemite.

We stopped there altogether three days, and were lost in admiration and
wonder at the beauty of everything. The greatest wonder the gentlemen
met was the item on the bill for blacking boots, which was fifteen
dollars. They paid without a murmur, because they wanted to tell their
friends about it when they got home.

We took our leave of beautiful Yosemite Valley, throwing a disdainful
look at the _boots_, and we saw the last of the Yosemites peeping at us
from behind the shrubbery. We mounted the stage-coach which was to take
us to Mariposa Grove. We drove up the mountain all right, but when the
summit was reached the coachman began to whip up his six horses and
started galloping them down and turning those corners in such a
reckless manner that our hair stood on end; and in answer to our gentle
words reminding him that there were human beings in the coach he said,
coolly:

"Oh, I guess it'll be all right, but this is my first experience." On a
sharp turn of the road we suddenly saw a great white pine about six
feet in diameter lying right across our path. It had evidently fallen
in the night. Fortunately, the driver saw it and managed to pull up his
six horses in time to avoid a catastrophe.

How in the world should we ever get over this obstacle? All our
projects would be disarranged if there came a single unexpected delay.
A _conseil de guerre_ was held, every one talking at once, and it was
decided that the driver should unhitch the horses, and that each lady
should hold two of them, while the men were to look about to find
timber enough to improvise an inclined plane on both sides of this
enormous tree-trunk, so that the coach could be hauled up on one side
and dragged down on the other. The gentlemen managed to get the
carriage over, then they led the horses over, and lastly we ladies were
piloted across.

After a delay of an hour we were able to drive to Mariposa Hotel, where
we found eight saddle-horses waiting for us. It was all most exciting,
and we enjoyed every moment of the ride through the most beautiful
forest in the world. The ordinary trees of this forest would be
gigantic in any other part of the globe (six to seven feet in
diameter), but when we "struck" the first big tree I almost fell off my
horse with wonder. This tree was four hundred feet high and about
thirty-three feet in diameter. I knew beforehand that they were
monstrously big and high, but I did not know that they had such a
beautiful color--a red cinnamon. The first branch was a hundred feet
from the ground and six feet in diameter. In the Mariposa Grove there
are three hundred of these giants. In one tree, which was partly
hollowed out by fire, we seven people sat on horseback. That gives you
an idea! We saw a carriage full of travelers drive through a hollow
fallen tree as if through a tunnel. One must see these to imagine what
they are like. The "Old Giant" was the most imposing and grandest of
them all--thirty-seven feet in diameter, and high! One got dizzy trying
to see the top, which is really not the top. The winds up there do not
allow themselves to be encroached upon, and the young shoots are nipped
off as soon as they appear.

We had to sleep at Mariposa Grove (Clark's Hotel) in the evening. We
talked of nothing else but the wonderful trees until some one asked me
if I was too tired to sing. I was willing enough. There was, in fact, a
piano in the parlor--an old, yellow-keyed out-of-tune Chickering which
had seen better days somewhere--and a spiral stool very rickety on its
legs. There were wax flowers under dusty globes. Though no one of our
party cared much for music, and the surroundings were anything but
inspiring, still I longed to sing.

I sang a lot of things, and my tired audience no doubt thought I had
done enough and ought to go to bed, which I did, after having received
their thanks and seeing the heads of the servant-girls and various
other heads and forms disappear from the veranda.


_May 25th._

We left Clark's early in the morning without having made a second trip
to the trees, as we wanted to, but the time was nearing when John
Cadwalader was to leave us for his trip around the world. We were
already too late as it was, and if anything should happen like another
Gulliver across our downward path he would lose the steamer which
starts from San Francisco in three days. I sat in the favorite seat
next to the driver and waved a long farewell to the beautiful forest
which I shall probably never see again.

Here another funny thing happened. Everything funny seems to happen at
the end of our trip. The driver (a new one, not the one of yesterday)
after a long silence, and having changed a piece of straw he was
chewing from one side of his mouth to the other many times, made up his
mind to speak. I did not speak first, though I longed to, as I am told
it is not wise to speak to the man at the wheel, especially when the
wheel happens to be a California coach and six horses.

"A beautiful day," the driver ventured.

"Yes," I said, "it is one of the most beautiful days I have ever seen."

He, after a long pause, said, "Was you in the hotel parlor last night?"

"Yes," I said, "I was."

"Did you hear that lady sing?"

"Yes, I did. Did you?"

"You bet I did. I was standing with the rest of the folks out on the
piazza."

How curious it would be to hear a wild Western unvarnished,
unprejudiced judgment of myself! "What did you think of her singing?" I
asked my companion.

He replied by asking, "Have you ever heard a nightingale, ma'm?"

"Oh yes, many times," I answered, wondering what he would say next.

"Wal, I guess some of them nightingales will have to take a back seat
when she sings."

I actually blushed with pride. I considered this was the greatest
compliment I had ever had.

We arrived safely, without any adventure, at Sacramento, where John
Cadwalader left us, and the rest of the party continued as far as
Chicago together, where we bade each other good-by, each going his
different way.


CAMBRIDGE, _June, 1877_.

My dear Sister,--Sarah Bernhardt is playing in Boston now, much to
Boston's delight. I went to see her at the Tremont House, where she is
staying. She looked enchanting, and was dressed in her most
characteristic manner, in a white dress with a border of fur. Fancy, in
this heat! She talked about Paris, her latest successes, asked after
Nina, and finally--what I wanted most to know--her impressions of
America.

This is her first visit. I found that she seemed to be cautious about
expressing her opinions. She said she was surprised to see how many
people in America understood French. "Really?" I answered. "It did not
strike me so the other evening when I heard you in 'La Dame aux
Camelias.'" "I don't mean the public," she replied. "It apparently
understands very little, and the turning of the leaves of the librettos
distracts me so much that I sometimes forget my role. At any rate, I
wait till the leaves have finished rustling. But in society," she
added, "I find that almost every one who is presented to me talks very
good French." "Well," I answered, "if Boston didn't speak French I
should be ashamed of it." She laughed. "Sometimes," she said, "they do
make curious mistakes. I am making note of all I can remember. They
will be amusing in the book I am writing. A lady said to me, 'What I
admire the most in you, madame, _c'est votre temperature_.'" She meant
"temperament." "What did you answer to that?" I asked. "I said, '_Oui,
madame, il fait tres chaud_,' which fell unappreciated."

She is bored with reporters, who besiege her from morning till night.
One--a woman--who sat with note-book in hand for ages ("_une eternite_"
she said) reporting, the next day sent her the newspaper in which a
column was filled with the manner she treated her nails. Not one word
about "_mon art_"! "Some of my _admirateurs_" she said, "pay their
fabulous compliments through an interpreter." She thought this was
ridiculous. When I got up to leave she said, "_Chere_ madame, you know
Mr. Longfellow?" "Yes," I replied, "very well." "Could you not arrange
that I might make his bust? You can tell him that you know my work, and
that I can do it if he will let me."

I told her that I would try. She was profuse in her thanks in
anticipation, but, alas! Mr. Longfellow, when I spoke to him, turned a
cold shoulder on the idea. He begged me to assure Sarah Bernhardt
nothing would have given him more pleasure, but, with a playful wink,
"I am leaving for Portland in a few days, and I am afraid she will have
left Boston when I come back"--thus cutting the Gordian (k)_not_ with a
snap. But, evidently regretting his curtness, he said, "Tell her if she
is at liberty to-morrow I will offer her a cup of tea." Then he added:
"You must come and chaperon me. It would not do to leave me alone with
such a dangerous and captivating visitor." He invited Mr. Howells and
Oliver Wendell Holmes to meet her. I wrote to Sarah Bernhardt what the
result of my interview was and gave the invitation. She sent back a
short "I will come." The next afternoon I met her at Mr. Longfellow's.
When we were drinking our tea she said, "_Cher_ M. Longfellow, I would
like so much to have made your bust, but I am so occupied that I really
have not the time." And he answered her in the most suave manner, "I
would have been delighted to sit for you, but, unfortunately, I am
leaving for the country to-morrow." How clever people are!

Mr. Longfellow speaks French like a native. He said: "I saw you the
other evening in 'Phedre.' I saw Rachel in it fifty years ago, but you
surpass her. You are magnificent, for you are _plus vivante_. I wish I
could make my praises vocal--_chanter vos louanges_."

"I wish that you could make _me_ vocal," she said. "How much finer my
Phedre would be if I could sing, and not be obliged to depend upon some
horrible soprano behind the scenes!"

"You don't need any extra attraction," Mr. Longfellow said. "I wish I
could make you feel what I felt."

"You can," she said, "and you do--by your poetry."

"Can you read my poetry?"

"Yes. I read your 'He-a-vatere.'"

"My--Oh yes--'Hiawatha.' But you surely do not understand that?"

"Yes, yes, indeed I do," she said. "_Chaque mot_."

[Illustration:
HENRY W. LONGFELLOW]

[Illustration:
JAMES G. BLAINE
When Speaker of the House of Representatives.]

"You are wonderful," he said, and fearing that she might be tempted to
recite "_chaque mot_" of his "Hiawatha," hastened to present Mr.
Holmes, who was all attention.

At last the tea-party came to an end. We all accompanied her to her
carriage, and as she was about to get in she turned with a sudden
impulse, threw her arms round Mr. Longfellow's neck, and said, "_Vous
etes adorable_," and kissed him on his cheek. He did not, seem
displeased, but as she drove away he turned to me and said, "You see I
did need a chaperon."

Johan has just come home from Boston, bringing incredible stories
about having talked in a machine called telephone. It was nothing but a
wire, one end in Boston and the other end in Cambridge. He said he
could hear quite plainly what the person in Cambridge said. Mr. Graham
Bell, our neighbor, has invented this. How wonderful it must be! He has
put up wires about Boston, but not farther than Cambridge--yet. He was
ambitious enough to suggest Providence. "What!" cried the members of
the committee. "You think you can talk along a wire in the air over
that distance?" "Let me just try it," said Bell. "I will bear half the
expense of putting up the wire if you will bear the other half."

He was ultra-convinced of his success when, on talking to his brother
in Cambridge from Boston in order to invite him to dinner, adding,
"Bring your mother-in-law," he heard, distinctly but feebly, the old
lady's voice: "Good gracious! Again! What a bore!"

There is also another invention, called phonograph, where the human
voice is reproduced, and can go on for ever being reproduced. I sang in
one through a horn, and they transposed this on a platina roll and
wound it off. Then they put it on another disk, and I heard my
voice--for the first time in my life. If that is my voice, I don't want
to hear it again! I could not believe that it could be so awful! A
high, squeaky, nasal sound; I was ashamed of it. And the faster the man
turned the crank the higher and squeakier the voice became. The
intonation--the pronunciation--I could recognize as my own, but the
_voice_!... Dear me!

[_Johan, desiring me to know his family, suggested that we spend the
Christmas holidays in Denmark, and we arrived safely after a slow and
very stormy voyage._]


"BJOERNEMOSE," _December 20, 1877_.

Dear Mother,--Denmark looks very friendly under its mantle of snow,
glistening with its varnish of ice. It is lovely weather. The sun
shines brightly, but it is as cold as Greenland. They tell me it is a
very mild winter. Compared with Alaska, it may be! The house, which is
heated only by large porcelain stoves, is particularly cold. These
stoves are filled with wood in the early morning, and when the wood is
burned out they shut the door and the porcelain tiles retain the
heat--still, the ladies all wear shawls over their shoulders and
shiver. I go and lean my back up against the huge white monument, but
this is not considered good form.

The Baltic Sea, which is at the foot of the snow-covered lawn, is
filled with floating ice. It must be lovely here in the summer, when
one can see the opposite shores of Thuro across the blue water.

My new family, taken singly and collectively, is delightful. I shall
tell you later about the dear, genial General--my father-in-law--the
kind mother, and the three devoted sisters. _Now_ I shall only
write--as I promised you--my _first_ impressions.

We live in a manner which is, I fancy, called "patriarchal," and which
reminds me continually of Frederika Bremer's book called _Home_. A
great many things in the way of food are new to me. For instance, there
is a soup made of beer, brown bread, and cream, and another made of the
insides of a goose, with its long neck and thin legs, boiled with
prunes, apples, and vinegar. Then rice porridge is served as soup and
mixed with hot beer, cinnamon, butter, and cream. These all seem very
queer, but they taste very good, I asked for oatmeal porridge, but I
was told that oatmeal was used only for cataplasms. Corn is known only
as ornamental shrubbery, and tomatoes, alas! are totally unknown.

Every one I have met so far has been most kind and hospitable. We have
been invited out to dinner several times. I will describe the first
one, which was unique as a _debut_.

The distances are enormous between country houses in this land; and, as
the hour named for dinner was six o'clock, we had to begin dressing in
the afternoon at the early hour of three. At four we were packed in the
family landau, with a mountain of rugs and different things to keep our
feet warm. We jogged along the hard, slippery highroad at a monotonous
pace; and, as it is dark at four o'clock, nothing could have been more
conducive to slumber and peaceful dreams. Finally we arrived. Every one
was standing up when we entered the _salon_. There seemed to be a great
number of people. I was presented to all the ladies, and the gentlemen
were brought up one by one and named to me. They bowed, shook my hand,
and retired. I noticed that all the ladies wore long trailing
skirts--lilac or gray--and had real flowers in their hair and on their
bosoms. Dinner was announced. Then there came a pause. The host and the
hostess were looking about for some one to undertake _me_--some one who
could _tale Engelsk_ (talk English). Finally they decided upon a lank,
spectacled gentleman, who offered me his arm and took me in.

My father-in-law, who was the person highest in rank, sat on the left
of the hostess. I thought this peculiar, but such is the custom here.
From the moment we sat down until we rose from the table my
English-speaking friend never stopped talking. He told me he had
learned my language when a boy, but had forgotten a great deal; if he
had said he had forgotten it entirely he would have been nearer the
truth.

He wanted to tell me the family history of a gentleman opposite us, and
began by saying: "Do you see that gentleman? He has been washing you
all the time."

"Washing me?" I exclaimed. "What do you mean?"

"Yes, the one with the gray hairs and the bird."

I looked about for a canary perched on some one's nose.

"It is a pity," he went on to say, "that he has no shield."

"How is that?" I asked. "I thought every one had a shield of some
sort?" To make it clearer to me, he said, uln Danish we call a shield a
_barn_."

"Is he a farmer?" said I, much puzzled.

"Oh dear, no! He is a lawyer like me."

"Then what does he want with a barn?"

"Every couple [pronounced copol] wants _burn_," he replied.

"What is it they want?" I asked. "What do you call _burn_?"

"Burn," he explained, "is _pluriel_ for barn. _Eight_ barn, two
_burn_."

"What?" I cried, "eight barns to burn! Why do they want to burn eight
barns? They must be crazy!"

All this will sound to you as idiotic as it did to me, but you will get
the explanation at the end of the chapter, as I did--on the drive
home--the two hours of which were entirely taken up in laughing at the
mistakes of the good lawyer, who did his best.

Our conversation languished after this. My brain could not bear such a
strain. Suddenly he got up from his chair. I thought that he was going
to take himself and his English away, but after he had quaffed a whole
glass of wine, at one swallow, bowed over it, and pointed his empty
glass at Johan, he resumed his seat, and conversation flowed again.

It seems that Johan had honored him with a friendly nod and an uplifted
glass, which obliged him to arise and acknowledge the compliment.

In Denmark there is a great deal of _skaal_-drinking (_skaal_, in
Danish, means drinking a toast). I think there must be an eleventh
commandment--"Thou shalt not omit to _skaal_." The host drinks with
every one, and every one drinks with every one else. It seems to me to
be rather a cheap way of being amiable, but it looks very friendly and
sociable. When a person of high rank drinks with one of lower the
latter stands while emptying his glass.

When we left the table I did not feel that my Danish had gained much,
and certainly my partner's English had not improved. However, we seemed
to have conversed in a very spirited manner, which must have impressed
the lookers-on with a sense of my partner's talent for languages.

On our return to the _salon_ we found more petroleum-lamps, and the
candelabra lighted to exaggeration with wax candles. The lamp-shades,
which I thought were quite ingenious, were of paper, and contained
dried ferns and even flattened-out butterflies between two sheets of
shiny tissue-paper. The _salon_ had dark walls on which hung a
collection of family portraits. Ladies with puckered mouths and
wasp-like waists had necks adorned with gorgeous pearls, which had
apparently gone to an early grave with their wearers. I saw no similar
ones on the necks of the present generation. After the coffee was
served and a certain time allowed for breathing, the daughter of the
house sat down, without being begged, at an upright piano, and attacked
the "Moonlight Sonata." This seemed to be the signal for the ladies to
bring out their work-bags.

The knitting made a pleasing accompaniment to the moonlight of the
sonata, as if pelicans were gnashing their teeth in the dimness. The
sterner sex made a dash for the various albums and literature on the
round table in the center of the room, and turned the leaves with a
gentle flutter. The sonata was finished in dead silence. As it was
performed by one of the family, no applause was necessary. I was asked
to sing; and, though I do not like to sing after dinner, I consented,
not to be disobliging. Before taking my seat on the revolving
piano-stool I looked with a severe eye at the knitting-needles. The
ladies certainly did try to make less noise, but they went on knitting,
all the same.

The flushed-with-success lawyer, wishing to show his appreciation of my
singing, leaned gracefully across the piano, and said, "_Kammerherrinde_
[that is my title], you sing as if you had a beard in your throat."

"A what?" I gasped. "A beard?"

"Yes! a beautiful beard," and added, with a conscious smile, "I sing
myself."

Good heavens! I thought, and asked, "Do you know what a beard is?"

"In Danish we call a beard a _fugle_" (pronounced _fool_.)

"Then," I said, pretending to be offended, "I sing like a fool?"

"Exactly," he said with enthusiasm, his eyes beaming with joy through
his spectacles.

This was hopeless. I moved gently away from the man who "talked
English."

The candles had burned down almost to their _bobeches_, and we were
beginning to forget that we had eaten a dinner of fifteen courses, when
in came a procession of servants with piles of plates in their arms and
trays of _smoerdroed_ (sandwiches), tea, beer (in bottles), and cakes,
which are called here _kicks_. Everything seemed very tempting except
the things handed about by the stable-boy, who was dressed for the
occasion in a livery, much too large, and was preceded and followed by
a mixed odor of stable and almond soap.

What struck me as unusual was that the host named the hour for his
guests to go home. Therefore all the carriages were before the door at
the same time.

Johan explained the mistakes on the way home.

"The man with the gray hairs and the _beard_" (pronounced like _heard_)
had been _watching_ me. _Shield_ meant _child! A child_ in Danish is
_et barn_, which sounds the same as _eight barn_. _Two children_ (in
Danish) are _to boern_, pronounced _toe burn. Bird_ he pronounced like
_beard_, because it was written so. A bird in Danish is _fugle_ (fool).

Do you wonder that I was somewhat bewildered?


_January, 1878._

Dear Mother,--After Christmas Johan and I went to Copenhagen, where I
was presented to the King and the Queen. I was first received by the
_Grande Maitresse_, Madame de Raben, and three _dames d'honneur_, who
were all pleasant but ceremonious. When the Queen entered the room and
I was presented to her she was most gracious and affable. She motioned
me to sit down beside her on the sofa. She said that she had heard much
about me. She spoke of my father-in-law, whom she _loved_, and Johan,
whom she _liked_ so much. She was most interested to hear about you and
the children. She had heard that Nina promised to be a beauty.

"If children would only grow up to their promises!" I said.

"Mine have," said the Queen; "they are all beautiful."

She showed me the photographs of the Princess of Wales and the
Grand-Duchess Dagmar of Russia. If they resemble their pictures they
must indeed be beautiful.

The _salon_ in which we sat was filled with drawings, pastels, and
photographs, and was so crowded with furniture that one could hardly
move about.

"I've been told," the Queen said, "that you have a splendid voice and
sing wonderfully. You must come some day and sing for me; I love
music." Then we talked music, the most delightful of subjects. The King
came in. He was also perfectly charming, and as kind as possible. He is
about sixty years old, but looks younger, having a wonderfully youthful
figure and a very handsome face. The King preferred to speak French,
but the Queen liked better to talk English, which she does to
perfection.

"Have you learned Danish yet?" the King asked me.

"Alas! your Majesty," I answered, "though I try very hard to learn, I
have not mastered it yet, and only dare to inflict it on my family."

"You will not find it difficult," he said. "You will learn it in time."

"I hope so, your Majesty--Time is a good teacher."

He told me an anecdote about Queen Desiree, of Sweden, wife of
Bernadotte, who on her arrival in Stockholm did not know one word of
Swedish.

She was taught certain phrases to use at her first reception when
ladies were presented to her. She was to say, "Are you married,
madame?" and then, "Have you any children?" Of course, she did not
understand the answers. "She was very unlucky," the King laughed, "and
got things mixed up, and once began her conversation with a lady by
asking, 'Have you any children?'"

The lady hastened to answer, "Yes, your Majesty, I have seven?"

"Are you married?" asked the Queen, very graciously.

"You must not do anything like _that_," said the King, smilingly.

I promised that I would try not to.

The _Grande Maitresse_ came in, and I thought it was the signal for me
to go--which apparently it was. There was a little pause; then the
Queen held out her hand and said, "I hope to see you again very soon."
The King shook hands kindly with me, and I reached the antechamber,
escorted by the ladies.

My next audience was with the Crown Princess. She is the daughter of
the late King of Sweden (Carl XV.) and niece of the present King Oscar,
whom I used to know in Paris. This audience was not so ceremonious as
the one I had had with the Queen. There was only one lady-in-waiting,
who received me in the _salon_ adjoining that of the Princess. She
accompanied me to the door, presented me, and withdrew, leaving us
together. In the beginning the conversation palled somewhat. I had been
warned that it was not etiquette for me to start any subject of
conversation, though I might enlarge on it once it had been broached.
The Crown Princess was so kind as to speak of something which she
thought would interest me, and the conventional half-hour passed
pleasantly and quickly.

I had other audiences. The Queen Dowager, the widow of King Christian
VIII., lives in one of the four palaces in the square of Amalienborg.
She is very stately, and received me with great etiquette. She was
dressed in a stiff black brocade dress, with a white lace head-dress
over her bandeaux; she wore short, white, tight kid gloves. She spoke
French, and was most kind, telling me a great deal about Denmark and
its history, which interested me very much.

As Mademoiselle de Rosen, her first _dame d'honneur_, re-entered the
room I made my courtesy, kissed the Queen's hand, and the audience was
over.

Johan accompanied me to the fourth audience, which for me was the most
difficult one. It was with the Princess Caroline, widow of Prince
Ferdinand, brother of King Christian VIII., who died when he was
heir-apparent to the throne. She spoke only Danish to us, so I sat and
gazed about, not understanding a word she said to Johan.

She wore flaxen braids wound above her ears, through which the cotton
showed like the petal of a flower. She had a lace cap on her head with
long lace ends, and these caught in everything she wore--her
eye-glasses, her neck-chain, her rings and bracelets, and she seemed to
do nothing but try to extricate herself while talking. This she did
steadily, in order (I suppose) to prevent any one else from talking.
She is so deaf that she cannot hear a word. She had once been burned,
and the effects of that, with the mark of former smallpox, makes her
face look far from handsome. But all these things have not prevented
her from reaching the ripe old age of eighty.

Johan supplied what little there was of conversation on our side. She
asked him, "How did you come to Denmark?" He, enchanted to be asked
something he could answer, replied that he had come on one of the big
German boats, and, to accentuate the fact that it was something _big_
he came in, he made a wide circular movement with his arms and became
quite eloquent, flattering himself that he was very interesting. The
Princess fixed a pair of earnest eyes on him, and said, in hushed
tones, "And what became of the child?"

We took our leave. In stooping to kiss her Royal Highness's hand her
cap caught in an ornament I had on my bonnet, and there we stood tied
together. Johan tried in vain to undo us, but was obliged to call in
the lady-in-waiting, who finally disentangled us.


DENMARK, _January, 1878_.

Dear Mother,--The Queen of Denmark is an adorable and lovely queen. I
am happy to call her _my_ Queen.

A few days after my audience we were invited to a dinner at
Amalienborg. We met in the _salon_, before their Majesties came in.
When they had made a little _cercle_ and said a word to every one,
dinner was announced. The King gave one arm to the Queen and the other
to the Princess Anne of Hesse--the Queen's sister-in-law. The King and
the Queen sat next to each other. There were about forty people at
table. Admiral Bille took me in; he talked English perfectly, and
was--like all naval officers!--very charming.

The Queen said to me: "I should so like to hear you sing. Will you come
to-morrow? I will send my carriage for you, and please don't forget to
bring some music."

As if I should forget! I was only too delighted.

The next morning the Queen sent her own coupe for me at eleven o'clock.
I felt very grand; all the people in the street bowed and courtesied,
thinking I was one of the royal family. I let down the glasses on both
sides of the coupe so that every one could have a chance to bow.

I was at once ushered into the Queen's _salon_ by an old red-liveried
majordomo who had many decorations on his breast. The Queen was alone
with the _Grande Maitresse_, and after having talked a little she said,
"Now we'll have some music," and led the way into the ballroom, where
there were two pianos. The Queen sat on the sofa, wearing an expression
that was half pre-indulgent and half expectant. The _Grande Maitresse_,
who was there, _not_ in her official character, but as a musician,
accompanied me when I sang "_Voi che sapete_." When I came to the
phrase, "_Non trovo pace notte ne di_," the Queen raised her hand to
her eyes, which were filled with tears, and after I had finished, said,
"Please sing another."

I spread out the music of "Biondina" in front of the eye-glasses of the
_Grande Maitresse_, but the first bars convinced me that if I were to
sing _that_ song, _she_ was not to play it, and, against all etiquette,
I placed my hands over hers and gently pushed her off the seat, saying,
"May I?"

I confess I deserved the daggers she looked at me, but the Queen only
laughed and said, "You are quite right; you must play _that_ for
yourself."

The Queen seemed to be delighted, and after some more music I returned
to the hotel in the same regal manner I had come.


COPENHAGEN, _February, 1878_.

Dear Mother,--Some days have passed between this and my last letter,
but I have been very busy. I have tried to do some sight-seeing--there
are many interesting and enchanting things to see here. Then I have had
a great many visits to pay, and I go often to sing with the Queen.

Yesterday I lunched at the palace. The Queen had said to me before:
"When you come to me, come straight to my room. Don't bother about
going first to the _dames d'honneur_. The servant has orders."

So yesterday, when I arrived, the old decorated servant who sits in the
antechamber simply opened the door of the Queen's private apartments,
where I found her and the Princess Thyra alone.

The Queen said, "You will stay to luncheon, will you not?" I hesitated,
as we had invited some friends to lunch with us, but that was evidently
no obstacle. She said: "Never mind that. I will send word to your
husband that I have kept you." Of course I stayed. We had a great deal
of music. I sang "Beware" for the first time. The Queen said, "Oh, the
King must hear that," and rang the bell, sending the servant to beg
Prince Valdemar to come in.

On his appearing, the Queen said, "Valdemar, you must tell papa that he
must come." Prince Valdemar soon returned, saying, "Papa has lumbago,
and says he cannot come." The Queen shook her head, evidently not
believing in the lumbago, and said, "Lumbago or not, papa _must_ come,
even if we have to _bring_ him."

The King came without being "brought," and I sang "Beware" for him, and
then "_Ma mere etait bohemienne_," the Queen accompanying me in both.

"Now," said the Queen, "please sing that song which you play for
yourself--the one with such a dash." She meant "Biondina."

"Please, madame," said the King, when I had finished, "sing 'Beware'
again."

Then we went down a little side-staircase for luncheon. The dining-room
is quite small and looks out upon the square. The table could not have
seated more than twelve people. Besides the King and Queen, there were
Prince Hans and Prince Wilhelm (brothers of the King), Prince Valdemar,
Princess Thyra, and myself. There were no ladies or gentlemen in
waiting, except the King's adjutant.

On a side-table were the warm meats, vegetables, and several cold
dishes. No servants were allowed in the room. It is the only meal when
the family are quite alone together; the serving was all done by the
royalties themselves. I felt quite shy when the King proposed to shell
my shrimps for me! "Oh, your Majesty," I said, "I can do that myself!"

"No," said he, "I am sure you cannot. At any rate, not as it ought to
be done."

He was quite right. I never could have done it so dexterously as he
did. He took the shells off and put the shrimps on some bread--they
looked like little pink worms. I did not dare to get up and serve
myself at the side-table, and rather than be waited on by royalty I
preferred eating little and going away hungry.

The King was very gay. He asked me how I was getting on with my Danish.
I told him some of my mistakes, at which they all laughed.


COPENHAGEN, _February, 1878_.

Dear Mother,--After our music and luncheon the other day at the palace
the Queen asked me if I would like to drive with her to see Bernstorff
Castle, where they spend their summers. I accepted the invitation with
delight. To drive with her was bliss indeed.

Bernstorff is about an hour's drive from Copenhagen. When the open
landau appeared in the _porte-cochere_ the Queen got in; I sat on her
left and the lady of honor sat opposite. The Danish royal livery is a
bright red covered with braid. The coachman's coat has many red capes,
one on top of the other, looking like huge pen-wipers. J. had told me
it was not etiquette for any one driving with the Queen to bow. We
happened to pass J. walking with a friend of his, and it seemed odd
that I was obliged to cut him dead.

When people see the Queen's carriage coming they stop their own, and
the ladies get out on the sidewalk and make deep courtesies. Gentlemen
bow very low and stand holding their hats in their hands until the
royal carriage has passed.

The castle of Bernstorff is neither large nor imposing, but looks
home-like and comfortable. The Queen showed me all over it--her private
rooms, and even upstairs where her _atelier_ is; she paints
charmingly--as well as she plays the piano.

She pointed out on the window-panes of a room over the principal _salon_
different things that her daughters had written with their diamond
rings on the glass: "Farewell, my beautiful clouds!--Alexandra." "Till
the next time.--Dagmar." "_A bientot_--Willie" (the young King of
Greece).[1]

      [1] King George of Greece who was assassinated in 1913.

She told me that Bernstorff was the first home she and the King had
lived in after their marriage, when he was Prince, and they love it so
much that they prefer it to the larger castles. They go to Fredensborg
in the autumn. The Grand-Duchess Dagmar and the Princess of Wales, when
they come to Bernstorff in the summer, sleep in the room which they
shared as children.

I cannot tell you how nice the royal family are to me.

We were present at a state ball at Christiansborg. On arriving we
passed up a magnificent staircase and went through many large _salons_,
the walls of which were covered with fine tapestries and old Spanish
leather, and a long gallery of beautiful pictures, before we reached
the _salon_ where I belonged according to my rank (every one is placed
according to the rules of the protocol).

Their Majesties entered. The Queen looked dazzlingly brilliant. She
wore all the crown jewels and had some splendid pearls on her neck. The
King looked superb in his uniform. They were followed by the Princess
Thyra (the young and sympathetic Princess with eyes like a gazelle),
and the youngest son, Prince Valdemar.

The Crown Prince and Princess were already there. She also had some
wonderful jewels, inherited, they said, from her mother, who was of the
royal family of Holland.

Their Majesties were very gracious to me. The King even did me the
honor to waltz with me. He dances like a young man of twenty. He went
from one lady to another and gave them each a turn. I was taken to
supper by a person whose duty it was to attend to me--I forget his
name. The King danced the cotillon. You will hardly see that anywhere
else--a gentleman of sixty dancing a cotillon.

The principal street in Copenhagen is Ostergade, where all the best
shops are. It is very narrow. People sometimes stop and hold
conversations across the street, and perambulating nurses, lingering at
the shop windows, hold up the traffic.

There is a very pretty square called Amagertorv, where all the peasant
women assemble, looking very picturesque in their national dresses,
with their little velvet caps embroidered in gold, and their
Quaker-like bonnets with a fichu tied over them. They quite fill up the
square with flowers, fruits, and vegetables, and stand in the open air
by their wares in spite of wind, rain, and weather.

Around the corner, in front of Christiansborg Castle, by the canal,
your nose will inform you that this is the fish-market, where the fish
are brought every morning, wriggling and gasping in the nets in which
they have been caught overnight. It is a very interesting sight to see
all the hundreds of boats in the canal, which runs through the center
of the town.

The other evening there was a large musical _soiree_ given at
Amalienborg. I won't tell you the names of those who were present, as
you would not know them, but they are the most prominent names here.

Their Majesties sat in two gilded arm-chairs, in front of which was a
rug. There was a barytone from the Royal Theater who sang some Danish
songs; then the Princess Thyra and an English lady and I sang the trio
from "Elijah," and a quartette with the barytone. I sang several times
alone. There was an English lady, whose name I do not remember, who
played a solo on the _cornet a piston_. Her face was hidden by her
music, which was on a stand in front of her. After I had sung the
"_Caro Nome_" from "Rigoletto," and the English lady had played her
solo, the deaf Princess Caroline--who, with her ears filled with cotton
and encompassed by her flaxen braids, sat in front--said, in a loud and
penetrating voice, "I like _that_ lady's singing better than the other
one's"--meaning me. Every one laughed. I had never had a _cornet a
piston_ as a rival before.


_March 1, 1878._

Dear Mother,--Our last day here. I lunched at Amalienborg, and was the
only stranger present. The King, who sat next to me, said, "I feel
quite hurt that you have never asked me for my photograph."

"But I have one," I answered, "which I bought. I dare not ask your
Majesty to sign it."

"One must always dare," he answered, smilingly. "May I 'dare' to ask
you to accept one from me?" He got up from the table and left the room,
being absent for a few minutes. When the door opened again we saw the
King standing outside, trying to carry a large picture. His Majesty had
gone up to the room in which the picture hung, and the servant who had
taken it from the wall brought it to the door of the dining-room,
whence the King carried it in himself. The mark of the dusty cord still
showed on his shoulder. It was a life-size portrait of himself painted
in oil.

He said, "Will you accept this?"

I could not believe my ears. This for me! I hesitated.

The Queen said, "My dear, you must take it, since the King desires it."

"But," I replied, "how can I?"

Her Majesty answered, "Your husband would not like you to refuse. Take
it!--_you must!_" and added, "The ribbon [the blue Order of the
Elephant] is beautifully painted"--as if the rest were not!

The Princess Thyra said, "Papa has only had six portraits painted of
himself. This one is painted by Mr. Shytte. I don't think that it is
half handsome enough for papa. Do you?"

"Well," said the King, "I shall have it sent to your hotel." I could
not thank his Majesty enough, and I am sure I looked as embarrassed as
I felt.

As we were going away the next day, this was my last visit to the
Queen. On bidding me good-by she pressed something into my hand and
said, "You leave me so many _souvenirs_! I have only one for you, and
here it is."

It was a lovely locket of turquoises. On opening it I found the Queen's
portrait on one side and the Princess Thyra's on the other.

She kissed me, and I kissed her hand, with tears in my eyes.

We return to Bjoernemose to bid our parents good-by; then farewell to
Denmark.

We leave in four days for New York.


WASHINGTON, _February, 1879_.

Dear Mother,--Monsieur de Schloezer is one of the colleagues whom we
like best. I wish you knew him! I do not know anything more delightful
than to see him and Carl Schurz together. They are not unlike in
character; they are both witty, refined, always seeing the beautiful in
everything, almost boyish in their enthusiasm, and clever, _cela va
sans dire_, to their finger-tips. They bring each other out, and they
both appear at their best, which is saying a great deal. We consider
that we are fortunate to number them among our _intimes_.

Would it interest you to know how these _intimes_ amuse themselves?
Life is so simple in Washington, and there are so few distractions
outside of society, that we only have our social pleasures to take the
place of theaters and public entertainments. It is unlike Paris and
other capitals in this respect.

We have organized a club which we call "The National Rational
International Dining Club," to which belong Mrs. Bigelow Lawrence, her
sister Miss Chapman, Mr. de Schloezer, Carl Schurz, Aristarchi Bey (the
Turkish Minister), Count Doenhoff (Secretary to the German Legation),
and ourselves. So when we are free, and not invited elsewhere, we dine
together at one another's houses. I am the president, Mrs. Lawrence the
vice-president, Schurz the treasurer, Schloezer the sergeant-at-arms,
and Johan has the most difficult--and (as Mr. Schurz calls it) the
"onerous"--duty of recognizing and calling attention to the jokes,
which in his conscientious attempts to seize he often loses entirely.

The "rational" part is the menu. We are allowed a soup, one roast, one
vegetable and dessert, and _two_ wines, one of which, according to the
regulations, _must be good_. We do not even need so much, for there is
more laughing than eating. A stuffed goose from the Smithsonian
Institution serves as a _milieu de table_, and is sent, on the day of
the dinner, to the person who gives it.

We always have music. Schurz and Schloezer play the piano alternately,
and I do the singing. I must say that a more appreciative audience than
our co-diners cannot be imagined.

We have laws and by-laws written on large foolscap paper, bearing a
huge seal which looks very official. Mr. Schurz carries it in his
inside pocket, and sometimes at large dinners he pulls it out and
begins reading it with the greatest attention, and every one at the
table believes that there is something very important going on in
politics. But we, the initiated, know that the document is the law of
the N.R.I. Dining Club. Then, when all eyes are fastened on him, he
puts the paper deliberately back in his pocket, with a sly wink at the
members.

Mr. Schurz is now Secretary of the Interior, and a great personage.
When one thinks that he hardly knew a word of our language when he came
to this country (a young man of twenty), and that now he is one of our
first orators, one cannot help but admire him. Because he has entirely
identified himself with the politics of our country he has risen to the
high position which he now holds. You said, when you heard him deliver
that oration at Harvard College, that you were astonished that any
foreigner could have such complete command of the language. He is
integrity itself, with a great mind free from all guile, and is filled
with the enthusiasm and vivacity of youth. During the revolutionary
movement in Germany in 1848 he helped a political friend escape from
the Schandau prison, and on account of that was himself condemned to
death. However, he managed to evade pursuit and took refuge in America,
where he has lived ever since.

_Le Chevalier_, as we call Senator Bayard, because he is so entirely
_sans reproche_, sent his photograph to Mrs. T. and wrote on the back
of it, "_Avec les regards de T. Bayard_." She showed it to her friends
with the scathing remark, "People should not write French if they don't
understand the language." Others, who understood the language, thought
it very clever.

Schloezer has let it be known in the Foreign Office in Berlin that a
secretary who has money to spend is more desirable in America than one
who has not. He thinks that it is more advantageous for a young man to
travel through the country and learn things than to sit copying
despatches in the _chancellerie_ in Washington.

In this respect Count Doenhoff, his new secretary, ought to satisfy him,
for never was a person so determined to see everything, know everybody,
and do all that is doing. He begged Mr. Schurz to give him permission
to accompany General Adam, who, because he knew the Indians and their
little ways and how to deal with them, was sent out to Montana to
rescue the family of one of the commissioners who had been captured.

These two gentlemen (Adam and Doenhoff) went to the place where the
women and children were concealed, and remained there a week, trying to
induce the Indians to give them up. They were finally successful, but
it was known afterward that the Indians during the time they were there
were holding council every night to decide whether or not they would
hang the two "pale-faces" to the first tree in the morning.

Both Schurz and Schloezer were relieved to see Count Doenhoff when he
returned safe and sound. They reproached themselves for allowing him to
start on such an expedition, as it was a very reckless adventure, and a
great risk for him.


WASHINGTON, _March, 1879_.

My dear Mother,--We have taken the Fant House for this winter. People
say it is haunted. As yet we have not seen any ghosts nor found any
skeletons in the closets. The possible ghosts have no terrors for me.
On the contrary, I should love to meet one face to face! But the rats
are plentiful and have probably played ghosts' parts and given the
house its reputation. Those we have here are so bold and assertive that
I have become quite accustomed to them. I meet them on the staircase,
and they politely wait for me to pass. One old fellow--I call him
Alcibiades, because he is so audacious--actually gnaws at our door, as
if begging to be allowed to come in and join us. We put poison in every
attractive way we can think of all about, but they seem to like it and
thrive upon it. Johan, having had a Danish sailor recommended to him,
allows him to live in a room up-stairs and to help a little in the
house while waiting for a boat. He is very masterful in his movements,
and handles the crockery as if it were buckets of water, and draws back
the portieres as if he were hauling at the main-sheet.

Mr. Robeson (Secretary of the Navy), who ought to know _le dernier cri_
on the subject of the habits of rats, told us that the only way to get
rid of them was to catch one and dress him up in a jacket and
trousers--red preferable--tie a bell round his neck, and let him loose.
"Then," he said, "the rat would run about among his companions and
indicate the pressure brought upon rats, and soon there would not be
one left in the house."

This was an idyl for our sailor. He spent most of his days making a
jacket with which to clothe the rat, and actually did catch one (I
hoped he was not my friend of the staircase) and proceeded to put him
into this sailor-made costume, which was not an easy thing to do, and
had he not been accustomed to bracing up stays and other nautical work
he never could have accomplished the thing. However, he _did_
accomplish it; he tied the bell on the rat's neck and let him loose.

The remedy (though uttered from an official mouth for which we have
great respect) was worse than the evil. The rat refused to run about to
warn his friends. On the contrary, he would not move, but looked
imploringly into the eyes of his tormentor, as if begging to be allowed
to die in his normal skin. Then, I believe, he went and sulked in a
corner and committed suicide--he was so mortified. We said one rat in a
corner was worse than twelve on the staircase.

The Outreys (the French Minister) had their diplomatic reception, and
sent cards to every one they knew and many they did not know. The
ladies who went expected Madame Outrey to be dressed in the latest
fashion; being the wife of the French Minister, it was her duty to let
society into the secrets of Parisian "modes," but she was dressed in a
simple, might-have-been-made-at-home black gown. This exasperated the
ladies (who had gone with an eye to copying) to such a degree that many
went home with pent-up and wounded feelings, as if they had been
defrauded of their rights and without supper--which, had they stayed,
they would have found to be the latest thing in suppers.


WASHINGTON.

The grass on our small plot has reached the last limit of endurance and
greenness, and is sprouting weeds at a great rate; also our one bush,
though still full of chirpiness, is beginning to show signs of
depression.

We were invited to a spiritualistic _seance_ at the L----'s _salon_.
The Empress Josephine has consented to materialize in America after
having visited the Continent. We saw her, and a more unempress-looking
empress I cannot imagine. To convince a skeptic she displayed her leg
to show how well it had succeeded in taking on flesh. I have no
patience with people who believe such nonsense. The famous spiritualist
Poster is also here in Washington. He is clever in a way, and has made
many converts simply by putting two and two together. We went, of
course, to see him, and came away astounded, but not convinced. He
produced a slate on which were written some wonderful things about a
ring which had a history in J.'s family. J. could not imagine how any
one could have known it. Foster said to me: "I had a premonition that
you were coming to-day. See!" and he pulled up his sleeve and there
stood "Lillie," written in what appeared to be my handwriting in gore,
I suppose--it was red. I urged Baron Bildt to go and see him, knowing
that he liked that sort of thing. The moment he appeared, Foster,
smelling a diplo-rat, said, "Madame Hegermann sent you to me," upon
which Baron Bildt succumbed instantly.

Teresa Carreno, the _Wunderkind_, now a _Wunder-maedchen_, having
arrived at the age when she wisely puts up her hair and lets down her
dresses, is on a concert tour with Wilhelmj (the famous violinist). He
is not as good as Wieniawski, and can't be named in the same breath
with Ole Bull. They came here to lunch, together with Schloezer, who
brought the violin. I invited a good many people to come in the
afternoon--among others, Aristarchi, who looks very absorbed when music
is going on, but with him it means absolutely nothing, because he is a
little deaf, but looks eager in order to seize other people's
impressions.

Wilhelmj played, and Teresa Carreno played, and I sang a song of
Wilhelmj's from the manuscript. He said, "You sing it as if you had
dreamed it." I thought if I had dreamed it I should have dreamed of a
patchwork quilt, there were so many flats and sharps. My eyes and brain
ached.

After a good deal of music Wilhelmj sank in a chair and said, "I can no
more!" and fell to talking about his wines. He is not only a violinist,
but is a wine merchant. Schloezer and J. naturally gave him some large
orders.

Washington is very gay, humming like a top. Everything is going on at
once.

The daily receptions I find the most tiresome things, they are so
monotonous. Women crowd in the _salons_, shake hands, leave a pile of
cards on the tray in the hall, and flit to other spheres.

At a dinner at Senator Chandler's Mr. Blaine took me in, and Eugene
Hale, a Congressman, sat on the other side. They call him "Blaine's
little boy." He was very amusing on the subject of Alexander Agassiz
(the pioneer of my youthful studies, under whose ironical eye I used to
read Schiller), who is just now being lionized, and is lecturing on the
National History of the Peruvians. Agassiz has become a millionaire,
not from the proceeds of his brain, but from copper-mines (Calumet and
Hecla). How his dear old father would have liked to possess some of his
millions.

Sam Ward is the diner-out _par excellence_ here, and is the king of the
lobby _par preference_. When you want anything pushed through Congress
you have only to apply to Sam Ward, and it is done. I don't know
whether he accomplishes what he undertakes by money or persuasion; it
must be the latter, for I think he is far from being a rich man. His
lobbying is mostly done at the dinner-table. He is a most delightful
talker and full of anecdotes.

Mrs. Robeson's "Sunday evenings" are very popular. She has given up
singing and does not--thank Heaven!--have any music. She thinks it
prevents people from talking (sometimes it does, and sometimes it has
the contrary effect). She prefers the talking, in which she takes the
most active part. Mr. Robeson is the most amiable of hosts, beams and
laughs a great deal.

The _enfant terrible_ is quoted incessantly. She must be overwhelmingly
amusing. She said to her mother when she saw her in evening dress; "Mama,
pull up your collar. You must not show your stomach-ache!" Everything
in anatomy lower than the throat she calls "stomach-ache"--the fountain
of all her woes, I suppose.

Mr. Blaine and Mr. Robeson, supplemented by General Schenck, are great
poker-players. They are continually talking about the game, when they
ought to be talking politics for the benefit of foreigners. You hear
this sort of thing, "Well, you couldn't beat my full house," at which
the diplomats prick up their ears, thinking that there will be
something wonderful in Congress the next day, and decide to go there.

Mr. Brooks, of Cambridge, made his Fourth-of-July oration at our
_soiree_ on Thursday. This is the funniest thing I have ever heard. Mr.
Evarts almost rolled off his seat. It is supposed to be a speech made
at a Paris _fete_ on the Fourth of July, where every speaker got more
patriotic as the evening went on. The last speech was the climax:

"I propose the toast, '_The United States!_'--bordered on the north by
the aurora borealis; on the east by the rising sun; on the west by the
procession of equinoxes; and on the south by eternal chaos!"


WASHINGTON, _April, 1879_.

Mr. Schurz, as Secretary of the Interior, was to receive a conclave of
Indians, and could not refuse Mrs. Lawrence, Miss Chapman, and myself
when we begged to be present at the interview. They came to make some
contracts. The interpreter, or agent, or whatever he was, who had them
in charge proposed to dress them suitably for the occasion, but when he
heard there were to be ladies present he added colored and striped
shirts, which, the Indians insisted upon wearing over their embroidered
buckskin trousers. They caused a sensation as they came out of the
clothes-shop. They had feather head-dresses and braids of hair hanging
down by the sides of their brown cheeks. They wore bracelets on their
bare arms and blankets over their shoulders. They sat in a semicircle
around Mr. Schurz. After Mr. Schurz had heard what the interpreter had
to say he and the other members of the committee (they call them
"undershirts") talked together for a while, and Mr. Schurz said, "I
cannot accept," which was translated to the chief, who looked more
sullen and treacherous than before. Then there was a burst of wild
Indian, and the chief held forth in a deep bass voice, I fancy giving
pieces of his mind to Mr. Schurz, which were translated in a milder
form. Mrs. Lawrence, who looks at everything in a rosy, sentimental
light, thought they looked high-spirited and noble. I, who am prosaic
to my finger-tips, thought they looked conceited, brutal, and
obstinate. They all sat with their tomahawks laid by the side of their
chairs. The chief was not insensible to the beauty of Miss Chapman, and
sat behind his outspread fingers, gazing at her and her jewelry. We
were glad to get away from the barbarous-looking people. All the same,
the interview was very interesting.

       *       *       *       *       *

General and Mrs. Albert Meyer gave a dinner in honor of the President
and Mrs. Hayes, to which some diplomats were invited. You know Mr.
Meyer is the man called "Old Prob," because he tells one beforehand
what weather one can expect for the next picnic.

This was the first dinner that the Presidential couple had gone to, and
we were a little curious to see how it would be managed. As neither Mr.
nor Mrs. Hayes drinks wine, they were served all the different known
brands of mineral waters, milk, and tea. But the others got wine. Mr.
Meyer was very funny when he took up his glass, looked at it
critically, and said, "I recommend this vintage." The President did not
seem to mind these _plaisanteries_. We were curious to see what they
would do when _punch a la Romaine_, which stood on the menu in a little
paragraph by itself, would be served. It was a rather strong punch (too
strong for any of the diplomats) and the glasses were deep, but they
seemed to enjoy this glimpse into the depths of perdition and did not
leave a mouthful. Taking it, you see, with a spoon made a difference.

The Lesseps were among the guests. There are thirteen little Lesseps
somewhere; only one daughter is with them. Monsieur Lesseps is
twenty-five years older than Madame, if not more. When the three came
in the _salon_, young Miss Bayard said, "The girl is taking her mother
and grandfather into society."

A weird menu was at the side of each plate; it was in French--on
account, I suppose, of the Lesseps. One of the items was _L'estomac de
dinde a l'ambassadrice, pommes sautees_. Mr. John Hay, who sat next to
me, remarked, ironically, "Why do they not write their menu in plain
English?"

"I think," I answered, "that it is better in French. How would 'turkey
to an ambassadress's stomach' or 'jumped potatoes' sound?"

He could find no answer to this.

Madame Lesseps confided to me in our coffee-cups that she and her
husband were in "Vasheengton _en touristes, mais aussi, ils avaient des
affaires_." The _affaires_ are no less than the Panama Canal.


CAMBRIDGE, _Summer, 1879_.

Ole Bull (the great violinist) has taken James Russell Lowell's house
in Cambridge. He is remarried, and lives here with his wife and
daughter. He has a magnificent head, and that broad, expansive smile
which seems to belong to geniuses. Liszt had one like it.

He and Mrs. Bull come here often on Sunday evenings, and sometimes he
brings his violin. Mrs. B. accompanies him, and he plays divinely.
There is no violinist on earth that can compare with him. There may be
many who have as brilliant a technique, but none who has his _feu
sacre_ and the tremendous magnetism which creates such enthusiasm that
you are carried away. The sterner sex pretend that they can resist him,
but certainly no woman can.

He is very proud of showing the diamond in his bow which was given to
him by the King of Sweden.

He loves to tell the story of King Frederick VII. of Denmark, who said
to him: "Where did you learn to play the violin? Who was your teacher?"

Ole Bull answered, "Your Majesty, the pine forests of Norway and the
beautiful _fjords_ taught me!"

The King, who had no feeling for such high-flown sentiments, turned to
one of his _aides-de-camp_ and said, "_Sikken vroevl_"--the Danish for
"What rubbish!"

Mr. John Owen (Mr. Longfellow's shadow) swoops down on us occasionally
on the wings of poesy. I don't always comprehend the poesy, and
sometimes would like to cut the wings, but Owen can't be stopped. Every
event is translated into verse; even my going to Newport by the
ten-o'clock train, which sounds prosy enough, inspires him, and the
next morning he comes in with a poem. Then we see it in the _Boston
Advertiser_, evening edition.

[Illustration:
OLE BULL
From a photograph taken in New York in 1880.]


CAMBRIDGE.

A Dane, a friend of Johan's, who had come to America to write a book on
American institutions, asked the consul to find him a quiet
boarding-house in a quiet street. The consul knew of exactly such a
retreat, and directed the Professor to the place. It was not far from
the Revere House. He arrived there in the evening, unpacked his
treasures, congratulating himself on his cozy quarters and his nice
landlady, who asked such a modest price that he jumped at it.

The next morning, at four o'clock, he was awakened by a strange noise,
the like of which he had never heard outside a zoological garden. At
first he thought he was still dreaming, and turned over to sleep again,
but the noise repeated itself. This time it seemed to come from under
his bed, and sounded like a lion's roar. Probably a circus had passed
and a lion had got loose and was prowling about, seeking what he could
devour! He thought of ringing up the house, but demurred, reflecting
that whoever answered the bell would probably be the first victim.
Again the roar! Fear overcame his humane impulses; he rang, hoping that
if the lion's appetite was appeased by the first victim, he might be
spared.

The landlady appeared in the flesh, calmly and quietly. "Did you ring,
sir?" she asked, placidly.

"I did indeed," he answered. "Will you kindly tell me whether I am
awake or asleep? It seems to me that I heard the roar of a lion. Did no
one else hear it?"

The landlady hesitated, embarrassed, and answered, "I did, sir--you and
I are the only persons in the house."

"Then the lion is waiting for us?" he said, quaking in his slippers.

"I beg your pardon, sir," the woman answered. "I had hoped that you had
not noticed anything--"

"Good gracious!" he said, "do you think I can be in the house with a
roaring lion and not notice anything?"

"He happens to be hungry this morning, and nothing will keep him
quiet," said the kind lady, as if she were talking of her kitten.

"Madam," screamed the infuriated Dane, "one of us is certainly going
mad! When I tell you that there is a lion roaming over your house you
stand there quietly and tell me that he is hungry?"

"If you will wait a moment, sir, I will explain."

"No explanation is needed, madam. If I can get out of this house alive
I will meet you in some other un-lion-visited part of Boston and pay
you." And he added, with great sarcasm, "He is probably a pet of yours,
and your ex-boarders have furnished his meals."

Instead of being shocked at this, the gentle landlady's eyes beamed
with content. "That's just it--he is a pet of mine, and he lives in the
back parlor."

"The lion is here in your back parlor, and you have the face to keep
boarders?" shrieked the Dane.

"My other boarders have left me."

"I should think so, and this one is going to do like-wise, and without
delay"--beginning to put his things in his bag.

She said she was sorry he thought of going, but she could understand he
was nervous.

Nervous! If he could have given his feelings words he would have said
that never in all his life had he been so scared.

The meek lady before him watched him while he was making up his
packages and his mind. What he made up was his reluctance to flee from
danger and leave the lion-hearted little woman alone.

"I will not go," he said, in the voice of an early Christian martyr.

"You see, sir, this is how it happened," began the woman. "A very nice
sailor came to board here, but could not pay his bill, so to settle
with me he offered me his pet dog. I thought it a puppy, and as I had
taken a fancy to the little thing--he used to drink milk with the cat
out of the same saucer--I consented to keep it."

"And he turned out to be a lion? How did you first notice it?"

"Well, sir, I soon saw he attracted attention in the street. He wanted
to fight all the other animals, and attacked everything from a horse to
a milk-pan. It was when I was giving him a bath that I noticed that his
tail was beginning to bunch out at the end and his under-jaw was
growing pointed. Then the awful thought came to me--it was not a dog,
but a lion! This was a dreadful moment, for I loved him, and he was
fond of me, and I could not part with him. He grew and grew--his body
lengthened out and his paws became enormous, and his shaggy hair
covered his head. But it was when he tried to get up in my lap, and
became angry because my lap was not big enough to hold him, that he
growled so that I became afraid. Then I had bars put up before the door
of my back parlor, which was my former dining-room, and I keep him
there."

"Do you feed him yourself?"

"Yes, sir, but it takes a fortune to keep him in meat."

"How old do you think he is?" the Dane asked, beginning now to feel a
respectful admiration for the lone woman who preferred to give up
boarders rather than give up her companion.

"That I do not know," she replied, "but from his size and voice I
should say he was full-grown."

"I can vouch for his voice. Will you show him to me?" He had never seen
a lion boarding in a back parlor, and rather fancied the novelty. He
told the consul afterward that he had never seen a finer specimen of
the Bengal lion. To his mistress he was obedient and meek as a lamb.
She could do anything she liked with him; she passed her hand lovingly
over his great head, caressing his tawny locks, while the lion looked
at her with soft and tender eyes, and stuck out his enormous tongue to
lick her hand.

The Dane stayed on, like the good man he was. He had not the heart to
deprive the little woman of the few dollars he paid for his room, which
would go toward buying food for her pet. He himself became very fond of
"Leo," and would surreptitiously spend all his spare money at the
butcher's, who must have wondered, when he sent the quarters of beef,
how such a small family could consume so much--and the Dane would pass
hours feeding the lion with tidbits held on the end of his umbrella.

We were told afterward that the police discovered that the noises
coming from the house were not the usual Boston east winds, and, having
found out from what they proceeded, suggested that the Zoological
Gardens should buy the animal, for which they paid an enormous price.
So the sailor did pay his debt, after all!


CAMBRIDGE, _March, 1880_.

Dear L.,--I love to write to you; my thoughts run away with me, my pen
flies like a bird over the paper. You need not remind me of the fact
that my handwriting is execrable. I know it, therefore don't waft it
across America. Spare me this mortification. Tear the letters up after
reading them, or _before_, if you like. When I see the stacks of
never-looked-through letters being dragged from one place to the other,
tied up in their old faded ribbons, I feel that I do not wish mine to
have the same fate.

I read the other day H.'s lively letters full of dash, written in her
happy girlhood, and think of her as she is now, the tired mother of six
children, without a sparkle of humor left in her, and nothing more
spicy in her epistles than a lengthy account of the coal bill or the
children's measles. All the life taken out of her for ever! Just deadly
dull!

I feel in the above pathetic mood whenever I look out of my window and
see the veteran Washington elm facing wind and weather, bravely waiting
the end. With what care they bolster up its weary limbs, saw off its
withered branches, and deluge its old roots! They spend days belting
and tarring its waist, trying to destroy the perverse caterpillars; but
with all this they can never give it back its fresh and green youth. It
goes on patiently year after year putting forth its leaves in spring
and coquetting in its summer garb with its younger rivals. In autumn
the pretty colored leaves fly away, and it remains bare and grim under
its coating of snow and ice. Some day it will blow down, and nothing
but the monumental stone will be left on which future generations will
read, "Under this tree George Washington first took command of the
American Army, July 3, 1775."

If I stay in Cambridge long enough I shall become a beacon of wisdom.
Every one is so learned. If I happen to meet a lady in the street she
will begin to talk of the "old masters" as if it were as natural a
subject of conversation as the weather.


Washington, _March 23, 1880_.

Johan has this moment received the news that he is transferred to Rome.
We feel dreadfully sad to leave Washington and all our dear friends.
Our good Schloezer would say "_Que faire? La diplomatie a des exigences
qu'il ne faut pas negliger_."

The Queen of Denmark writes, "I hope that you are sure that I never
omit to name your husband when a change is coming on in diplomacy, and
I hope soon to see something advance to fulfil my wish. Alas, no great
benefit to me personally, as you will not live in Copenhagen, but you
would come here in an easier way, and you would be in Europe. Farewell,
dear Lilly, farewell, and think of me as I of you. Yours.... Louise.
The King's best compliments."

From this I fancy it was the gracious Queen whose finger pointed to the
post Rome. This will be the last letter you will get from me from this
side of the Atlantic, as I am going to be very busy--as busy as the bee
I only hope that people will let the busy B.




ROME, 1880-1890




ROME, PALAZZO ROSPIGLIOSI, _December, 1880_.

Dear Mother,--We are now almost settled in the Eternal City, after a
process which has seemed to me as eternal as the city itself, and I am
so far established as to be able to take up the threads of my new life.
The first of these will be this letter to you.

We found an apartment in this palace which is large and comfortable. It
looks onto the Piazza Quirinal on one side, and on the other into the
courtyard, where we see the procession of tourists with red Baedekers
under their arms, filing into the Palazetto to admire the famous
"Aurora."

Johan had been received by King Umberto before I arrived. The ceremony
seems to have been full of splendor and surrounded with etiquette. A
magnificent gala coach drawn by two splendid horses brought Signor
Peruzzi (master of ceremonies), accompanied by an escort of
carabineers, to the Hotel Bristol, where Johan was stopping, attracting
a large crowd in the Piazza Barberini--less than this is sufficient to
collect gazers-on in Italy, where the natives pass most of their time
in gazing at nothing at all.

As the carriage entered the _grande cour_ of the palace, the guards
presented arms and the military band played. A second master of
ceremonies met Johan at the foot of the principal staircase, while the
Grand Master of Ceremonies waited for him at the head of it.
Accompanied by these gentlemen, Johan passed through the long gallery,
which was lined on both sides by the civil and military members of the
household. At the extreme end of the gallery stood the prefect of the
palace, Signor Visone, who preceded Johan to the King's apartment and
retired after having announced him to his Majesty. This seems
complicated, but you see it takes all these functionaries to present a
Minister to a King.

Johan had prepared his obligatory speech about _les bonnes relations_
which had always existed between Italy and Denmark, and so forth, but
the King did not give him the opportunity to make any speech at all. He
held out his hand and said in a most friendly and cordial manner, "_Je
suis bien content de vous voir, et j'espere que vous vous plairez parmi
nous_." His Majesty then asked Johan about King Christian, and spoke
about the visit he had made to Denmark some years ago. Before the end
of the audience Johan succeeded in making the King accept his _lettres
de creance_, and presented the greetings of King Christian; but the
speech remained unspoken.

The contrast seemed very striking between the ceremonious manner in
which he was conducted to the King, and the simple and unconventional
manner in which he was received by his Majesty.

Yesterday I asked for an audience with the Queen. The Marquise
Villamarina (the _Grande Maitresse_) wrote that the Queen, though
desiring to see me, thought it better to defer the audience until after
the reception of the _Corps Diplomatique_, which was to take place in a
few days. I am rather glad of the few days of rest before the first of
January, as I am completely tired out.


_January, 1881._

Dear Mother,--The great event of the season has just taken place! The
_Corps Diplomatique_ has been received by their Majesties at the
Quirinal, and I have made my first official appearance and worn my
first court train. This splendid ceremony took place at two o'clock in
the afternoon, a rather trying time to be _decolletee_ and look your
best. In my letter from Paris I told you about my dress made by Worth.
It really is quite lovely--white brocade, with the tulle front--all
embroidered with iridescent beads and pearls. The _manteau de cour_ is
of white satin, trimmed with Valenciennes lace and ruches of chiffon. I
wore my diamond tiara, my pearls on my neck, and everything I owned in
the way of jewelry pinned on me somewhere.

Johan was in full gala uniform--the red one--on the back of which was
the chamberlain's key on the blue ribbon.

On arriving at the Quirinal we drove through the _porte-cochere_ and
stopped at the grand staircase, which was lined all the way up by the
tall and handsome guards, dressed in their brilliant uniforms.

We were received in the _salon_ adjoining the throne-room by the
Marquise Villamarina and the _Prefet du Palais_. In crossing this
_salon_ one lets one's train drag on the floor and proceeds,
peacock-like, toward the ballroom. It seems that this is the proper
thing to do, as it is expected of you to allow all beholders to admire
your train and to verify its length. It must be four and a half yards
long. I was told that the train of one of the diplomatic ladies last
year was not long enough, and she was officially reproached. She
excused herself by saying that she thought it would go "_that once_,"
but she found that it didn't go, and it was considered very
disrespectful of her to disregard the court's regulations.

On entering the ballroom you pick up your train and go to your
place--for every lady has her place according to her _anciennete_. I,
being the wife of the newest Minister, was naturally at the very end,
and next to me was the newest Minister himself. While waiting for their
Majesties you let your train fall, and it lies in a heap at your left
side.

Behind each lady was a red-velvet _fauteuil_, in which she could rest
for a moment, if her colleagues would screen her from public view by
"closing up," according to military language. We did not, fortunately,
have long to wait. The doors were opened and their Majesties entered.
The ladies courtesied low, and the gentlemen bowed reverentially.

I was quite overcome by the Queen's dazzling beauty and regal presence.
She wore a beautiful dress of very pale salmon-colored satin,
embroidered in the same color. A red-velvet _manteau de cour_ covered
with heavy embossed silver embroidery hung from her shoulders. Her
jewels were handsomer than anything I had ever seen before, even more
magnificent than those of the Empress Eugenie. The King and Queen
separated. The King turned to the _doyen_ of the _Corps Diplomatique_,
talked a long time with him, and then passed on, having a word for each
gentleman, not overlooking even the youngest secretary.

The Queen went directly toward the Countess Wimphen, the _doyenne_,
and, holding out her hand, leaned forward as if to kiss her cheek. The
Ambassadress sank almost to the ground. Then the Queen talked with all
the Ambassadresses and to the Ministers' wives. Madame Westenberg, the
wife of the Minister from Holland, being the _plus ancienne_ of these,
stood, full of importance at the head of her flock. The Queen's ready
mind found something of interest to say to every one, and she seemed
brimming over with conversation. There were continual glances between
their Majesties, as if they were mutually comparing notes, which I
fancy were something like this, "You'd better hurry, or I shall finish
before you do."

Every time the Queen turned, Marquis Guiccioli (the Queen's
chamberlain) bent down to the ground and arranged her train, spreading
it out flat on the floor. When the Queen caught sight of me a smile of
recognition passed over her face, and when she gave me her hand she
said: "I am so glad to see you again, and so happy to know that we are
going to have you in Rome. I've never forgotten your singing. Your
voice is still ringing in my ears."

I answered, "I have never forgotten your Majesty's kindness to me when
I was here before."

"I remember so well," she said, "how beautifully you and the Marquise
Villamarina sang that duet from 'La Pavorita.' We shall have some music
later, I hope," and she added, "The King was delighted with Monsieur de
Hegermann."

I said that Monsieur de Hegermann was very much flattered by the King's
gracious manner when the King received him.

On leaving me the Queen crossed the room, directing her steps toward
the _doyen_ Ambassador. In the mean while the King came toward the
ladies, passing rapidly from one to the other. He made quick work of
us, as he did most of the talking himself, hardly ever waiting for an
answer.

He said to me, "The Queen tells me that you have been here before."

"I have, your Majesty," I answered; "I was here five years ago and had
the honor to be presented to you."

"Really?" said the King. "I don't remember."

"But I've known you longer even than that," I said.

"How so?" asked the King, abruptly.

"When your Majesty was in Paris in 1867."

"That makes us very old friends," he said, smilingly.

Finally, when their Majesties had finished the circle, they met at the
end of the ball-room; every one made a _grande reverence_, and they
bowed graciously in response and withdrew.

We ladies, in walking out, allowed our _manteaux_ to trail behind us.
We entered the room where refreshments were served, and crowded around
the buffet, which groaned under the weight of all sorts of good things.
We drank one another's health and Happy New Year in champagne.


_January, 1881._

Dear Mother,--You would never believe that my official duties weigh as
heavily on me as they do. I received a letter from the Marquise
Villamarina, saying that "her Gracious Sovereign would be pleased to
receive me on the seventh at three o'clock." Therefore, dressed in my
best, I drove to the Quirinal. It is so near our palace that I had
hardly entered the carriage before I had to get out of it. The
gorgeously dressed and long-bearded _concierge_ who stood pompously at
the entrance of the palace waved the carriage to the other end of the
courtyard, and pounded his mace on the pavement in an authoritative
manner.

I mounted the broad, winding staircase, went through the long gallery
lined with lackeys, and reached the _salon_, where the Marquise
Villamarina was waiting to receive me. After the usual greetings she
said, "_Sa Majeste vous attend_," and led me through many _salons_ to
the one where the Queen was. I noticed, as we walked along, that the
Marquise removed her right-hand glove, I took this as a hint that I
should do the same. The Queen was standing when I entered the room. I
made a deep courtesy before going in. She came forward and gave me her
ungloved hand, over which I bowed deeply. The Marquise retired, leaving
me alone with the Queen, who motioned me to sit beside her on the sofa.
She spoke French, and so rapidly that I could hardly follow her. She
was kindness itself, as affable and charming as one could possibly be,
and put me at my ease immediately.

She had a little diamond ball hanging on a chain in the folds of her
dress, the prettiest little watch I ever saw. After a half-hour, which
passed like a flash, the Marquise reappeared in the doorway. This was a
signal for me to take my leave. The Queen rose, gave me her hand, and
said, "Good-by, Madame de Hegermann; I'm so glad to have you here in
Rome."

I should have liked to kiss her hand, but I was told that the wife of a
foreign minister never kisses the hand of any queen save her own.

I feel now that I am really launched. Let us hope that my barque will
ride the waves successfully! In Europe visits are not as with us in
America. Here the residents wait until the stranger makes the first
visit; in America it is just the contrary. I must say I like the
European way best. It would be very awkward for _me_ to receive
visitors now, especially when my household is in its present chaotic
state. I hope it will be only a question of cards for some time yet.


_January 20, 1881._

Dear Mother,--Last night the Princess Palavicini gave what she intended
to be the finest ball of the season, for which no expense was spared.
They had sent to Paris for the cotillon favors, to Nice for flowers to
decorate the magnificent _salons_ of the Palazzo Rospigliosi, and to
Naples for the famous Neapolitan orchestra.

The Princess Palavicini is one of the Queen's ladies of honor, belongs
to one of the most aristocratic families in Italy, and claims to have
the most select society in Rome. The King and the Queen had consented
to grace the ball with their presence. That the King had promised to go
was a great exception, as he has never been willing to go to any
function outside of the Quirinal since the much-talked-of ball at the
Duke di Fiano's. I believe that it is only his keen sense of duty that
makes him attend his own entertainments.

All the guests were assembled and awaiting the arrival of their
Majesties, but they did not come. The reason given was that the present
members of the Ministry took exception to the fact that neither they
nor their wives had been invited. The Ministers sent word to the King
that if their Majesties attended the ball they would give in their
resignations _en bloc_. The result was that the ball was a complete
failure. All the spirit had gone out of the guests, who moved about
aimlessly, talking in groups, and then quietly disappeared. The dancers
of the cotillon waited for the supper, which they said was magnificent
and sufficient for a hungry army.


ROME, _February 1881_.

Dear ----,--The two sons of the King of Sweden (Prince Oscar and Prince
Carl) are here for a fortnight's visit, and are seeing Rome thoroughly
in the company of two chamberlains, two cicerones, and some friends.
The young princes gave a dinner at the Hotel Quirinal, to which we
were invited. They had engaged the Neapolitan singers from Naples, who
sang the most delightful and lively songs. We felt like dancing a
_saltarello_, and perhaps might have done so if we had been in less
princely presences. The Scandinavian Club gave a feast--the finest and
greatest in the annals of the club--in honor of the two princes, to
welcome the Swedish and Norwegian Minister's bride, and also to
welcome us--a great combination--and to celebrate the carnival by a
fancy ball.

People were begged to come in costume, which, to be amiable, every one
was delighted to do. The costumes were not original. Roman peasants
were abundant. This costume needs only a towel folded square and put on
the head, and a Roman apron, easily obtained at the Campo di Fiore for
a song. Flower-girls with hats turned up on the side and baskets of
flowers were also popular. The handsome Prince Carl, who is six feet
six, needed only a helmet to personify to perfection a youthful god
Mars. Prince Oscar merely wore his naval mess-jacket. Herr Ross (the
Norwegian artist) was the head and spirit of the ball and directed
everything. He was dressed appropriately as a _pierrot_, with a wand in
his hand, and pirouetted about to his heart's content.

All was done on the most economical basis, as the club is entirely
composed of artists, who, consequently, are poor. The lines were drawn
apparently at the food, but in _skaals_ (toasts)--the thing dearest the
Scandinavian heart--they were extremely liberal and reckless. All six
of us were toasted to a crisp brown, and at each separate toast we
stood up and listened to the tale of our virtues.

The celebrated Ibsen honored this feast with his presence, and
especially honored the Chianti and Genzano wines, which were served
copiously, in _fiascos_. When you see Ibsen, with his lion face and
tangle of hair, for the first time, you are fascinated by him, knowing
what a genius he is, but when you talk with him, and feel his piercing,
critical eyes looking at you from under his bushy brows, and see his
cruel, satirical smile, you are a little prejudiced against him. We
meet him often at our friend Ross's studio at afternoon teas, where
there is always a little music. Ibsen sits sullen, silent, and
indifferent. He does not like music, and does not disguise his dislike.
This is not, as you may imagine, inspiring to the performers. In fact,
just to look at him takes all the life out of you. He is a veritable
wet blanket. I have read all his works in the original. I think they
lose a great deal in being translated. The Norwegian language is very
curt and concise, each word conveying almost the meaning of two in
English, which enables the author to paint a whole situation in a few
words. I can see the difference, in reading the English translations,
and where they fail to convey his real meaning. Strangers who wish to
see Ibsen must go to the cheap Italian restaurant, "Falcone," where he
sits before a small iron table, eating deviled devil-fish. No wonder
that he is morbid and his plays weird!


_February, 1881._

Dear Mother,--I know you would like to hear about the first ball at the
Quirinal. It was very splendid. Since the last and famous ball at the
Tuileries I had seen nothing like it. When we had mounted the
guard-lined staircase and passed through innumerable _salons_ we were
received by the _Grande Maitresse_, surrounded by numerous _dames de
palais_, all so beautiful that I wondered if they had been chosen for
their beauty alone. I never saw so many handsome women grouped
together. Numerous chamberlains preceded us into the ballroom and
showed us the benches where the _Corps Diplomatique_ have their places.
The benches looked inviting enough, with their red-velvet coverings and
their gilded legs, but I did not feel as if I should care to sit on
them for hours.

Madame Minghetti sat on one of the _taborets_ on one side of the
throne, and Madame Cairoli (wife of the Minister of Foreign Affairs)
occupied the _taboret_ on the other side. These two ladies are the only
ones who have the right to sit on the little square stools that are
called _taborets_.

We waited in our places until we heard the orchestra start the national
hymn, then every one stood up as the King and the Queen entered arm in
arm, followed by splendidly dressed and bejeweled _dames d'honneur_ and
the numerous suite. Their Majesties went to the throne, stood there a
moment, then stepped down and spoke to the two ladies on the
_taborets_. The _quadrille d'honneur_ commenced almost immediately.
Count Wimphen approached the Queen, making the deepest of bows, offered
her his hand, and led her to her place on the floor. M. de Keudell and
the Countess Wimphen took their places opposite the Queen. There were
only two other couples. Every one stood while this quadrille was being
danced.

The Queen looked exquisite, and seemed to be in the best of spirits.
She was the _point de mire_ of all eyes. She wore a superb gown of
light-blue brocade, the front entirely trimmed with old Venetian lace.
Her necklace and tiara were of enormous pearls and diamonds. She was
truly a vision of beauty and queenly grace.

After the _quadrille d'honneur_ the dancing became general. The Queen
first talked to the Ambassadresses, then to the wives of the Ministers,
sitting down on the bench beside the lady she desired to converse with,
the one on the other side moving on discreetly to make more room for
the Queen.

The King never came anywhere near the ladies, but talked only with the
gentlemen, frequently keeping one by his side and addressing him while
he talked with another.

The dancing continued until the Queen had returned from a tour of the
other _salons_, where she had been talking with those assembled there.
Re-entering the ballroom, preceded as always by her chamberlains and
followed by her ladies, she joined the King, and both, bowing
graciously as if to say good night, retired.

[Illustration:
QUEEN MARGHERITA
Mother of the present King of Italy as she appeared in 1886. The tiara
was a present from the King on the preceding Christmas. In the necklace
are some of the crown jewels, pearls and six remarkable emeralds.]


ROME, _February, 1881_.

Dear ----,--Mrs. Elliot brought Ouida to see me on my reception-day.
Ouida is, I am afraid, a little bit of a _poseuse_, but geniuses have
privileges which cannot be endured in ordinary people. She was dressed
with a lofty disregard of Roman climate and its possibilities, and in
utter defiance of common sense. She wore a dress open at the throat,
with short sleeves, and the thinnest of shoes and stockings, which she
managed to show more than was quite necessary. She spoke in an affected
voice, and looked about her continually as if people were watching her
and taking notes.

Among the ladies of the Queen here are three Americans who have married
Italians and have entered the charmed circle of the court. Their
services are only required upon certain gala occasions. One is the
daughter of Hickson Fields (whom we used to know so well in Paris), who
has married Prince Brancaccio. Another American lady, the wife of
Prince Cenci, who is of the same family as the lady with the turban.
Both the Prince and the Princess are at court, he as chamberlain and
she as _dame de palais_. He is called the "_Boeuf a la mode_," not
because he in any way looks like a _boeuf_, but because he is
fine-looking, masterful, and _a la mode_.

Count Gianotti, first master of ceremonies, has also an American wife.
She was a Miss Kinney, a daughter of Mrs. Kinney whom we knew in
Washington. She is tall and striking-looking. Her Friday receptions are
well attended, especially when she lets it be known that there will be
_particularly_ fine music. While the artist at the piano thinks he is
making a heavy and great success and is wrestling with his _arpeggios_
on a small piano, the guests come and go and rattle their teacups,
regardless of the noise, while the music goes on. This is often the
case in Roman _salons_.

The Marquis de Noailles is the French Ambassador. You recollect him and
the Marquise, who were in Washington the first year we were there. He,
as you know, is of the bluest blood of France. She is of Polish
extraction and lived in Paris, where she had a _succes de beaute_ in
the Napoleonic days. After her first husband's death (Count
Schwieskoska) she married de Noailles. They have an offspring, an
_enfant terrible_, if there ever was one, who is about nine years old,
and a worse torment never existed. Nobody on earth has the slightest
control over him--neither father, mother, nor tutor. The Marquis makes
excuses for his bringing-up by saying that, having had a very severe,
rod-using father himself, he was determined that if he ever had a child
he would spare the rod. He can flatter himself that he has thoroughly
succeeded in spoiling the child.

When we were at a very large and official dinner at the Farnese Palace
(the French Embassy), where the beautifully decorated tables filled the
whole length of the Carracci Gallery, the guests were amazed as seeing
Doudou (the name of the infant) come in on a velocipede and ride round
and round the table, all the servants dodging about to avoid collision,
holding their platters high in the air, for fear of being tripped up
and spilling the food. The astonished guests expected every moment to
have their chairs knocked from under them. This made this
should-be-magnificent dinner into a sort of circus. No persuasion or
threats could induce this terrible child to go away, and he continued
during the dinner to do his velocipede exercises. He must be a very
trying boy. His mother told me herself that he forces both her and his
father to take castor or any other oil when the doctor prescribes it
for him. People tell horrible stories about him. I am sure you will say
what every one else says--"Why don't his parents give him a good
spanking?"

At a small dinner at the English Embassy I met the celebrated tenor,
Mario. I had not seen him since in Paris in 1868, when he was singing
with Alboni and Patti in "Rigoletto." Alboni once invited the Duke and
the Duchess of Newcastle, Mr. Tom Hohler, and ourselves to dinner to
meet Mario in her cozy apartment in the Avenue Kleber. I was perfectly
fascinated by Mario and thought him the beau ideal of a Lothario. His
voice was melodious and _caressante_, as the French say, and altogether
his manners were those of a charmer. It was a most interesting dinner,
and I was all ears, not wanting to lose a word of what Alboni and he
said. What they talked about most was their many reminiscences, and
almost each of their phrases commenced, "_Vous rappelez vous_?" and
then came the reminiscence. After fourteen years I meet him here, a
grandpapa, traveling with his daughter. He is now the Marquis di Candia
(having resumed his title), _et l'homme du monde parfait_; he is
seventy years old and has a gray and rather scanty beard instead of the
smooth, carefully trimmed brown one of _autrefois_. Why do captivating
and fascinating creatures, such as he was, ever grow old? But, as Auber
used to say, "the only way to become old is to live a long time."

At the Embassy dinner he did not sit next to me, alas! but afterward we
sat on the sofa and talked of Alboni, Paris, and music. I told him that
the first time I had heard him sing was in America, when he sang with
Grisi.

"So long ago?" he said. "Why, you couldn't have been born!"

"Oh yes," I answered; "I was born, and old enough to appreciate your
singing. I have never forgotten it, nor your voice. One will never hear
anything like it again. Have you quite given up singing?" I asked.

"Why, I am a grandfather! You would not have a grandfather sing, would
you?"

"I would," I answered, "if the grandfather was Mario."


ROME, _1881_.

Dear ----,--The opening of the Parliament is a great occasion in Rome
(where one would like to be both inside and outside at the same time).
The children's governess had a friend who offered them seats in her
window, and this is what they saw outside:

The streets lined with soldiers from the Quirinal to the House of
Parliament, the large places in the Square swept clean and sanded (an
unusual sight in Rome), thousands of citizens hanging out of the
windows, flags and pennants waving in the air; brilliant cavalcades
followed one another, accompanied by military bands playing inspiring
music, and then came the Bersagliere, in their double-quick step,
sounding their bugles as they marched along, their hats cocked very
much on one side, with long rooster feathers streaming out in the wind.
This is the most unique regiment (I was going to say cockiest) one can
imagine. Their uniforms are very dark green, their hats are black
patent leather, and they wear black gloves and leggings. I am told that
these soldiers do not live long--that they hardly ever reach the age of
forty. The strain on the heart, caused by their quick pace, which is
something between a run and a trot, is too great, especially for the
buglers, who blow their bugles while running. At last came the splendid
gala coaches of the King and the Queen, followed by many others, and
then the military suite, making a splendid procession.

[Illustration:
KING VICTOR EMMANUEL
From a photograph given to Madame de Hegermann-Lindencrone in 1893.]

Inside, the large building was crowded to its limit. The state
Ministers were in their seats in front, the members of Parliament
behind them. The balconies were filled with people, and every available
place was occupied. When the Queen entered the royal _loge_ with her
ladies and chamberlains, there was a great deal of clapping of hands,
which is the way an Italian shows his enthusiasm and loyalty. Every one
arose and remained standing while the Queen came forward to the front
of her _loge_, bowed and smiled, and bowed and bowed again until the
clapping ceased; then she took her seat, and every one sat down.

The _loge_ reserved for the Diplomatic Corps is directly opposite the
Queen's. After a few moments' pause the platform supporting the throne
was noiselessly invaded by numerous officers in their glittering and
brilliant uniforms, and members of the court in their court dress
covered with decorations, who took their places on each side of the
throne. The King came in quietly without any pomp, and was greeted by
the most enthusiastic and prolonged demonstration. He acknowledged the
ovation, but evidently chafed under the slight delay, as if impatient
to commence his speech. Before doing so he turned toward the Queen's
_loge_ with a respectful inclination of the head, as if to acknowledge
her presence, then, bowing to the Diplomatic _loge_ and turning to the
audience, read his proclamation.

It was most difficult to hear what the King said, perched as we were
high above him; but we understood by the frequent interruptions and the
enthusiastic _benes_ and _bravos_ and the clapping of hands that what
he said pleased his subjects. The speech over, the King, accompanied by
his suite, left as quietly as he had entered, amid the vociferous
applause that followed. The Queen then arose, smiled and bowed to the
assembly, and withdrew.

The streets were thronged with soldiers and people, and it was as much
as his life was worth for the coachman to draw up in front of the door.

Mr. and Mrs. Field have almost completed their enormous palace out by
Santa Maria Maggiore, but they have not, as they hoped, succeeded in
making that part of Rome fashionable. They have bought land as far as
the Colosseum; Nero's gold house, which stands in a _finocchi_ patch,
is theirs too. The tenement-houses near them continue to festoon the
facades with the week's wash in every state of unrepair. There is no
privacy about the Italians washing their dirty linen, though they do
wash at home.

I seem to be introducing you to all Rome.

Mr. and Mme. Minghetti are old friends--that is, I have known her from
1866. Then she was Princess Camporeale, very handsome and captivating.
She is just as attractive now and holds Rome in her hand. Her _salon_
is the _salon_ where all fashionable Rome flocks. She has arranged it
in the most artistic manner. It is crowded with furniture, with cozy
corners and flirtatious nooks between _armoires_ and palm-trees.
Valuable old pictures and tapestries decorate the walls. The _salon_ is
two stories high and has an ornamental little winding staircase on
which an enormous stuffed peacock stands with outspread tail, as if
guarding things below. On her Sunday afternoons one is sure to hear
some good music. No one refuses, as it gives a person a certain
prestige to be heard there.

Mr. Minghetti, possessing the order of the Annunciata (the highest
decoration of Italy), is called "_Le cousin du Roi_." He is a great
personage. He has been Prime Minister and still plays a very
conspicuous part in politics. He has written many books on
constitutional law. He is tall, handsome, and altogether delightful.

The Storys still live in the third heaven of the Barberini Palace,
where on Fridays there is a steady procession of tea-thirsty English
and Americans who toil upward.

The two sons are what Mr. Story calls "promising." Waldo (the elder)
promises to rival his father as a sculptor. Julian promises to be a
great painter. His picture of Cardinal Howard, all in red against a red
background, is a fine study in color besides being an excellent
likeness.

The Haseltines are flourishing like green bay-trees. Their beautiful
apartment in the Altieri Palace, where his _atelier_ is, is filled with
his exquisite water-colors and paintings. Her brother, Mr. Marshall, is
staying with them. He is very amusing. Last evening he held the table
in a roar when he told of a recent experience.

At the Duchess Fiano's costume ball he had worn a costume of a
Mignon-Henri-II. He described it to us. A light-blue satin jacket, and
trunk-hose, slashed to exaggeration, with white satin puffs, a jaunty
velvet cap with a long feather, and white satin shoes turned up at the
ends.

Worth had made it and put a price on it almost equal to Marshall's
income, and just because it had cost so much and he had received a good
many compliments he thought it was his duty to have it and himself
photographed as a memento of his reckless extravagance before the
costume was consigned to oblivion. On the day of his appointment with
the artist he was dressed and ready in his costume. As it was a rainy
day, he provided himself with an umbrella and a pair of india-rubbers
big enough to go over the gondola-like shoes. He also carried a stuffed
falcon in his hand so that there should be no doubt as to what he was.

Unluckily, the horse fell down on the slippery _Corso_, and the
coachman insisted upon Marshall's getting out.

"You may imagine my feelings," he said, "at being obliged to show
myself in broad daylight in this get-up. A crowd of gaping idiots
gathered about me and made particularly sarcastic remarks. One said,
'_E il Re!_' ('It is the King'). Another screamed, '_Quante e bello i
piccolo_!' There was I stranded in the middle of the _Corso_, holding
an umbrella over my head in one hand and that ridiculous falcon in the
other, my feather dripping down my back; and when I looked down at blue
legs fast turning another color and my huge india-rubbers I realized
what a spectacle I was making of myself...."

We laughed till the tears rolled down our cheeks. He showed us the
photograph, and I must say that a less Mignon-Henri-II-like Mignon and
a more typical American face and figure could not be imagined. If Henri
II had caught sight of him with his thin legs, side-whiskers, and
eye-glasses he would have turned in his grave.

Dr. Nevin, our pastoral shepherd, has really done a great deal for the
American church here and ought to have a vote of thanks. He has
collected so much money that he has not only built the pretty church,
but has decorated it with Burne-Jones's tall angels and copies of the
mosaics from Ravenna. He has also built a comfortable rectory, which he
has filled with rare _bric-a-brac_. They say that no one is a better
match for the wily dealers in antiquities than the reverend gentleman,
and the pert little cabmen don't dare to try any of their tricks on
him.

He shows another side of his character when in the pulpit.

The mere sound of his own voice in reading the Scriptures affects him
to tears. Last Sunday he almost broke down completely when he was
reading about Elijah and the bears (a tale which does not seem in the
least pathetic to me). He is a great sportsman and plays all games with
enthusiasm, and is a fervent but bad whist-player, and when he revokes
(which he often does) we suppose he is thinking out his next Sunday's
sermon. In the summer vacation he goes to the Rocky Mountains and kills
bears.

A few Sundays ago it was, if ever, the occasion to say, "Don't kill the
organist; he is doing his best." Signor Rotoli (the organist), who does
not know one word of English, was dozing through Dr. Nevin's usual
sermon, and, having the music open before him of the solo that Mr.
Grant (the tenor) was going to sing, heard the first words of the
prayer, "O Lord, grant--" thought that it was the signal for the
anthem, and crashed down the opening chords.

Dr. Nevin looked daggers at him, as if he could have killed him on the
spot, and had there been anything at hand heavier than his sermon he
certainly would have thrown it at him.


_March, 1881._

Dear ----,--The carnival is over. As it is the first carnival I have
ever seen, I must describe it to you. It lasts almost a week. It
commenced last Wednesday and finished yesterday. Mr. Saumares, of the
English Embassy, had taken a balcony just opposite the Palazzo Fiano,
where the Queen always goes. He invited us for the whole week, and when
we were not in the fray ourselves, we went there at five o'clock to
take tea and to see the _corso di barbeir_ (the race of the wild
horses). The first day of the carnival we were full of energy and
eagerness. We were all in our shabbiest clothes, as this is the
customary thing. The coachman and the valet also had their worst
clothes on, which is saying a good deal, and the horses were even worse
than usual, which is saying a good deal more. The carriages were filled
to overflowing with flowers, bonbons, and confetti by the bushel. Our
servant, Giuseppe, had been since early morning bargaining for the
things, and after tucking us in the carriage he contemplated us with
pride as we drove off.

We started from the Piazzo del Popolo at three o'clock, and pelted
every one, exhausting our ammunition recklessly. Dirty little
beggar-boys would jump on the step of the carriage and snatch what
flowers they could, even out of our hands, and would then sell them
back to us, scrambling for the soldi which we threw at them; and, what
was worse, they picked the same bouquets up, which by this time had
become mere stems without flowers and covered with mud, and threw them
at us. They wanted their fun, too.

At five o'clock we stood on the balcony to watch the race of the wild
horses. These are brought straight in from the country, quite wild and
untamed. They are covered with all sorts of dangling pointed tin things
and fire-crackers, which not only frighten them dreadfully, but hurt
them. They started at the Piazza del Popolo and were hooted and goaded
on by the excited screams of the populace all the way down the narrow
_Corso_, which is a mile long. It is a wonder that the poor creatures
in their fright did not dart into the howling crowd, but they did not.
They kept straight on their way, stung to desperation by the fireworks
on their backs. At the Piazza di Venezia the street narrows into a very
small passage, which divides the palazzo from its neighbor opposite.
Here sheets (or, rather, sails) were hung across this narrow place,
into which the horses, blinded with terror, puzzled and confused, ran
headlong, and were easily caught. The one who gets there first gets the
prize, and is led back through the streets, tired and meek, wearing his
number on a card around his neck. It is a cruel sport, but the Italians
enjoy it, believing, as they do, that animals have no souls, and
therefore can support any amount of torture.

Nothing is done on Friday. The following Tuesday--Mardi-gras--was the
last day. Then folly reigned supreme. After the horses had run their
race and twilight had descended on the scene, the _moccoletti_ began.
This is such a childish sport that it really seems impossible that
grown-up men and women could find any amusement in taking part in it.
Lighting your own small tallow candle and trying to put out your
neighbor's--that is what it amounts to. Does it not sound silly? Yet
all this vast crowd is as intent on it as if their lives and welfare
were at stake. At eight o'clock, however, this came to an end, the last
flickering light was put out, and we went home--one would think to play
with our dolls.


ROME, _1881_.

Dear ----,--Since we are bereft of balls and _soirees_ we devote our
time to improving our Italian. Johan and I take lessons of a monsignore
who appears precisely at ten every morning. We struggle through some
verbs, and then he dives into Dante, the most difficult thing to
comprehend in the Italian language. Then he tries to explain it in
Italian to us, which is more difficult still. He makes us read aloud to
him, during which he folds his hands over his fat stomach and audibly
goes to sleep. He will awake with a start and excuse himself, saying
that he gets up at five o'clock in the morning for _matines_, and that
naturally at eleven he is sleepy; but I think he only pretends to sleep
and takes refuge behind his eyelids, in order to ponder over the
Italian language as "she is spoke."

Sgambati, the very best composer and pianist in Rome, gives lessons to
Nina, who he says has "_molto talento_." Sgambati has a wonderful and
sympathetic touch, which is at once velvety and masterful. His gavotte
is a _chef-d'oeuvre_. He calls it a gavotte, but I tell him he ought to
call it "The Procession of the Cavaliers," because it has such a
martial ring to it. It does not in the least resemble a Gavotte Louis
XV. I seem to see in my mind's eye Henry V. trying to rally his
comrades about him and incite them to combat. Sgambati looks like a
_preux chevalier_ himself, with his soft, mild blue eyes and long hair
and serene brow. He brought a song that he composed, he said, "_per la
distinta Eccellenza Hegermann_ expressly by her devoted and admiring
Sgambati." Although the song was beautiful as a piano piece and as _he_
played it, I could not sing it. I said:

"My dear Sgambati, I can never sing 'Mio' on a si-bemol. Can I not
change it for an 'A'?"

"No!" answered Sgambati. "The-whole meaning would be lost; but you can
broaden it out and sing 'Miaa.'"

Another shining light is Tosti, who comes to us very often. He is by
far the best beloved of popular composers. He understands the voice
thoroughly and composes songs which are melodious and easy to sing.
Therefore every one sings them. He has not much of a voice, but when he
sings his compositions he makes them so charming that they sell like
wildfire. He is the most amiable of geniuses, and never refuses to sing
when he is asked.

Yesterday I sang something I had composed as a _vocalize_. He liked it
so much that he asked why I did not sing it as a song.

I said, "I cannot write either it or the accompaniment."

"That is easy enough," he replied. "I will write it for you," and
scribbled it off then and there.

He dedicated a piece to me called "Forever," which I sing on every
occasion.

I have a great friend in Madame Helbig, the wife of Herr Helbig, the
German archaeologist in Rome. She is born a Russian princess, and is
certainly one of the best amateur musicians, if not the best, I have
ever met. She is of immense proportions, being very tall and very
stout. One might easily mistake her for a priest, as she is always
dressed in a long black garment which is a sort of water-proof; and as
her hair is short and she never wears a hat, you may well imagine that
she is very well known in Rome. When she hails a cab to take her up the
very steep Caffarelli Hill, where they live, the cabbies, who are
humorists in their way, look at her, then at their poor, half-fed
horses and the weak springs of their dilapidated _bottes_ (cabs), shake
their heads, and, holding up two dirty fingers, say, "_In due volte_"
(which means "in two trips"). Mr. Ross, the Norwegian painter, whose
English is not quite up to the mark, said she was the "hell-biggest"
woman he ever saw; and when she undertook a journey to Russia, said,
"Dear me, how can she ever travel with that corpse of hers?"


ROME, HOLY WEEK, _1881_.

My dear Aunt,--The churches are open all day. St. Peter's, Laterano,
Santa Maria Maggiore each has one of the famous sopranos. The music
is--well, simply divine! I can't say more. You must hear it to
appreciate it. (Some day I hope you will.) Good Friday is the great day
at St. Peter's. The church is so crowded that one can hardly get a
place to stand. There are not chairs enough in any of the churches
during Holy Week for the numerous strangers that pervade Rome. My
servant generally carries a camp-stool and rug, and I sit entranced,
listening in the deepening twilight to the heavenly strains of
Palestrina, Pergolese, and Marcello. Sometimes the soloists sing
Gounod's "Ava Maria" and Rossini's "Stabat Mater," and, fortunately,
drown the squeaky tones of the old organ. A choir of men and boys
accompanies them in "The Inflammatus," where the high notes of M.'s
tearful voice are almost supernatural. People swarm to the Laterano on
Saturday to hear the Vespers, which are especially fine. After the solo
is finished, the priests begin their monotonous Gregorian chants, and
at the end of those they _slap-bang_ their prayer-books on the wooden
benches on which they are sitting, making a noise to wake the dead. I
thought they were furious with one another and were refusing to sing
any more. It seemed very out of place for such an exhibition of temper.
A knowing friend told me that it was an old Jewish custom which had
been repeated for ages on this particular day and at this hour. It
closes the Lenten season.

On Easter Sunday I sang in the American church. Dr. Nevin urged me so
much that I did not like to refuse. I chose Mendelssohn's beautiful
anthem, "Come unto Me."


ROME, _1883_.

Dear ----,--We have moved from the Palazzo Rospigliosi to the Palazzo
Tittoni, in Via Rasella, which leads from the Palazzo Barberini down to
the Fontana di Trevi. I never would have chosen this palace, beautiful
as it is, if I could have foreseen the misery I suffer when I hear the
wicked drivers goading and beating their poor beasts up this steep
hill. The poor things strain every muscle under their incredible
burdens, but are beaten, all the same. I am really happy when I hear
the crow--I mean the bray--of a donkey. It has a jubiliant ring in it,
as if he were somehow enjoying himself, and my heart sympathizes with
him. But it may be only his way of expressing the deepest depths of
woe.

Mrs. Charles Bristed, of New York, a recent convert to the Church of
Rome, receives on Saturday evenings. She has accomplished what hitherto
has been considered impossible--that is, the bringing together of the
"blacks" (the ultra-Catholic party, belonging to the Vatican) and the
"whites," the party adhering to the Quirinal. These two parties meet in
her _salon_ as if they were of the same color. The Pope's singers are
the great attraction. She must either have a tremendously long purse or
great persuasive powers to get them, for her _salon_ is the only place
outside the churches where one can hear them. Therefore this _salon_ is
the only platform in Rome where the two antagonistic parties meet and
glare at each other.

We went there last Saturday. The chairs were arranged in rows, superb
in their symmetry at first, but after the first petticoats had swept by
everything was in a hopeless confusion. Two ladies sitting on one
chair, one lady appropriating two chairs instead of one, and another
sitting sideways on three. The consequence was that there was a
conglomeration of empty chairs in the middle of the room, while crowds
of weary guests stood in and near the doorway, with the thermometer
sky-high! When one sees the Pope's singers in evening dress and white
cravats the prestige and effect are altogether lost. This particular
evening was unusually brilliant, for the monsignores and cardinals were
extra-abundant. There were printed programs handed to us with the list
of the numerous songs that we were going to hear.

The famous Moresca, who sings at the Laterano, is a full-faced soprano
of forty winters. He has a tear in each note and a sigh in each breath.
He sang the jewel song in "Faust," which seemed horribly out of place.
Especially when he asks (in the hand-glass) if he is really Marguerita,
one feels tempted to answer, "_Macche_," for him. Then they sang a
chorus of Palestrina, all screaming at the top of their lungs,
evidently thinking they were in St. Peter's. It never occurred to them
to temper their voices to the poor shorn lambs wedged up against the
walls.

Afterward followed the duet, "_Quis est homo_," of Rossini's "Stabat
Mater," sung by two gray-haired sopranos. This was extremely beautiful,
but the best of all was the solo sung by a fat, yellow-mustached
barytone. I never heard anything to compare to his exquisite voice. We
shall never hear anything like it in this world, and I doubt in the
next. Maroni is the man who always directs the Pope's singers. He makes
more noise beating time with his roll of music on the piano than all
the cab-drivers below in the Piazza del Popolo.

The supper-room was a sight to behold--the enormous table fairly
creaking under the weight of every variety of food filled half the
room, leaving very little space for the guests. The sopranos got in
first, ahead even of the amiable hostess, who stopped the whole
procession, trying to go abreast through the door with a portly
cardinal and a white diplomat, leaving us, the hungry black and white
sheep, still wrestling with the chairs.

You must have heard of Hamilton Aide, the author of _The Poet and the
Prince_ and other works. He comes frequently to see us, and always
brings either a new book or a new song--for he is not only a
distinguished author, but a composer as well. He sings willingly when
asked. He is very fond of one of his songs, called "The Danube River."
If he had not brought the music and I had not seen the title as I laid
it on the piano, I should never have known that it was anything so
lively as a river he was singing about. Though I could occasionally
hear the word "river," I hoped that as the river and singer went on
they would have a little more "go" in them; but they continued babbling
along regardless of obstacles and time. I was extremely mortified to
see that several of my guests had dozed off. The river and the singer
had had a too-lullaby effect on them.


ROME, _1883_.

Dear ----,--Next to the Palazzo Tittoni lives a delightful family--the
Count and Countess Gigliucci, with a son and two daughters. The
Countess is the celebrated Clara Novello of oratorio fame. The three
ladies are perfectly charming. I love to go to see them, and often drop
in about tea-hour, when I get an excellent cup of English tea and
delicious muffins, and enjoy them in this cozy family circle.

Though they live In a palace and have a showy _portier_, they do not
disdain to do their shopping out of the window by means of a basket,
which the servant-girl lets down on a string for the daily marketing.
Even cards and letters are received in this way, as the porter refuses
to carry anything up to their third story. "_Sortita!_" screamed down
in a shrill voice is the answer to the visitor waiting below in the
courtyard.

When the three ladies are sitting at the tea-table dispensing tea, one
of them will suddenly commence the trio from "Elijah"--"Lift thine
eyes"--the other two joining in (singing without an accompaniment, of
course) in the most delicious manner. Their voices are so alike in
_timbre_ and quality that it is almost impossible to distinguish one
from the other. After the trio they go on pouring out tea as if nothing
had happened, whereas for me it is an event. It is such perfection!

Countess Gigliucci comes sometimes and sings with me. Her voice is
still beautiful and clear as a bell. What must it have been in its
prime? In her letters to me she calls me "my delicious blackbird."


ROME, _March, 1883_.

The King of Sweden came to Rome on an official visit to their
Majesties. I suppose it is called official because he is staying as a
guest at the Quirinal, therefore he is hardly seen in private. You
remember that I saw a good deal of him when he was in Paris in 1867. He
was then hereditary Prince to the throne of Sweden, and was called
Prince Oscar. He only stayed three days at Rome. There was a gala
dinner to which all the diplomats were invited. He greeted me very
cordially, shook hands in his genial manner, and talked about the past
(sixteen years ago) as if it were yesterday. He said, smilingly:

"You see, since I have become King I have cut my hair."

I had no idea what he meant and looked puzzled.

"Don't you remember," he said, "you called me 'the _Hair_ Apparent' on
account of my long locks?"

"Oh, your Majesty," I said, "how could I have been so rude?"

"It was not rudeness," he said, kindly. "You said what you liked in
those days. You were not then a diplomat's wife."

The day of his departure from Rome we went to the station. The King was
very gracious, and said to Johan, "I hope you and your wife will come
some day to Sweden," and gave my hand an extra-hearty squeeze. A hearty
squeeze from his hand was something to remember!

       *       *       *       *       *

The Queen has asked me to sing with her, and I go regularly twice a
week to the Quirinal at two o'clock. We sing all kinds of duets,
classical and the ultra-modern. The Queen's singing-master, Signor
Vera, and sometimes the composer, Signor Marchetti, accompany us--they
bring new music which has appeared, which we _dechiffrons_ under their
critical eyes. It is the greatest delight I have to be able to be with
her Majesty in such an informal way. She is so enchanting, so natural,
so gay, and so fascinating. No one can resist her. Am I not a greatly
privileged person? I presented Nina to her last week--her Majesty told
me to bring her with me on one of our singing-lesson days at half past
one--so we had a half-hour of conversation before the singing-master
came. The Queen said, after Nina had gone: "What a beauty she is! She
will set the world on fire."


_May, 1883._

The visit of the newly married couple, Prince Tomaso, brother of the
Queen, and Princess Isabella of Bavaria, has been the occasion of many
festivities.

Yesterday there was a garden party in the Quirinal gardens. It was a
perfect day, and the beautiful toilets of the ladies made the lawn look
like a _parterre_ of living flowers. The grounds are so large that
there were several entertainments going on at the same time without
interfering with one another.

A band of gipsies in their brilliant dresses were singing in one place,
and in a _bosquet_ a troupe of Neapolitans were dancing the tarantella
in their white-stockinged feet. There were booths where you could have
your photograph taken and your fortune told. Everywhere you were given
souvenirs of some kind. One played at the _tombola_ and always got a
prize. Buffets, of course, at every turn. We went from one surprise to
another. The Prince of Naples was omnipresent and seemed to enjoy
himself immensely. Whoever arranged this _fete_ ought to have received
a decoration. Twilight and the obligation of having to dress for the
evening concert put a stop to this delightful afternoon. In the evening
there was a gala concert which was very entertaining. It commenced by a
piece written by the Baron Renzie and very well performed by amateurs,
and some mandolinists, who played several things more or less
acceptably, and then came a long and tedious symphony which was too
classical for the majority of the audience. The Queen and the Duchess
of Genoa seemed to enjoy it. I did, too, but the King looked bored to
death, and the bridegroom went fast to sleep. The Queen, who was
sitting next to him, gave him a vigorous pinch to wake him up. The
pinch had the intended effect, but the groan he gave was almost too
audible. In the interlude when ices were passed the Princess talked
with the wives of the diplomats who were brought up to her. The Queen,
still laughing at her brother's discomfiture, passed about among the
other guests.


_December, 1883._

We returned to Rome a week ago. It was said that their Majesties had
expressed the desire that as many diplomats as possible should be
present when the Crown Prince of Germany came for his visit to the
Quirinal.

During the stay of the Crown-Prince Frederic the crowds waited
patiently outside the Quirinal, hoping to catch a glimpse of him. He is
very popular, and whenever he shows himself he is cheered to
_outrance_. Sometimes he came out on the balcony, and once he took the
Prince of Naples up in his strong arms and cried "_Evviva l'Italia_"
The people clapped their hands till they were worn out.

There were fireworks from the Castel St. Angelo in his honor which were
wonderfully fine.

To reach the balconies reserved for the _Corps Diplomatique_ we were
obliged to leave our carriages in a little side-street and go through a
long carpeted passage, the walls of which were hung with fine old
tapestries taken from the Quirinal in order to hide the unsightly
objects concealed behind them. The balconies were erected on the
outside of the dilapidated houses which overlook the Tiber and facing
the Castel St. Angelo. How they ever managed to make this passage is a
mystery! In the daytime one could not see the possibility of cutting
through the labyrinth of these forlorn tumble-down houses. We sat
trembling for fear that the shaky planks would suddenly give way and
plunge us into the whirling Tiber under our feet. The fireworks were
the most gorgeous display of pyrotechnics I ever saw. And the bouquet
as the _finale_ was a magnificent tornado of fire which left a huge "F"
blazing, which lighted up the December night. We were thankful when we
reached home alive.

The next and last evening of the festivities was a gala opera, where
there was a great deal of clapping and enthusiasm which accompanied a
rather poor performance of "Aida." They said that Verdi was in the
audience, but he did not appear, nor was there any demonstration made
for him.


ROME, _January, 1884_.

My dear ----,--There are a few changes in the Embassies. Sir Saville
Lumley has succeeded Sir August Paget at the English Embassy. Sir
Saville's own paintings now cover Lady Paget's chocolate cherubs--only
those above the door and their bulrushes are left to tell the tale.
Monsieur Decrais, the new French Ambassador and his wife, who replace
the De Noailles in the Farnese Palace, are already established. The
iciness of Siberia continues to pervade the palace in spite of all
efforts to warm those vast _salons_, enormous in their proportions--I
do not know how many _metres_ they are to the ceiling. The Carracci
gallery separates the bedrooms from the _salons_. Madame Decrais says
that they are obliged to dress like Eskimos when they cross it, as they
do twenty times a day.

How the Roman climate must have changed since the time when the Romans
went about in togas and sandals and lay on slabs of marble after their
bath!

We are delighted to have our dear friend M. de Schloezer here. He is
Minister to the Vatican, and is (or ought to be) as black as ink, while
we Quirinalers are as white as the driven snow; but he has no prejudice
as to color, nor have we, so we see one another very often and dine
together whenever we can. As soon as his silver was unpacked we were
invited straightway to dinner. His rooms in the Palazzo Capranica
(belonging to the family of Madame Ristori's husband) are as bare as
those he occupied in Washington--barer, even, for here there are no
_portieres_. In the _salon_ he had his beloved Steinway grand, one
stiff sofa, four enormous _fauteuils_, destined for his cardinals, a
few small gilt _chaises volantes_ (as he calls little chairs that are
easy to move about), one table on which reposes the last piece of
marble picked up while strolling in the Forum, and, as a supreme
banality, his niece's Christmas present, a _lamp-mat_, on which stands
the lamp in solitary glory.

Schloezer's dinners are of the best, and are most amusing. He
superintends everything himself and gives himself no end of trouble.
Each course as it is served receives an introductory speech: "_Ce pate,
mon cher, est la gloire de ma cuisiniere_" etc.

He says that all _volaille_ ought to be carved at the table, therefore
he carves the birds and the chickens himself, brandishing the knife
with gusto while sharpening it.

And as for the wines! Dear me! After filling his glass he holds it
against the light, tastes the wine, smacks his lips, and says: "_Ce vin
de Bordeaux est du '64. Il faut le boire avec recueillement. Je l'ai
debouche moi-meme_."

He has a great liking for Lenbach (the famous painter), although they
are utterly different in character and ways. Lenbach is not musical,
and is rather rough and gruff in his manners. Even his best friends
acknowledge that he does not possess the thing called manners. He is
clever and witty in his way, but his way is sarcastic and peevish.
Sometimes when he is talking to you he beams and scowls alternately
behind his spectacles. You think that he is listening to you, but not
at all! He is only thinking out his own thoughts, in which he seems
always to be wrapped.

Lenbach occupies the same apartment in the Palazzo Borghese that
Pauline Bonaparte lived in. Probably the very couch is still there on
which she reclined for her famous statue. You remember what a modest
lady friend said to her, "_Cela m'etonne que vous ayez pu poser comme
cela_!"--meaning, without clothes; to which the Princess replied: "But
why do you wonder? Canova had a fire in the room."

Lenbach asked permission to paint Nina. We did not refuse, and expected
great things. He photographed her twenty times in different poses,
turning her head (physically, not morally) every which way, and painted
thirteen pictures of her, but there was only one (a very pretty profile
in crayon with a pink ear and a little dash of yellow on the hair)
which he thought good enough to give us.

Do not ask me what we have done or whom we have seen. We are out
morning, noon, and night. Every day there is a regular "precession of
the equinoxes"--luncheons, dinners, and _soirees_ galore.

I sing twice a week with the Queen--red-letter days for me. I look
forward with joy to passing that hour with her. I never knew any one so
full of interest, humor, and intelligence. It is delightful to see her
when she is amused. She can laugh so heartily, and no one, when there
is occasion for sympathy, is more ready to give it. Her kind eyes can
fill with tears as quickly as they can see the fun in a situation.

Nina and I go out every morning from ten to twelve. Johan is then busy
with his despatches and shut up in the chancellery. It is the fashion
during those hours to drive in a cab in the _Corso_. It is not
considered _chic_ to go out in one's own carriage until the afternoon.
I am glad of the excuse of buying even a paper of pins in order to be
out in the sunshine.

Another queer fashion is that on Sundays gentlemen (the highest of the
high) who have their own fine equipages, of which on week-days they are
so proud, drive to the fashionable places, like Villa Borghese and
Villa Doria, in _cabs_. Sometimes you will see the beaux most in vogue
squeezed (three or four of them) in a little _botte_ (the Italian name
for cab), looking very uncomfortable. But as it is the thing to do,
they are proud and happy to do it. But on other days!--horrible!
Nevertheless, it is on Sundays (_especially_ on Sundays) that Principe
Massimo causes people to stop and stare because he drives abroad on
that day in his high-seated phaeton, his long side-whiskers floating in
the wind, his servants in their conspicuous dark-red liveries covered
with armorial braid, pale-blue cuffs and collars, sitting behind him.
Then it is that the Romans say to themselves, Our aristocracy is not
yet dead.

Our colleagues, the de W.'s, had a _loge_ in the Argentina Theater and
invited us the other evening to go with them to see the great Salvini
in "Hamlet." The theater was filled to the uppermost galleries; you
could not have wedged in another person. The people in the audience,
when not applauding, were as silent as so many mice; this is unlike the
usual theater-going Italian, who reads and rustles his evening paper
all through the performance, looking up occasionally to hiss.

Salvini surpassed himself, perhaps on account of the presence of her
Majesty, whose eyes never wandered from the stage, except in the
_entr'actes_, when she responded to the ovation the public always makes
wherever she appears. She rose and bowed with her sweet smile, the
smile which wins all hearts.

There was only one hitch during the performance, and that was when
Hamlet and Polonius fought the duel; the latter, unfortunately, missed
his aim and speared Hamlet's wig with his sword, on which it stuck in
spite of the most desperate efforts to shake it off. Salvini, all
unconscious, continued fencing until he caught sight of his wig
dangling in the air and, realizing his un-Hamlet-like bald head, backed
out into the side-wing, leaving Polonius to get off the stage as best
he could.

In the _entr'acte_ Monsieur de W. and I talked over the play, and,
unfortunately, I said, "Did Hamlet ever exist?" A bomb exploding under
our noses could not have been more disastrous! He burst out in
indignant tones, and we almost came to literary blows in our violent
discussion. M. de W. insists upon it that Shakespeare knew all about
Hamlet and where he lived, the medieval clothes he wore, and that he
was the sepulchral Prince with whom we are so familiar; that Ophelia
was a very misused and unhappy young lady, who drowned herself in a
water-lily pond; and that Hamlet's papa used to come nights and scare
the life out of the courtiers.

"Wait a little," I said. "I flatter myself that I know the story of
Hamlet thoroughly. I spent all last summer studying the old Danish
chronicle, which was written in Latin in 1200 by a monk called Saxo
Grammaticus, then translated into old-fashioned Danish, which I
translated, to amuse myself, into English. If what Saxo says is true
Hamlet lived about two or three hundred years before Christ."

"Impossible!" almost screamed my friend.

I went on, regardless of M. de W.'s dangerous attitude: "Denmark at
that time was divided into several kingdoms, and Hamlet's father was
king in a part of Jutland, which, let us say, was as small as Rhode
Island--"

"What nonsense!" interrupted M. de W., indignantly.

"He probably went about in fur-covered legs and a sheepskin over his
shoulders, as was then the fashion. He was called Amleth; Shakespeare
simply transposed the h. He was a naughty little boy, vicious and
revengeful. He despised his mother and hated his uncle, who was his
stepfather."

[Illustration:
TWO YOUNG QUEENS
From a photograph, taken in 1878, of the two daughters of the King of
Denmark. They were then the Princess of Wales and the Grand Duchess
Dagmar. They are now the widows of two European sovereigns, Dowager
Queen Alexandra of England and the Dowager Empress of Russia. They
spend their summers together in a small cottage near Copenhagen.
Alexandra is on the right of the picture.]

"Why?" asked, in a milder tone, M. de W.

"Because his mother and the uncle, wishing to marry and mount the
throne, killed Hamlet's father. Hamlet passed his youth haunted by
thoughts of revenge and how he could punish the two sinners."

"It was clever of Shakespeare to let the father do the haunting and
leave to Hamlet the _role_ of a guileless and sentimental youth; the
authorities do not agree as to whether Hamlet was really a fool or only
pretended to be one."

"Fool he certainly was not," I replied. "He was clever enough to play
the part of one, and he played it so well that no one, even at that
time, could make out what he really was."

"Then," declared M. de W., "Shakespeare got that part of it
right--perhaps you will concede that much. How about Hamlet's grave?
Surely there is no humbug about that? I have seen it myself. Has it
been there since two hundred years B.C.?"

"Hamlet's grave at Helsingoer is an interesting bit of imagination. A
unique instance of inaccuracy on the part of the Danes! Hamlet lived to
be king in his little land and was buried where he died--if he ever
lived--as an Irishman would say."

"How confusing you are," said my opponent. "You destroy my dearest
illusions--I, who adore Shakespeare's Hamlet."

"I adore Shakespeare's Hamlet, too, but I do not adore Saxo's. Hamlet's
love for his father was the only redeeming point about him. Did you
know that he married the daughter of the King of England?"

"Shakespeare only mentions Ophelia, and we are led to believe that
Hamlet died unmarried."

"Well," I answered, "if Saxo is right, he was married, had lots of
children, and continued the dynasty till _dato_."

"Go on! You interest me."

"He made himself very disagreeable at home with his silly talk and his
hatred of the King and the Queen. In a conversation he had with his
mother he flung away all disguise and also hurled some unpleasant and
extremely unvarnished truths full in the maternal face."

"That does not speak well for him," said Mr. de W.

"To get rid of him," I continued, warming to my subject, "the Danish
court sent him to the English court with a nice letter of introduction,
and at the same time sent a letter to the King of England, begging him
to have Hamlet killed somehow or other, but clever Hamlet stole and
read the letter and killed the messenger himself."

"That shows he was no fool," acknowledged M. de W.

"The King of England gave him a fine dinner, and I think the English
court must have opened its eyes when Hamlet pushed away the food,
saying it was '_too bad to eat_.' He told them that the bread tasted of
dead men's bones and the wine of blood, and, worst of all, that the
Queen was not a born lady. When the court asked with one voice how he
dared breathe such an insult he answered that there were three things
that proved that what he said was true."

"It would amuse me to know what the three things were," said M. de W.

"One was," I said, "that the Queen held up her dress while walking;
another, that she threw a shawl over her head; and the last, that she
picked her teeth and chewed the contents! I actually blush for the
Danes when I read the account of that dinner."

"I confess," laughed de W., "that that _was_ pretty bad. Tell me some
more."

"The courtiers hurried to examine into affairs and found that
everything that Hamlet said was true. The poor Queen was horribly
mortified, for they discovered that her papa had been a peasant."

"I suppose," said M. de W., "that the court forbade the banns after
that."

"No," I said, "Hamlet went home with his bride, and the royal Danish
court of Jutland made an enormous feast for the home-coming of the
princely couple. _This_ was the thing that Hamlet had waited for all
his life. Saxo hurries over this harrowing episode. Hamlet succeeded in
getting all the guests dead drunk, then he pulled the tapestries all
down on top of them and set fire to the palace and burned them all up.
What do you think of your adorable Hamlet now?"

"I think," said M. de W., curtly, "all things considered, that Hamlet
was a damn fool!"

"I thought so too until I read the speech he made to his subjects when
he mounted the throne. It was the most beautiful bit of sentiment, the
tenderest tribute to his dead father, and showed his undaunted love for
his country. I am sorry that Shakespeare made no mention of this."

Mr. Story, who was with us, said he once heard a lady say she did not
care much for Shakespeare, because he was "so full of quotations."


ROME, _1884_.

Dear ----,--The King drives every day in his high English phaeton
through the crowded streets, not fearing to expose himself to his
people, as some other sovereigns do.

When some one remonstrated with him, "Your Majesty ought not to run
such risk," he answered, smilingly: "_Comment donc! C'est un des ennuis
de notre metier_." Everybody bows respectfully, and in return he takes
off his hat and holds it at right angles, keeping the reins in the
other hand. Sometimes he does not get the chance to put his hat back on
his head the whole length of the _Corso_. His adjutant sits by his side
and a lacquey sits behind, dressed in black. The King likes simplicity
in all things.

The Queen drives in a landau (_a huit resorts_), accompanied by her
lady in waiting; the servants in their brilliant red liveries can be
seen from a long distance. Her Majesty recognizes every one, smiles and
bows right and left; sometimes she will look back and give a person an
extra smile. She says that she can see, while flying by, all the
objects exposed in the shop windows, and often sends the servant back
to buy what she has noticed.

When their Majesties meet in the drive in their respective equipages
the Queen rises in her seat as if to make a courtesy, and the King
responds in the most ceremonious manner.

Before Christmas the Queen goes about in the shops and makes her own
purchases (the shops are then shut to the public). All the ladies of
the court receive magnificent gifts, generally in the shape of jewels.

The King always keeps on his writing-table and within touch a quantity
of rare unset stones. He likes to look at them and handle them; and
then, when the occasion comes to give a present, he has the stones set
in diamonds.


MILAN, _November 2, 1884_.

My dear Aunt,--We arrived here last night, and shall remain till
to-morrow, when we are expected at Monza, where the King and the Queen
have invited us to make them a visit.

Count Gianotti came this afternoon to tell us that we are to take the
train leaving here at three o'clock. Johan and I went out for a stroll
while the maid and valet were packing. We wandered through the Victor
Emmanuel Gallery, then went into the ever-enchanting cathedral. I never
tire of seeing this wonderful place. I pay my two soldi for a chair and
sit there, lost in thought and admiration. The dimness and silence make
it very solemn and restful. Every little while a procession of intoning
priests shuffle by to go to some altar in one of the side-chapels for
some particular service. Sometimes it is a baptism, and the peasants
whose babies are going to be baptized stand in an awed group around the
font. Everything is done in a most matter-of-fact way. I look at the
splendid carvings and filigree of marble and wonder how any _one_
mountain can have furnished so much marble, since it started furnishing
hundreds of years ago. It is lucky that the mountain belongs
exclusively to the Church!

On my return to the hotel I found a card from Countess Marcello, saying
that the Queen had suggested our going to the Scala Theater, and that
we were to occupy the royal box. She has just left Monza. She is lady
in waiting to the Queen, and, her duties having finished for this
month, she is replaced by the Princess Palavicini. She told us that
there were at present no guests at Monza. She said that there are three
categories of toilets: "_good, better_, and _best_" (as she put it),
besides the unexpected which always arrived in the shape of court
mournings, and one must be prepared for them all. When the King's
sister (Princess Clothilde) is there, only severe, sober, and half-high
dresses are worn. For the Queen's mother (the Duchess of Genoa) the
usual evening dress, _decolletee_, with a train. But when the Queen of
Portugal comes everything must be extra magnificent, with tiaras and
jewels galore and the last things of modernity.

We arrived in the theater just as the curtain was going down on the
first act. The audience stared steadily at us with and without
opera-glasses. I suppose people thought that we were members of some
royal family. As the performance was not interesting and I was tired,
we left at an early hour. I scribble this off to you just before going
to bed.


MONZA, _November 3d_.

You see that I am writing on royal paper, which is a sign that we are
here. Now I will tell you about things as far as we have got. At the
station in Milan, Count Gianotti met us and put us safely in the
carriage, which bore a kingly crown; Princess Brancaccio accompanied
us. On arriving at Monza station we found Signor Peruzzi waiting for
us, and an open barouche drawn by four horses mounted by postilions
from the royal stables. We drove through the town and through the long
avenue leading to the _chateau_ at a tremendous pace, people all taking
off their hats as we passed.

[Illustration:
THE PALACE, MONZA (FRONT)
Occupied in the summer by the King and Queen of Italy.]

[Illustration:
PALACE AND GARDENS
Here the King and Queen entertained their friends. Apartments in the
second story, the entire right half as seen in the picture, were
occupied by the De Hegermann-Lindencrones.]

In the courtyard (which is immense) the carriage stopped at the
entrance of the left wing, and we entered the _chateau_, where the
Marquise Villamarina met us and led the way to our apartment, telling
me, as we walked along, that her Majesty was looking forward with much
pleasure to seeing us, and said that we were expected at five o'clock
for tea in the _salon_ and that I was to come dressed as I was, adding
that she would come for us to show the way.

I had time to admire our gorgeous set of rooms, which is finer than
anything I had ever seen before--finer than Compiegne, and certainly
finer than our apartment at Fredensborg.

We passed through an antechamber which led to my _salon_, the walls of
which are covered with red damask, the curtains and furniture of the
same; many beautiful modern pictures hang on the walls, and there are
pretty vitrines filled with _bric-a-brac_. My dressing-room is entirely
_capitonne_ in blue satin from top to bottom--even the ceiling. It has
long mirrors set in the walls, in which I am reflected and re-reflected
_ad infinitum_. My bath-room is a dream with its tiled walls and marble
bath. (My maid's room is next this.) My bedroom is as large as a
ballroom; the curtains, _portieres_, divans, and comfortable arm-chairs
are of white satin, and in the middle is a glass chandelier fit for a
Doge's palace. A hundred candles can light me when I go to bed. My bed
stands on a rather high platform and has white-satin curtains hanging
from a _baldaquin_ with fringe and tassels, and a huge Aubusson carpet
covers the whole floor.

Next to my bedroom is J.'s bedroom, which is also very large, with two
windows, furnished in red brocade; great gilt consols support the
elaborate-framed Italian mirrors. Then comes his dressing-room, which
connects with his bath-room and his valet's room. Then another
antechamber giving on to a corridor which leads to the great gallery.

The Marquise came to my door, and we followed her through two or three
drawing-rooms before we reached the center room, which is a very large
_salle_ with a dome taking in three stories.

The Queen welcomed me most cordially and seemed very glad to see me.
She kissed me on both cheeks and made me sit by her on the sofa. She
was, as always, lovely and gracious.

The repast was a very sumptuous high tea--all sorts of cold meats,
birds, confitures, cakes of various kinds, and sandwiches.

I asked the Queen if she had been singing much during the summer.
"Alas, no!" she replied. "My voice has had a vacation, and Vera and
Marchetti have also had theirs. I have been in Stresa with my mother,
and in Turin, but, now you are here, we shall certainly have some
music. Vera is here," and at that very moment the amiable old master
appeared. We remained talking till nearly six o'clock; then we went up
to dress for dinner. I had a better look at our rooms. They appeared
more magnificent than before. My maid had unpacked everything, and a
fire was burning brightly in my bedroom, making it look cozy, if one
can make such a royal and luxurious apartment look cozy.

I looked at my bed on its platform and wondered how in the world I was
ever to get in it when the time came. The sheets and pillow-cases were
of the finest linen trimmed with exquisite Valenciennes, like huge
pocket-handkerchiefs. Instead of blankets there was a large white-satin
perfumed, sachet with a cord sewed round it, completely covering the
bed.

Johan was told not to be in evening-dress suit. The King always wears a
_redingote_ and a black tie. The other gentlemen, of course, do the
same. The dinner was at seven o'clock. Every one was assembled when we
entered the _salon_. The Prince of Naples was talking with some ladies.
His _Gouverneur_, Colonel Osio, stood near him. After a few moments the
King and the Queen came in together. The King greeted us with great
kindness. The Prince kissed his mother's hand, made a military salute
to his father, and left the _salon_. He is fifteen years old now, but
looks younger. He wears a uniform which makes him look even smaller
than he really is. The King gave his arm to the Queen, and every one
followed into the dining-room, going through the Japanese room. I
should say that there were twenty people at table, J. and I being the
only guests. I sat on the right of the King, and Johan sat on the right
of the Queen. The dinner was delicious. We had the famous white
truffles from Piemonte supplied exclusively for the King. These
truffles exist only in certain forests belonging to the Crown in
Piemonte. And there is only a certain kind of pigs that have the
particular kind of nose that can find them and rout them out from under
the ground. A pig and his nose are not enticing caterers, but
nevertheless the truffles are delicious. When they are served they have
rather a strong odor of garlic, but they do not taste of it in the
least.

"Well," said the King, as we sat down to the table, "what have you been
doing?"

"Your Majesty would be soon tired if I told you all I have done," I
said.

"_Bien!_ that is a good commencement. We will have enough for the whole
dinner.... I listen...."

"To begin with, we spent two months in Denmark. Then I went to America
to see my mother; then to Paris; then to the Riviera; and from Monte
Carlo here."

"Monte Carlo," remarked the King. "That is a bad place. I have never
been there. It is out of the circuit of my official duties," he added,
laughingly.

"It is a very bad place, your Majesty, if you are unlucky in play;
otherwise it is a lovely place."

"Of course you played at the tables?" the King said.

"Of course," I replied.

"And lost all your money," said the King, and laughed.

"No, your Majesty. I won. I won enough to bring away a hundred-franc
gold piece which I keep as a fetish."

"Lend it to me! I need a fetish badly," said the King.

"Certainly I will," and prepared to unhook it from the chain it was on.

"No, no! I am only joking. I do not need anything to bring me luck."
Then he changed the conversation suddenly.

After dinner we returned to the _grande salle_. The King and the
gentlemen remained with the ladies a little while, then went to smoke
in the billiard-room. As the King hardly ever sits down--or, if he
does, sits on the edge of the billiard-table--the gentlemen were
obliged to stand during the hour before the King joined the Queen. We
ladies sat with the Queen, who entertained us with her impressions of
the novels she had just been reading.

She has such a wonderful way of absorbing and analyzing that she can
give you in a few words a complete and concise synopsis of the plot and
all the situations, besides making clever criticisms.

It was eleven o'clock before his Majesty and the gentlemen returned
from their billiards and cigars. The Queen got up, bade us good night,
and left the room with the King.

I was appalled when I was ready to occupy my royal bed. It seemed to
have become more imposing and more majestic than when I last saw it. I
tried to put a chair on the platform, but the platform was too narrow.
The only way was to climb on a chair near the bed and from it make a
desperate jump. So I put the chair, said, "_One, two, three_," and
jumped. The white-satin hangings, fringes, and tassels swung and
jingled from the rebound. Once in bed, I cuddled down under the scented
linen. I brought the sachet up to the level of my nose, where it
hovered for just a little moment before it slid off me and off the bed.

Then commenced a series of pulling up and slipping down which lasted
until I was thoroughly waked up for the night. The only way I got the
better of the sachet was to balance it warily and pretend I slept.

In the morning we were served a real Italian breakfast in our room:
thin Pekoe tea, a little cream, and much powdered sugar, and an
assortment of sweet cakes replacing the customary English buttered
toast.


MONZA, _November 4, 1884_.

Dear Mother,--I want to tell you what we did, though we did not do
anything of great interest. It was such horrible weather that we could
not drive out, as is the Queen's custom every day. After luncheon
Signor Vera (the Queen's singing-master who accompanied us in Rome) was
called in, and her Majesty and I sang our duets.

All the music from the Quirinal seems to have been transported here,
and Vera knows exactly where to put his hand upon everything as it is
needed. There is a new edition of Marcello's psalms which are very
amusing to _dechiffrer_. Sometimes the Queen takes the soprano part, at
others she takes the contralto.

At three o'clock the Queen went to her apartment, and I took that
occasion to pay some visits to the other ladies in their different
_salons_. We met in the _grande salle_ for tea. M. and Mme. Minghetti
arrived from Milan by the same train we came on Monday, and came
straight from the carriage into the _salon_. The Queen seemed enchanted
to see them. They are charming people. He is as delightful as he is
unpretentious, which is rare in a man so celebrated as he is, and she
has lost none of her fascinations, although she is a grandmother. They
brought the last news from Rome, and the conversation was on politics
and war; they talked so rapidly that neither my brain nor my Italian
could keep pace with them. I might have told you something of interest
if I had been able to understand what they said.

At seven o'clock there was a military dinner. As there were about sixty
people present, the dinner was served in the large dining room. The
King and the gentlemen of the household were, as usual, in _redingotes_
and black ties, but the generals and the officers were in all their
war-paint, most gorgeous to behold. I sat on the left of the King
(Madame Minghetti was on his right), and next to the dearest old
general in the world, who was politeness itself, and, though I suppose
we shall never see each other again, he gave himself much trouble to
entertain me. He told me that he had been with the King when he fought
in the battle of Custozza (in the Austrian war), where the King had
shown so much bravery and courage. The King, hearing what my neighbor
was saying (he probably raised his voice a trifle), leaned across me,
and, laughingly holding up a warning finger, said:

"If you go on like that I shall leave the table."

"Oh, your Majesty! that would never do," said my general. "Now,
madame," turning to me, "shall we talk of the weather?"

After dinner there was _le cercle_. Their Majesties went about and
talked to everybody. The King seemed in the best of spirits, laughing
continually, and familiarly clapping the officer to whom he was talking
on the back. Every one stayed in the _salon_ until it was time for the
military guests to take their leave.


_November 5, 1884._

Dear ----,--This morning I received a little word from the Marquise
Villamarina: "Please put on a warm dress, as her Majesty intends taking
a long drive after luncheon, and it will be chilly and damp before we
get back."

We came into the _salon_ just in time not to be too late, for their
Majesties entered almost immediately.

The Prince of Naples (they call him the _Principino_) sat next to me at
luncheon. He is very clever--unusually clever--and has a memory that
some day ought to stand him in good stead. Mine by the side of it felt
like a babe in arms. The questions he asked, _a brule-point_, would
have startled a person cleverer than I am. He is very military and
knows all about the different wars that have been fought since the time
of Moses, and when he wished to know how many officers were killed in
the battle of Chattanooga I had to confess that, if I had ever known, I
had forgotten. But he knew everything concerning Chattanooga and all
other battles.

When the white truffles were served (they were temptingly buried in a
nest of butter) the Prince said, "How can you eat those things?"

"You mean, your Highness, these delicious truffles?"

"Yes," he answered; "they don't taste bad, but they stink so."

"Oh, Monseigneur," I cried, "you must not say that word. It is a
dreadful word."

"Oh no, it is not. It is in the Bible."

I could not contradict him. I hope he will find out later that there
are some words in the Bible that are not used in general conversation.

After luncheon the Queen said: "We are going to take a very long drive.
You must dress very warmly." I went to my room. I had a little time
before the rendezvous in the _salon_, and I thought perhaps I could
finish my letter begun yesterday, but, alas! I could not.... I returned
to the _salon_ with everything I owned in the way of furs and wraps,
and found all the guests waiting for the Queen.

The equipages here are always _a la Daumon_--that is, open
landaus--seats for four people inside, a rumble behind, and a seat for
the coachman, if there Is a coachman, but the two postilions on the
four horses are seemingly all that are required. In front of the
garden-side _perron_ were the two landaus waiting. The Queen, Madame
Minghetti, and Johan sat inside of the first landau. General Garadaglia
and I sat on the coachman's box and manoeuvered the brake. It happened
rather often that we forgot to manoeuver. Then we would get a very
reproachful glance from the postilions, and we would turn the brake on
to the last wrench; then we would get another look because the wheels
could not move. Somehow we never got the right tension. The Queen
enjoyed our confusion.

When we passed through the small villages the whole populace would run
out into the streets to gaze at us.

I thought it strange that the villagers, who must have seen the Queen
hundreds of times, did not seem to recognize her, and sometimes bowed
to me, thinking, I suppose, that I, being on the first seat, must
naturally be the first person. How different it is in Denmark! When any
royal carriage passes, people courtesy, sometimes even when the
carriage is empty.

The Queen ordered the postilions to go slowly through the narrow
streets of the village to avoid the risk of running over the crowds of
children. I never saw so many. Eight or ten at each door! They all
seemed to be of the same age, and all were dressed in red calico, which
made a very pretty note of color against the shabby houses. There are a
great many manufactories about here, and I suppose red calico must be
cheap.

We reached the _palazzo_ before sunset. I was quite chilled through in
spite of all my wraps (heavy and warm as they were) and thankful to get
out of them and get a hot cup of tea.

We found the Marquise Dadda and the Countess Somaglia, who had arrived
for tea. The Queen always receives her friends at this time.

Another military dinner this evening! Evidently, Monza is polishing off
the military just now. It is very amusing for us, as it gives us the
chance to see all the celebrities. I sat to the left of his Majesty,
and he told me in a loud voice who every one was and what each one had
done. He did not seem to mind their hearing. Pointing to one of the
generals, he said, laughingly: "He is _tout ce qu'il y a de plus
militaire_; even his night-gowns have epaulettes on them, and he sleeps
with one hand on his sword."


MONZA, _6th of November_.

Dear ----,--Signor Bonghi, the great Italian savant, arrived for
luncheon to-day. He is a personality! I will describe him later. I will
only say now he is most learned and very absent-minded. After luncheon
the Queen wanted us to see the old cathedral of Monza, where, as you
know, the famous iron crown of Charlemagne is kept. So after lunch the
landau was ordered for us. Marquise Trotti (_dame d'honneur_)
accompanied us. The Queen asked Signor Bonghi to go with us to explain
things. Quite a crowd collected about the church door to stare at the
court equipages. The handsome tall servants, in their brilliant red
liveries, were alone worth looking at.

It is very much of a ceremony to see the iron crown. After having
visited the cathedral thoroughly we were conducted down some steps to
the little chapel which contains the crown. The priest is obliged to
put on the robes of high mass, and is assisted by another priest and a
boy who swings the censer all the time. The _cappellano_ collected the
money (twenty lire) from our party before the proceedings. (It is
always well to be on the safe side.) The money question settled, the
priest read some prayers, knelt many times, then ascended a little
step-ladder, opened a gilded cupboard which was fastened to the wall,
unlocked it, said some more prayers, and then with great reverence took
out a casket, which he held high above his head, intoning a special
prayer. He came down from the step-ladder, bringing the casket with
him, which he opened, and we were allowed to look at, but not touch,
the celebrated relic. The same ceremony was gone through when it was
replaced.

Do you know that this crown was born in the year 593, and is made out
of a nail supposed to be taken from Christ's cross and hammered into a
ring, and is encircled by a gold band about eight centimeters wide?
Outside the iron is a gold band set with _soi-disant_ precious stones.
Not much to look at, and certainly not heavy to wear.

While we were there Signor Bonghi, at the request of the Queen, copied
a Latin inscription on a tomb. He translated it from the Latin and gave
it to the Queen when he returned, also to me. (I inclose it.)

INSCRIPTION ON A TOMB IN MONZA CATHEDRAL

    _Quod fuit, est; erit peril articulo brevis horae
        Ergo quid prodest esse fuisse fore
    Esse fuisse fore trio florida sunt sine flore
        Cum simul omne peril quod fuit est erit._

    That which is, that which has been, that which shall be
        Perishes in one short hour.
    To what use is it to exist, to have existed,
        Or to exist in time to come?
    The Present, the Past, the Future
        Are three flowers without perfume,
    Since all perish together,
        The Present, the Past, the Future.

Princess Pia di Savoya, Princess Trivulzio, Count Greppi, and others
were invited to tea. After they had gone the Queen had a fancy to run
out in the park without a hat, in spite of the cold and drizzly rain,
and with only a light cloak. She did not mind, so no one else minded.
Of course, we all did as she did, except Princess Palavicini (_dame
d'honneur_), who had just arrived, and who asked permission that she
might retire to her room in order to rest before dinner.


MONZA, _November 7th_.

Dear Mother,--I try every day to get a moment to write, as you desire,
but the days go so quickly and the evenings come so soon that I hardly
have time to do anything but change from one dress to the other.

After luncheon this morning the King ordered some large scales to be
brought into the _salon_, and we were all weighed. Our kilos were
written in a book, and each person was asked to write his name under
his kilo. This took a long time. The Queen weighs twenty kilos less
than Johan. There was a twinkle in the eye of the King when General
Pasi got on the scales. General Pasi is enormously tall, and big in
proportion, being a good deal more than six feet and very stout. They
piled on all the weights they had, but nothing sufficed. Pasi looked
aghast (Could the royal board be so fattening?) ... and wondered if it
were not time for heroic action. And when it was found that the King
had had his foot on the scales all the time every one was convulsed
with laughter, especially the King, who enjoyed his little joke. The
Queen's drive to-day was to the Marquise Dadda's (one of her ladies in
waiting), who has a pretty villa and park near here.

We had thought of leaving Monza to-day, but the Queen wished us to stay
longer, and of course we did not refuse, though my toilets were at a
rather low ebb, having thought to remain only a few days.

I sat to the left of the King at dinner. He seemed very melancholy, and
told me that never in his life had he had such a painful experience as
he had this afternoon. A few days ago a quite young soldier had struck
his superior officer and had been sentenced to death. The King said:
"He is to be shot to-morrow in the barracks near the park, and this
afternoon his poor mother, accompanied by the priest, came to the
palace to make a last and supreme effort to obtain pardon. His mother
clung to my knees and wept her soul out: 'He is my only child and only
nineteen years old--too young to die. Take me instead. _Sono vecchia,
egli tanto giovine!_' ['I am old, and he so young!'] The priest added
that the boy had always been such a good son--kind and gentle to his
mother--and begged that he should be pardoned." The King repeated all
this with tears in his good eyes.

"I am sure that your Majesty did pardon him. Did you not?"

"No," he said, "though it broke my heart to refuse. In military affairs
one must not interfere with the discipline."

"But this one," I urged, tearfully; "could there not be extenuating
circumstances? Do pardon him, your Majesty. Just think what that would
mean for the poor mother."

But the King, true to his ideas of military discipline, said: "No! He
is condemned to die. He must die."

The King could not shake off the impression this interview had made on
him, and J., who passed the evening in the smoking-room with his
Majesty, said that he never saw the King so depressed as he was this
evening.

The Queen came up to me directly after dinner, saying: "What _were_ you
and the King talking about? You both looked so serious and sad."

I told her.

She said, "The King has such a good heart."

The thought of the poor young fellow who was to be shot kept me awake,
and I thought at five o'clock that I heard the report of guns, but I
was not sure. My imagination was so keen that I could have pictured
anything to myself.

The first thing the King said to me at luncheon was, "Did you hear this
morning?"

I told him I heard something, but I dreaded to think what it might have
meant.

"Alas!" he said, as his eyes filled with tears, "it is too true, I hate
to think of it."

We left Monza at three o'clock this afternoon, I cannot tell you how
kind their Majesties were to me! The Queen kissed me good-by and said,
"_Au revoir a Rome_."

The King gave me his arm and went down the steps of the grand staircase
of the principal entrance with me and put me himself in the landau.
"You do not know what an honor this is," said Signor Peruzzi--as if I
did not appreciate it!

We drove to the station in state and traveled in the royal compartment
to Milan.... We intended to leave for Rome and home this evening, but
I feel too tired to do anything but send to you these few lines and go
to bed.

To-morrow night will find us in the Palazzo Tittoni, where the children
already have arrived.


ROME, _January, 1885_.

Dear Aunt Maria,--Just now we are reveling in Liszt. Rome is wild over
him, and one leaves no stone unturned in order to meet him. Fortunate
are those who have even a glimpse of him, and thrice blessed are those
who _know_ and hear him. He is the prince of musicians--in fact, he is
treated like a prince. He always has the precedence over every one;
even Ambassadors--so tenacious of their rights--give them up without
hesitation. Every one is happy to pay this homage to genius.

We met him the first time at M. de Schloezer's dinner. Schloezer, with
his usual tact, plied him well with good food, gave him the best of
wines and a superlative cigar. (Liszt is a great epicure and an
inveterate smoker.) M. de Schloezer never mentioned the word "music,"
but made Liszt talk, and that was just the thing Liszt wanted to do,
until, seeing that he was not expected to play, he was crazy to get to
the piano. Finally he could not resist, and said to Schloezer, "Do play
something for me!"

"Never!" said Schloezer. "I would not dare."

Then Liszt turned to me and asked me to sing. I also said, "I would not
dare." Whereupon he said, "Well, since no one will do anything, I will
play myself."

(The Minghettis, von Keudell, and Count Arco, Schloezer's secretary,
were the guests.)

How divinely he played! He seemed to be inspired. Certainly the
enthusiastic and sympathetic listeners were worthy to be his audience.

"Do you still sing Massenet?" he said to me. "Do you recollect my
dining with you in Paris, and your singing those exquisite songs?"

"Recollect it!" I cried. "How do you think I could ever forget?"

"Will you not sing? I will accompany you," he said. "Have you any of
Massenet's songs?"

"I have nothing with me to-night. I never dreamt of singing," I
answered.

Schloezer said: "That is no obstacle. I will send a servant to your
house directly to fetch the music." And in a very short time the music
was in my hands.

Then Liszt sat down and, turning over the pages, found what he wanted,
and I sang. Schloezer was radiantly happy. There was not one disturbing
element. Every one was as appreciative as he was himself--those who
listened as well as those who performed.

[Illustration:
NOTE FROM F. LISZT]

Liszt was at his best; I mean that he could not have been better.
Knowing that Count Arco sang, he insisted on hearing him. Arco at first
declined, but finally yielded--there was no resisting the arch-charmer.
Liszt played the "_Suoni la tromba_" (Arco's _cheval de bataille_), by
heart, of course, singing himself, to help the timid singer, and adding
variations on the piano.

Liszt was in such high spirits that we would not have been surprised if
he had danced a jig. He threw his long hair back from his forehead, as
if to throw care to the winds. Later he spread his large hands over the
keyboard in protest and said, "_No more from me_, but we must hear
Schloezer before we go." Therefore Schloezer was obliged to play. He can
only improvise, as you know. Liszt sat by his side and played a helpful
bass.

Schloezer ordered some champagne, and we all drank one another's
healths. It was after one o'clock when we bade our host adieu. Johan
and I took Liszt in our carriage and left him at his apartment in the
Via Margutta on our way home.

We saw a great deal of him afterward, and he dined with us twice. The
first time we asked Grieg, the Norwegian genius, thinking it would
please Liszt to meet him. Perhaps this was a mistake. However, it was a
most interesting evening. Mrs. Grieg sang charmingly (Grieg's songs, of
course); and Liszt, with his hands folded in front of him, was lost in
thought--or was he asleep? Let us say he _dozed_--only waking up to
clap his hands and cry "Brava!" But it was perfectly wonderful when he
read at sight a concerto of Grieg's, in manuscript, which Grieg had
brought with him. Liszt played it off as if he had known it all his
life, reading all the orchestra parts. Both these great artists were
enchanted with each other, but after a while Liszt became tired of
music and asked if we could not have a game of whist. To play a banal
game of whist with Liszt seemed a sacrilege, but we played, all the
same. I was very _distraite_, seeing Grieg and his wife (who do not
play cards) wandering restlessly around the room, and sometimes I put
on an ace when a two would have done the deed.

Liszt plays the piano better than he plays whist. I don't know how many
times he revoked. Every one pretended not to notice, and we paid up at
the finish without a murmur. He was delighted to win four lire and
something, and counted out the small change quite conscientiously.
Johan drove him home--a very tired and sleepy Liszt--and only left him
at the sill of his door.

I received a very queer letter the day Liszt dined here. I copy it for
you. It was from the Princess W----, a lady whose friendship he
renounced when he took holy orders.

    I hear that you are going to have the Master (_le Maitre_) to dine
    at your house. I beg of you to see that he does not sit in a
    draught of air, or that the cigar he will smoke will not be too
    strong, and the coffee he drinks will be weak, for he cannot sleep
    after, and please see that he is brought safely to his apartment.

    Yours, etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

All these instructions were carried out to the letter. On another
occasion Liszt wrote to me that he would bring some of his songs to try
over at five o'clock. I inclose his letter. What a chance, thought I,
for me to give pleasure to some of my friends who I knew were longing
to see him. Although he had said _entre nous_ in his letter, and I knew
that he really wanted to look through the songs alone with me, I could
not resist the temptation--though it was such rank disobedience--and
said to them: "Liszt is coming to me at five o'clock. If you would like
to hear him, and consent to be hidden behind a door, I will invite
you." They all accepted with rapture, and were assembled in the little
_salon_ before the time appointed. The door was left open and a large
screen placed before it.

Johan fetched Liszt in our carriage, as he always does. I received him
and the book of _Lieder_, which he brought with him. (Only Johan and
Nina were present.) He opened the book at "_Comment disaient
ils?_"--one of his most beautiful songs, which has an exquisite but
very difficult accompaniment. He played with fairy fingers, and we went
over it several times. I could see the screen swerving and waving
about; but Liszt's back was turned, so he could not see it.

After we had finished tea was served, and then he said, "Have you heard
my 'Rigoletto'?"

"Yes," I said, "but not by you."

"Well," he said, "I will play it for you. Your piano is better than the
one I have. It is a pleasure to play on it."

The screen, now alive with emotion, almost tipped over. After
"Rigoletto" he played "_Les soirees de Vienne_," and this time the
screen actually did topple over and exposed to view the group of ladies
huddled behind it. I shuddered to think how the Master would take this
horrible treachery.

He took it better than I expected--in fact, he laughed outright. The
ladies came forward and were presented to him, and were delighted. I am
sure that Liszt was, too; at any rate, he laughed so much at my ruse
and contrition that the tears rolled down his cheeks. He wiped them
away with his pocket-handkerchief, which had an embroidered "F.L." in
the corner. This he left behind, and I kept it as a souvenir.

Some days after this there was a large dinner given by the German
Ambassador (Herr von Keudell) for the Princess Frederick Carl. Liszt
and many others, including ourselves, were present. The Ambassador
allowed the gentlemen only a short time to smoke; he gave them good but
small cigars. I do not know how the great Master liked this, for he is
a fervent smoker. However, as _le charbonnier est maitre chez lui_, our
host had his way and the music commenced, as he wished, very soon after
dinner. Both the Ambassador and his wife are perfect pianists.

They play four-hand pieces on two pianos. On this occasion, to do honor
to the famous composer, they grappled with a formidable work by Liszt,
called "Mazeppa." (I fancy that Liszt is a little like Rossini, who
used to say, "_Jouez pour moi toute autre chose que ma musique_.")
Mazeppa's wild scampering over the two keyboards made our hair stand on
end, but the Master dozed off in peaceful slumber and only waked up and
cried "Bravo!" when Mazeppa had finished careering and the two pianists
were wiping their perspiring brows. Liszt begged the Princess to
whistle, and opened his book of _Lieder_ at "_Es muss ein wunderbares
sein_" (a lovely song) and said, "Can you whistle that?" Yes, she
could; and did it very carefully and in a _wunderbares_ manner. Liszt
was astonished and delighted.

Then Liszt played. Each time I hear him I say, "Never has he played
like this." How can a person surpass himself? Liszt does. He had the
music of "_Comment disaient ils?_" in the same book and begged me to
sing it. "Do you think," he said, "you could add this little cadenza at
the end?" And he played it for me.

"I think so," I said. "It does not seem very difficult," and hummed it.

"I had better write it for you," he said, "so that you will not forget
it." And he took out his visiting-card and wrote it on the back. (I
send it to you.)

[Illustration:
FROM F. LISZT
Handwritten music score.]

Liszt is not always as amiable as this. He resents people counting on
his playing. When Baroness K. inveigled him into promising to take tea
with her because he knew her father, she, on his accepting, invited a
lot of friends, holding out hopes that Liszt would play. She pushed the
piano into the middle of the room--no one could have possibly failed to
see it. Every one was on the _qui vive_ when Liszt arrived, and
breathless with anticipation. Liszt, who had had many surprises of this
sort, I imagine, saw the situation at a glance. After several people
had been presented to him, Liszt, with his most captivating smile, said
to the hostess:

"_Ou est votre piano, chere madame?_" and looked all about for the
piano, though it was within an inch of his nose.

"Oh, Monseigneur! Would you, really...?" advancing toward the piano
triumphantly. "You are too kind. I never should have dared to ask you."
And, waving her hand toward it, "_Here_ is the piano!"

"Ah," said Liszt, who loves a joke, "_c'est vrai. Je voulais y poser
mon chapeau_."

Very crestfallen, but undaunted, the Baroness cried, "But, Monseigneur,
you will not refuse, if only to play a scale--merely to _touch_ the
piano!"

But Liszt, as unkind as she was tactless, answered, coldly, "Madame, I
never play my scales in the afternoon," and turned his back on her and
talked with Madame Helbig.

As they stood there together, he and Madame Helbig, one could not see
very much difference between them. She is as tall as Liszt, wears her
hair short, and is attired in a long water-proof which looks like a
soutane; and he wears his hair long, and is attired in a long soutane
which looks like a water-proof. As regards their clothes, the only
noticeable difference was that her gown was buttoned down the front and
his was not. Both have the same broad and urbane smile.

One of the last dinners with Liszt before he left Rome was at the Duke
and Duchess Sermonetas'--the Minghettis, the Keudells, Schloezer, and
ourselves. Lenbach, the celebrated painter, was invited, but forgot all
about the invitation until long after the dinner. Then he hurriedly
donned a _redingote_ and appeared, flurried and distressed. Liszt was
in one of his most delightful moods, and began improvising a
tarantella, and Madame Minghetti jumped up suddenly and started to
dance. Schloezer, catching the spirit of it, joined her. Who ever would
have thought that the sedate German Minister to the Pope could have
been so giddy! He knelt down, clapping his hands and snapping his
fingers to imitate castanets. Madame Minghetti, though a grandmother,
danced like a girl of sixteen, and Liszt at the piano played with
Neapolitan gaiety! It was a moment never to be forgotten. Keudell's
kind eyes beamed with joy. Lenbach looked over his spectacles and
forgot his usual sarcastic smile. We all stood in an enchanted circle,
clapping our hands in rhythmical measure.

Our good friend Ludolf, as Liszt's ambassador, asked the abbe--who has
a great respect for "the powers that be"--to a beautiful dinner, to
which we were invited, the Minghettis, the Keudells, and four
others--making twelve in all. Madame Minghetti accepted for herself,
but excused her husband, who she said was not to be in Rome that
evening. Count Ludolf asked M. de Pitteurs (the Belgian Minister) to
fill Minghetti's place.

Five minutes before dinner was announced, in came Madame Minghetti with
Monsieur Minghetti.

"What!" cried the Count. "I did not expect _you_! Why did you not send
me word that you were coming? We shall be thirteen at table, and that
will never do."

Both M. and Mme. Minghetti were very much embarrassed.

"There is nothing easier," answered Signor Minghetti. "I can go home."

You may imagine that this was not very pleasant for the great
Minghetti, who had probably never had such an experience in all his
life.

Count Arco, seeing the situation, and as a solution to the difficulty,
went across the street to the club, thinking that some one could be
found. Fortunately, he succeeded, and you may be sure the emergency
guest was only too delighted to make the fourteenth at _that_ table.

The Minghettis kindly and magnanimously overlooked the Count's want of
tact.

Liszt, as if he wished to make us forget this untimely incident, played
after dinner as he had never played before. But nothing could suppress
Count Ludolf--never mind where the _plats_ were, his feet continued to
get into them. Right in the middle of Liszt's most exquisite playing
our irrepressible host said, in a loud voice:

"If any one wishes to have a game of whist, there are tables in the
other room."

Liszt stopped short, but, seeing all our hands raised in holy horror at
the thought of exchanging him for a game of whist, consented amiably to
remain at the piano.

Liszt honored me by coming to my reception, brought by M. de
Keudell--Liszt is always brought. Imagine the delight of my friends who
came thus unexpectedly on the great Master. They made a circle around
him, trying to edge near enough to get a word with him. He was
extremely amiable and seemed pleased to create this manifestation of
admiration. (Can one ever have enough?) There are two young musical
geniuses here at the Villa Medici, both _premier prix de Rome_. One is
Gabriel Pierne, surnamed "_Le Bebe_" because he is so small and looks
so boyish--he really does not seem over fourteen years of age--and
another, Paul Vidal, who is as good a pianist as Pierne, but not such a
promising composer.

I asked Liszt if he would allow these two young artists to play some of
their compositions for him. Liszt kindly consented, and the appointed
day found them all in the _salon_. Liszt was enchanted (so he said);
but how many times has he said, clapping the delighted artist on the
shoulder, "_Mon cher, vous avez un tres grand talent.... Vous irez
loin; vous arriverez_," a great phrase! And then he would sit down at
the piano, saying with a smile, "Do you play this?" and play it and
crush him to atoms, and they would depart, having _la mort dans l'ame_,
and overwhelmed with their imperfections. Instead of encouraging them,
he discouraged them, poor fellows! Speaking of young artists in
general, he said once, "_Il n'y a personne qui apprecie comme moi les
bonnes intentions, mais je n'en aime pas toujours les resultats_."

You may believe that my artistic soul is full of joy when I can collect
about me such artists as Liszt, Grieg, Sgambati, Pierne, Vidal, Mme.
Helbig, and Countess Gigliucci, not to mention the Queen's _Gentilhomme
de la reine_ (Marquis Villamarina), who has the most delicious barytone
voice I have ever heard--but he seems to think as little of this divine
gift as if it were his umbrella. Vera (the singing-master) was
prevented from coming to-day to the Queen's lesson, and Signor
Marchetti replaced him. He is a very well-known composer, and has
written an opera called "Ruy Blas," which has had quite a success here
in Italy. The Queen and I sing a duet from it which is really charming.

Baron Renzis had some theatricals at his pretty villa in Piazza
Indipendenza, in which Nina acted the principal _role_, in "L'ete de
St.-Martin." Senateur Alfieri (son of the celebrated Alfieri) took the
part of the uncle. One of the thirteen pictures Lenbach painted of Nina
was put on the stage and afterward brought before the curtain, but it
created no enthusiasm--people did not think it did her justice.

One actor (a young Frenchman) had such a stage-fright that when he had
to say this phrase (it was all he had to say), "_Le peintre vous a
diablement flattee_," he said, "_Le diable vous a peintrement
flattee_," which caused a roar of laughter and hurt Lenbach's
feelings....

Massenet has just sent a complete collection of his songs--all six. I
like the first two best--"_Poeme d'Avril_" and "_Poeme de Souvenir_."
This last he dedicated to me. There stands on the title-page, "_Madame,
Vous avez si gracieusement protege le Poeme d'Avril_...", etc. The
"_Poeme d'Hiver_," "_Poeme d'Octobre_," and "_Poeme d'Amour_" have
pretty things in them, but they are far from being so complete as the
first ones. Massenet wrote the date of its composition on each
title-page, and a few bars of music.

I took them to the Queen, and we looked them over together. She was
enchanted, and thought them the most graceful and refined things she
had ever heard. She said, "I envy you having them."

"Would your Majesty like to have some?" I asked.

"Yes, indeed; very much," she replied. "But I could never sing them.
You would have to teach me how. They suit your voice, but would they
mine? No one can sing them as you do."

"I learnt them with Massenet; that is why," I replied.

I wrote to Massenet and begged him to send the same collection to the
Queen, as she had been so delighted with his songs, and added, "Don't
forget to put your name, the dates, and a bar or two of music just like
what you sent to me."

Most amiably he did what I asked for, and the Queen was more than
pleased, and immediately thanked him through the Marquise Villamarina.

Massenet has become a great celebrity now. Twenty years ago, when he
was struggling to get on in Paris, Auber and I helped him. I used to
pay him five francs an hour for copying manuscripts. Now one pays
twenty francs _just to look at him_!

Mr. Morgan, of London, has hired our good friend George Wurts's
magnificent apartment in the relic-covered Palazzo Antici-Mattei. Wurts
is secretary to the American Legation in Petersburg, but comes
occasionally to see his friends in Rome, who all welcome him with
delight. Mr. Morgan gives beautiful dinners, and, although he has as
many fires as he can possibly have, the huge rooms are freezingly cold,
and sometimes we sit wrapped in our mantles.


ROME, _1st of January, 1886_.

My dear Aunt,--All Johan's and my most affectionate greetings: "May the
year which commences to-day bring you every joy." I am selfish enough
to wish that it will bring _us_ the joy of seeing you. You promised to
make us a visit. Why not this spring?

It is six o'clock. I am sitting in my dressing-gown and feeling good
for nothing. The diplomatic reception this afternoon was as brilliant
as the others which I have described so often. The Queen was, _if
possible_, more beautiful and gracious than ever. (I think the same
each time I see her.) Every eye followed her. Does there exist in the
world a more complete and lovely woman? To-day the Queen's dress was
exquisite--a white satin covered with paillettes and beads, the court
train of blue velvet heavily embroidered in silver. The tiara of
diamonds, with great upward-pointed shaped pearls which her Majesty
wore, was the King's New-year gift. "My Christmas present," the Queen
told me.

The King seemed more talkative than usual; he spoke a long time with
each person and smiled and laughed continually. Politics must be
_easy_--like honors in whist. There is evidently no trouble in that
quarter.


_March._

Dear ----,--I have permission to tell the great secret. Nina is engaged
to the young Dane I wrote to you about--a Count Raben-Levetzau. He is
very charming and belongs to one of the best families in Denmark. We
went to the German Ambassador's (Herr von Keudell's) ball last evening
at the Palazzo Caffarelli, which the King and the Queen honored with
their presence. As soon as I could, I approached the Queen, who was
sitting in one of the gilded chairs on the _estrade_ which does duty
for a throne, and told her of Nina's engagement. She came forward to
the edge of the platform and, beckoning Nina to come to her, held out
her hand and kissed her on both cheeks before the whole assemblage. Of
course, the news circulated as quick as lightning. When the King heard
it he came straight up to us, and I presented Frederick to him. His
Majesty was most affable, and said, smilingly, to Nina:

"Are we really going to lose you? We shall miss our beautiful stella"
(star). And turning to Frederick, he said: "I do not give my consent
_at all_. I think that I will forbid the banns."

Every one crowded around Nina, eager to congratulate her. Frederick was
as radiant as a new-blossomed _fiance_ could possibly be.


_March._

We are as busy as bees. The trousseau is being made by the nuns in the
Trinita de Monti convent. The Queen sent Nina a beautiful point-lace
fan with mother-of-pearl sticks. The Queen of Denmark sent her a
bracelet with diamonds and pearls. Count Raben's family and all the
colleagues have given her beautiful presents.


_April 10th._

It is all over--Nina is married and gone.

Day before yesterday was a day of emotions. In the morning we went at
ten o'clock to the Campidoglio, where the magistrate's offices are and
where the _sindaco_ (the Marquis Guiccioli, a great friend of Nina's)
performed the civil marriage. He particularly wished to do this _en
personne_ as a special favor. He made a charming and affectionate
speech and gave the pen we signed the contract with to Nina. Then we
drove home, changed our dresses, and were ready at two o'clock for the
real marriage at the church.

The church was filled to the last pew. When Nina came in on Johan's arm
there was a murmur of admiration. She looked exquisitely in her bridal
gown, and as she turned round before descending the altar steps and
threw back her veil she was a vision of beauty, and I am sure she will
be a "joy for ever." All Rome came to the reception at our house.

While at Sorrento we went one afternoon to take tea with the Marion
Crawfords. They have a charming villa on the rocks. They seemed very
glad to see us, and showed us all over the villa and their pretty
garden. "My den," as Mr. Crawford called his sunny and comfortable
library quite worthy of the lion he is. They are a very handsome
couple. She is as sympathetic as he is, and they both talk in the most
entertaining and lively manner. We had a delightful afternoon.

I was asked to sing at a charity concert to be given in the magnificent
_Salle de Gardes_ in the Barberini Palace. The concert was arranged by
all the most fashionable ladies in Rome, who with the ladies of the
court were _dames patronesses_.

I accepted, as the Queen expressed the wish that I should. She even
selected the songs she thought best for the occasion, and was present
with all the court, which, of course, gave great _eclat_ to the
concert.

Every place was taken, and, enormous as was the _salle_, it was crammed
to its limit, people standing up by hundreds. Sarah Bernhardt, being in
Rome, promised to lend her aid; she recited a monologue in her soft,
melodious voice, but so low that it could hardly have been heard
farther than the first few rows of seats.

I sang the "Rossignol" and Liszt's "_Que disaient ils?_" to Sgambati's
accompaniment. Madame Helbig played the accompaniment of the
"Capriciosa" of Blumenthal, the one that has all those wonderful
cadenzas which run rampant through the different keys. Madame Helbig is
a marvelous musician. I must tell you what she did. When I was soaring
all alone up in the clouds without any earthly help in that long
cadenza, she foresaw that I was not coming down on the right note and
changed the key from four sharps to four flats without any one noticing
it, thereby saving me from dire disaster.

Any musician can change from sharps to flats, but she was reading this
very difficult accompaniment almost at first sight and before a large
audience. I think that it was a tremendous _tour de force_.


AALHOLM, _August, 1886_.

My dear Aunt,--Did you receive the newspaper cuttings I sent you
describing the home-coming of Frederick and Nina? Did they not read
like fairy tales?

Aalholm Castle is situated on the sea. It is one of the most historic
places in the country, and seems to have been bandied back and forth to
pay the different kings' debts.

Christopher II. was imprisoned here (the prisons still exist), and two
more moldy and unpleasant places to be shut up in cannot well be
imagined. The guards used to walk up and down in front of the aperture
through which food was passed to the unfortunate and damp monarch.

Later Aalholm came into Count Raben's family (in the eighteenth
century). There are, of course, all sorts of legends and ghostly
stories which, as in all ancient castles, are, with the family specter,
absolutely necessary. Women in gauzy drapery have been seen roaming
about in dark corridors, horses have been heard rattling their chains
in the courtyard. Mirrors also do something, but I forget what.
However, no phantoms, I believe, have been noticed during this
generation; probably the building which is going on now has discouraged
them on their prowling tours and routed them from their lairs. I have
watched with interest for the last three weeks the workmen who are
making a hole in the massive walls in a room next to mine. The walls
are about ten feet thick and are made of great boulders, the space
between being filled with mortar which time has made as hard as iron.

Every king or owner of Aalholm since the time it has stood on its legs
seems to have had different ideas about windows. One sees on its tired
old exterior traces of every kind and every period. Some round, some a
mere slit in the wall, some with arches all helter-skelter, without any
regard to symmetry or style.

Each owner made his window, and each successor bricked it up and put
his window in its place. The building is very long, with two towers. It
looks at a distance like a huge dachshund with head and tail sticking
up. There is a chapel in one wing, which no one ever enters, and there
is a theater in another wing, where in old times there were given
plays.

The park is beautiful beyond words. You come across some old graves of
vikings, of which nothing is left save the stones they used for the
making of them. The treasures that they contained have long since been
removed by a wise government in order to fill the national museums.
Many gold and silver coins have been picked up _in the grounds_, and
are turned to use by making tankards and bowls, and very pretty and
interesting they are. On the walls of the large hall there are
inscriptions which were made in the sixteenth century to commemorate
the visits of different monarchs. King Frederick II., 1585, must have
had many friends with him. Like our modern guest-book, each guest left
his name and motto, which was painted on the walls, with his motto and
his particular sign, such as a mug or a rake (I hope these did not
refer to his personal attributes). One that King Frederick wrote seems
to me to be very pathetic, and makes one think that his friends must
have been ultra-treacherous and false. It reads: "_Mein hilf in Gott.
Wildbracht allein ist treu_." ("God is my help. Wildbracht [the name of
his dog] alone is faithful.") Don't you think that has a sad note in
it?

[Illustration:
AALHOLM. BUILT IN 1100
In 1585 some changes were made and from time to time windows have been
cut through the walls.]

[Illustration:
INSCRIPTIONS IN ONE OF THE ROOMS AT AALHOLM, BEARING THE DATE 1585
Those at the top are: Left: "My hope is in God. Wildtbragt [his dog]
alone is faithful.--Frederick II., King of Denmark and Norway." Right:
"God forgets not His own.--Soffia, Queen of Denmark." Those below were
made by members of the court, who attached their individual marks
instead of signatures.]


MILAN, HOTEL MILAN, _October 17, 1886_.

Dear Aunt M----,--Just think what luck I have had. They say that
everything comes to those who wait, and what I have waited for has come
at last. I have seen and made the acquaintance of Verdi, the famous. He
always stops at this hotel, because he is a friend of the proprietor's,
Mr. Spatz, who, knowing my desire to meet Verdi, said that he would
arrange an interview. This he kindly did. Verdi received me in his
_salon_. He looks just like his photographs--very interesting face
with burning eyes. His welcome was just warm enough not to be cold. The
conversation opened, of course, on music. I said that I admired his
music more than that of any other composer in the world. This was
stretching a point, but it brought a pale smile to his verdigris
countenance (this is unworthy of the worst punster). I told him that I
often had the honor of singing with the Queen, and that we sang many
duets from his operas. He did not seem to be much impressed by this
miracle and received it with amiable indifference.

I longed to hear him talk, but with the exception of a few
"_veramentes_" and "_grazies_" he remained passive and silent. By way
of saying something he asked me if I had heard Tamagno in "Othello."

"Yes," I said. "I cannot think of anything more splendid. I never heard
anything to equal him, and Monsieur Maurel is equally fine, is he not?"

"His singing is well enough," answered Verdi, "but his accent is
deplorable."

After this the conversation languished, and I feared it would die for
want of fuel. I felt that I had been spinning my web in vain--that I
might catch some other fly, but not Verdi, when suddenly he said:

"You tell me that you sing often with the Queen. Which duets of mine do
you sing?" he asked with seeming interest.

I named several.

"What voice has the Queen? Soprano or contralto?"

"The Queen's voice is mezzo-soprano," I answered.

"And yours?" he asked.

"Mine is about the same, equally mezzo-soprano."

This seemed to amuse him.

"Do you think the Queen would like to have me write something [quite
jocosely] equally mezzo-soprano?"

"I am sure that the Queen," I answered, gushingly, "would be
overjoyed."

"_Bene_," said the great _maestro_ with a smile. "Then I win."

"How enchanting!" I cried, crimson with enthusiasm. "But may I beg one
thing?"

"Beg! _Je vous en prie_."

"_Fa dieze_ [F sharp] is a weak point in both our voices."

"_Bene_," he said, waving his hand toward his piano. "I will write a
duet for you, and only put one G minor in it."

"G minor!" I exclaimed. "Why, that is--"

He interrupted, "Have you ever noticed that G minor is much easier to
sing than P sharp?"

He did not wait for my assurance that I did not notice any difference,
but said, suddenly, "When do you go to Monza?"

"We are waiting to hear. Perhaps to-morrow."

"Ah," he said, thoughtfully, as if turning over in his mind whether or
not he could have the duet ready.


MONZA, _October 19th_.

Bonghi came yesterday. At the request of the Queen he read aloud my
sketch of the Hamlet legend before the _promenade en voiture_. The
Queen thanked me and said that she was going to keep the manuscript,
but Bonghi cut my literary wings by pronouncing in his brusque way
that, although it was interesting and he liked the contents, it was
badly written.

"_Chere madame_," he said, "you write very well, but you do not know
the art of punctuating. You write as the water runs, as the arrow
flies; therefore, in reading what you have written I have no time to
breathe. I cannot separate the different ideas. A comma means a _point
d'arret_, a moment of repose. Every period should be an instant in
which to digest a thought."

I felt crushed by this, but tried to defend myself by saying that I had
only written it for one indulgent eye, and ended lamely by promising
that the next time I wrote anything I would be more careful. "I will do
as Mark Twain did--put the punctuations at the end, and one can take
one's choice."

We had some music again this evening. The Duke played some solos on his
violoncello. He has a beautiful instrument. If Amati made cellos
(perhaps he did), he must have made this one.

At dinner I sat next to him.

He said, "I was very much interested in what you wrote about Hamlet."

"In spite of the lack of commas?" I asked.

"Yes, in spite of the lack of commas. But I wonder if all you wrote was
true?"

"How can we ever find out?"

"I hate to think of him as a myth."

"Please don't think of him as a myth. Think of him as you always have;
otherwise you will owe me a grudge."

Looking across the table to Signor Bonghi, he said: "He is a wonderful
man. I like his name, too--Ruggiero Bonghi, _tout court_."

"It sounds," I said, "so full of strength and power and straight to the
point, with no accessories, doesn't it?"

"You say that to _me_, who have twenty-four names."

"Twenty-four! Dear me! Do you know them all?"

"I must confess that I do not, but I will look them up in the Gotha and
write them out for you."

"Twenty-four," I repeated. "How out of breath the priest who baptized
you must have been!"

"Oh," cried the Prince, "he did not mind; he got a louis [twenty-franc
piece] for each name."


ROME, PALAZZO SFORZA-CESARINI, _January, 1887_.

My dear Aunt,--After the reception of the Diplomats on the 1st of
January we moved from Palazzo Tittoni to this, our new home.

We have in the largest _salon_ an enormous and gorgeously sculptured
chimneypiece which has a tiny fire-place that, when crammed full of
wood, and after we have puffed our lungs out blowing on it and prodded
it with tongs, etc., consents to smile and warm the chair nearest to
it, but nothing else.

The ceiling (a work of art of some old master) is way up in the clouds;
I am almost obliged to use an opera-glass to see which are angels' or
cherubs' legs up there in the blue.

The figures in the corners, I suppose, represent Faith, Hope, and
Charity; the fourth must be the Goddess of Plenty. She is emptying an
enormous cornucopia over our heads of the most tempting fruit, which
makes my mouth water and makes me wish she would drop some of it in my
lap.

This palace used to belong to that nice hospitable family you've heard
about--_the Borgias_. I dare say they did a good deal of their
poisoning in these very _salons_.

We were rather agitated the other day when a hole was discovered in one
of the walls. I put my hand way down in it as far as I could and pulled
out a little bottle which contained some dark liquid. Poison, for sure!
It looked very suspicious. Giuseppe, our Italian butler, who is as
Italian as an Italian can be, was frightened out of his senses (the few
he possesses) and held the bottle at arm's-length.

To test the contents of the vial he put half of it in some food he gave
to a thin and forlorn cat who hovered about our kitchen, and for whom
Giuseppe cherished no love. However, the cat survived with eight of its
lives. Then a rabbit a friend of Giuseppe's wanted to get rid of was
given the rest. He also lived and thrived. After these experiments we
don't think much of Borgia poisons.

One of the rooms behind the _salon_ (so large that it is divided into
four) has the most beautiful frescoed ceiling. It is a pity that it is
so dark there that one cannot see it properly. Perhaps originally it
was a chapel and the frescoes were easier seen when the altar-candles
were burning. But can one imagine a Borgia needing a chapel or a Borgia
ever praying?

Just around the corner from us is the _campo di fiori_ (field of
flowers), where one might expect to buy flowers, but it is the one
thing you do not find there. Everything else, from church ornaments to
umbrellas, from silver candlesticks to old clothes, you can buy for a
song not so musical as Mendelssohn's "without words"; on the contrary,
the buying of the most insignificant object is accompanied by a volume
of words screamed after the non-buyer in true Jewish style.

Then around another corner you come across the Torso, made famous by
that witty tailor called Pasquino, where he placarded his satirical
witticisms; his post-office for anonymous letters!

We have just come home from the Pantheon. There is held every year for
the anniversary of King Victor Emmanuel's death a memorial service
_pour le repos de son ame_. If it had been my soul it would never have
reposed; it would have jumped up and clapped its wings to applaud the
music, which, though always beautiful, to-day was divine.

I even forgot to freeze during the long two hours we stayed in the
icy-cold building, open to wind and weather above and full of piercing
draughts below. The marble pavement, which has collected damp and mold
since 27 B.C., has long since become so wavy and uneven that you walk
very unsteadily over it; the costly marbles of which the pavement is
made in fine mosaic-work have sunken away from their contours centuries
ago, so that now you only realize how beautiful it must have been in
its prime.

The high and imposing catafalque, erected for this occasion, which
filled the whole center of the large _basilique_, reaching almost to
the dome, was surrounded by enormous candelabra containing wax candles
as big as birch-trees.

The ministers of state and the diplomats had a _loge_ reserved for them
next to the orchestra, and, although there were carpets and rugs under
our feet, the humidity and cold penetrated to the marrow of our
stateful and diplomatic bones.

There were tiers of seats for people who were fortunate enough to
procure tickets.

Gayarre, the wonderful Spanish tenor, sang several solos, each one more
exquisite than the other. I have never heard a more beautiful voice,
and certainly have never heard a more perfect artist. The way he
phrases and manages his voice is a lesson in itself.

Tamagno, the famous Italian tenor, sings wonderfully also, but very
differently. He gives out all the voice he has, and you are overcome
with the strength and power and the compass of his unique voice. He is
the _tenor robusto par excellence_ of the world.

One cannot compare the two singers. Gayarre has the real quality of a
tenor, exquisitely tender, suave, and still powerful. He has a way of
keeping his voice bottled up until a grand climax; then he lets it
swell out in a triumphal burst.

This funeral service is a very long and fatiguing affair. I pity the
_carabinieri_ (the soldiers) who are on service that day. Although they
are men chosen for their powerful build, some of them cannot endure the
fatigue of standing "at arms" the two hours that the service lasts. I
suppose the poor things are put there from early dawn, and there they
must stand, stiff and straight, with uplifted sword, without moving a
muscle. We saw one (not this year, but last) faint dead away and drop
in a heap on the marble steps of the altar. His sword and casque made a
great clatter when they fell and rattled over the pavement. Four of his
comrades rushed in, picked him up, and carried him out, staggering
under his weight. He was replaced by another _carabinier_ noiselessly
and so quickly that you hardly knew that anything had happened.

The Argentina Theater attempted to give Wagner's Ring. It was a dismal
performance. Wagner is not at his best in an Italian setting, with all
the gas turned on and the scenery half tumbling down and the orchestra
fiddling in full view.

In the first act of "Rheingold," where the three maidens are swimming,
the poor girls, with hair of unequal lengths, sprawled about, their
arms clutching at air, and held up to the roof by visible and shaky
ropes, half the time forgetting to sing in their wild efforts to keep
themselves from falling, separated from the audience only by a gauze
curtain which was transparency itself.


DENMARK, _July, 1887_.

My dear Aunt,--Denmark in July is ideal. It is never too warm in the
day and always cool at night.

I have been spending a few days with Howard on his farm.

On the Fourth of July Howard wished to give the peasants in the
neighborhood an entertainment to celebrate his country's "glorious
Fourth." He hoped to inspire them with due enthusiasm and give them a
good day's sport.

The Danish peasant's idea of amusement is to walk leisurely to the
place of rendezvous, to sit quietly and rest from his week's hard work,
eat plenty of Smoerrebrod (sandwiches), drink barrels of beer, have
tobacco _ad libitum_, and finally to leave as lazily as he came.

This feast was going to be otherwise. Everything was to be done _a
l'Americaine_. The Fourth fell on a Sunday, and the farmers all
accepted and came on the stroke of the clock, dressed in their
Sunday-best clothes, which are of heavy broadcloth, made in the fashion
of Louis Philippe, voluminous over the hips, thick, heavy-soled boots,
and with long snake-like pipes hanging from their mouths.

Howard had arranged all sorts of _gymkhana_ sports, for which prizes
were to be given. There were to be the long jump, the high jump, a
running-race, catching the greased pig, pole-climbing, a race in a bag,
and so forth.

"They shall have a high old time," said Howard.

Their dismay only equaled their astonishment when they were told what
was expected of them. What! Jump, run, and be tied up in bags and climb
poles? Was this the way that they were going to amuse themselves on
this hot day? Were soiling their clothes, perspiring, and suffering
tortures in their tight boots the delightful, reposeful feast they had
been invited to? Their inborn politeness would not allow them to do
otherwise than obey the wishes of their host. They tried their best to
perform the feats put down on the program.

Their week's work of mowing, cutting trees, plowing, threshing, and the
different things belonging to a farmer's life seemed child's play
compared with this so-called enjoyment.

They did not understand why they got prizes for deeds they had not
done, and received the box of cigars or silver mug with unperturbed
serenity.

Consternation and resignation were the only expressions on their faces.
Neither did they understand when they were told to cry "Hurrah!" and
wave their hats after Howard should finish his oration. That he made
standing on a table. He expatiated on the beauty of liberty and the
soul-inspiring feeling of independence, and became quite eloquent. They
cheered in a spiritless and cheerless manner. For them liberty was a
high-sounding word which meant nothing. An enlightened government
provided them with all they needed. Why have the bother to choose your
doctor or your priest when all that is done for you? Only to pay taxes.
Can anything be more simple?

The games H. tried to teach them were not successful. They stood in a
circle and were told (Howard rubbed his hands in a dainty manner) that
"this is the way we wash our clothes." This did not appeal to them;
they knew too well how they washed theirs, and they saw no fun in
imitating such every-day affairs as washing and ironing.

Every way "we did" things had to be explained at length and translated
into Danish. And the most inexplicable of all the games was "Oranges
and lemons." When they were asked if they wanted oranges or lemons;
they all answered, truthfully and conscientiously, "Oranges." Who in
his senses would prefer a sour lemon to a juicy orange? The result was
that the battle was very one-sided--all oranges and only one lemon.

The dance was also rather dismal. The musicians played some national
waltzes, and the guests shuffled about on the sanded floor, treading a
slow measure and on one another's toes; the women held on to their
partners by their shoulders, and the men clutched the women round their
bulky waists. However, they all kept the measure, and some of the men
really danced quite well.

The _finale_ was the fireworks. It ought to have been a grand display,
but the rockets were damp, the "wheels," which ought to have wheeled up
in the air, merely whizzed on the ground and seemed to make for the
nearest guest in an absolutely vicious manner. All the things that
ought to have gone off stayed and sputtered.

As an entertainment it was a failure. The guests, however, had plenty
to eat and drink, and carried away pockets full of tobacco and cigars,
but it was rather pathetic to see the worn-out and weary farmers
dragging their tired limbs slowly and ponderously down the avenue with
a look of "Why all this?" depicted on their faces.


MONZA, _October 17th_.

After luncheon to-day we went out on the terrace to drink our coffee.
The sun was warm and the air deliciously cool, a typical Italian autumn
day. As we sat there we heard some mysterious noise which came from the
side of the park where the avenue terminates and is divided from the
deer-park by a large iron gate.

Looking down the avenue, we saw a man peering through the bars of the
gate. He had a bear with him. Her Majesty was curious to see them and
ordered the gate unlocked and the man and the bear permitted to enter.
The man was quite young, with soft black eyes and dazzling teeth. He
led the bear by a heavy iron chain passed through a ring in its nose.
The Queen went down the steps and talked with him.

"Will he bite me if I pat him?" she asked.

"No, signora; he is very good" ("_E molto buono_"). He hesitated a
moment, and then said, "Signora, will you tell me which of the ladies
there is the _Regina_?" The Queen was immensely amused, and answered,
"I am the Queen" ("_Son io la Regina_"). The young fellow was quite
overcome, and threw himself on the ground and kissed the hem of her
dress.

"How did you tame the bear?" inquired her Majesty.

He answered in a very agitated voice: "_Maesta_, it was very easy.
Bears are not difficult to tame. One must only be kind and patient."

"You look," said the Queen, "as if _you_ were very kind and patient."

The young Italian passed his hand lovingly over his companion's shaggy
head, and as he looked up at the beautiful and smiling Queen his eyes
filled with tears. "I love him," he said, simply; "he is my only
friend." We, who stood near enough to hear, were trembling on the verge
of weeping. He added, "We never leave each other; we eat and sleep
together, and all I have I share with him."

I saw tears in the Queen's eyes, which she quickly wiped away; and,
turning to the man, she asked, "Can he do any tricks?"

"_Si, maesta_, he can lie on his back and put his paws up in the air
and hum."

This did not seem much of a trick, probably being a bear's customary
attitude.

"Well," said the Queen, "let us see what he can do."

But, although the bear was addressed in terms of tenderest endearment
and although we hoped that he would obey his master and do honor to the
occasion, he did nothing of the kind. On the contrary, instead of lying
down and humming he stood up his full height on his hind legs and began
to waltz, swaying his long, plump body and shaking his thick, brown
fur.

He opened his mouth wide, showing his white teeth and his great red
tongue, and looked as if he were laughing and as if it was the funniest
thing in the world that he was doing.

"He does not seem to be very obedient," smiled her Majesty.

"He is afraid," said the man, trying to make excuses for his pet.

"You must come again," said the Queen, "when your bear is better
trained," and, turning to Signor Borea (her chamberlain), told him to
give the man some money and direct him to the forester's lodge, where
some food should be given to him.

The young Italian's face beamed with joy when he beheld the vast sum
(twenty lire) he had received, and led his disobedient companion away
in disgrace; but the bear, quite unconscious of being in disgrace,
turned his head for a last friendly glance, walked on his hind legs in
his clumsy and swaggering manner, but with a certain dignity, down the
avenue.

The King, who was with us on the terrace, had been a silent witness of
the whole scene, and, not being able to resist the promptings of his
kind heart, followed the couple. We saw him put a gold piece in the
brown palm of the poor fellow, whose "only friend" had failed him on
this unique occasion. He seemed quite overcome by this Danae-like
shower of gold, and hesitated before taking the piece, thinking,
perhaps, that on this occasion honesty might be the best policy, and
said:

"The Queen has already given me much."

"That does not matter," said the King. "You must take what _I_ give
you. Do you know who I am?"

"No, signor. Are you Garibaldi?"

The King laughed. "No, I am not Garibaldi; I am the King."

This second surprise was too much for the little man, and he almost
fell down in his emotion.

What his dreams were that night must have been like one of the Arabian
Nights.


REGGIO, _October 17th_.

Dear ----,--Count Spaletti has a very fine _chateau_ (a large park and
a beautiful forest), where he and his family live in patriarchal style.
It is the true Italian traditional home-life in every respect.

There is on the farm a large building in which the famous Parmesan
cheese is made. We were shown the entire process from the milking of
the cows down to the great wheels (which look like millstones) and the
completed cheese. Milking is a process with which you are, perhaps, not
familiar. It is done with the help of a maiden and a three-legged
stool, while the cow goes on chewing the worn-out cud of her last meal,
occasionally giving a Cenci-like glance of approbation.

But I won't tell you about that; I will let you in the secrets of
Parmesan-cheese making, so that when you are eating it grated on
macaroni you may know what an old stager you have to do with. The milk
is put in great vats just as it comes from the _mesdames les vaches_;
there it remains, occasionally turned around, not churned, with a
wooden paddle, until it becomes a solid substance.

When it is hard enough to handle it is put into large round wooden
forms and allowed to remain untouched--for how long do you think? _One
year!_ Then they put it under the oil _regime_--that is to say,
olive-oil is poured through the cheese at regular intervals until the
rind is as black and thick as leather. In four years it is ready to be
sold. Each cheese weighs several hundred pounds, is a foot thick, and
is as big as a cart-wheel. We eat it every day for luncheon and dinner.
I like it so much better, fresh and straight from the farm (if anything
four years old can be called fresh), than when stale and grated.


ROME, _1888_.

My dear Aunt,--Leo XIII.'s jubilee has been the means of bringing the
world to Rome. Every day during these last weeks we have watched the
carts passing our house piled with huge cases which contained the
presents destined for the Holy Father.

The streets are filled with pilgrims from everywhere. One cannot look
in any direction without seeing processions of nuns, priests, and monks
of all nations and denominations, from the dingy brown Franciscans, the
Capucines with their white mantles displaying their bare legs, to the
youthful disciples of the Propaganda in their brilliant scarlet
cassocks, not to speak of the _forestiere_ armed with their red
Baedekers, who are doing Rome and at the same time _doing_ the Pope's
Jubilee.

Everything and every one on the way to the Vatican.

We went to see the gifts, which are exposed in many rooms on the ground
floor of the Vatican. There was an enormous quantity of things of every
description, useful, ornamental, and superfluous. The windmills, bells,
every sort of vehicle, rowboats, sailboats, and every modern invention
had been put out in the Vatican gardens.

You can have no idea of the incredible amount of slippers sent
(thousands of them); church _vetements_ by the hundreds, embroidered by
millions of women who must have worked themselves blind; the most
exquisite articles of needlework, incrusted with pearls and precious
stones which have probably cost a mint of money.

The Princess del Drago's gift was a large diamond cross with an
enormous emerald in the center, an heirloom from her mother, the Queen
of Spain. There were many other private gifts which were equally
valuable. Almost a ship-load of canned fruits and vegetables sent from
America; these were arranged in a gigantic pyramid. Just to look at
them made my mouth water and me homesick.

Ridiculous objects from _naif_ donors, such as babies' socks and
jackets, and silver things for a lady's toilet-table, and other equally
inappropriate things, must have surprised the Pope when he saw them. I
have not mentioned the millions of francs the Pope received in money;
he can easily dispose of that; and he intends, I believe, to make
presents to every church in Italy of the different objects which can be
useful. But what can he do with the babies' socks?

On last Thursday the Pope said mass in St. Peter's. It was the great
event of the year.

As we are accredited to the Quirinal, of course I never can have the
opportunity to be received by his Holiness; therefore I was very glad
when the monsignore who is still _Dantefying_ us offered to give me a
_carte d'entree_.

I was obliged to be at St. Peter's at a very early hour, and succeeded,
owing to having a "friend at court" (the Swedish chamberlain to the
Pope, Marquis de Lagergren), in getting an excellent place where I had
a good view of the Pope and the whole ceremony. Ladies are dressed
entirely in black, with black veils instead of hats, on these
occasions.

There was a great deal of noise in the church--much scraping of chairs,
rather loud talking, people being shown to their seats, and, above all
other noises, _the organ_.

I cannot honestly say that the music was beautiful. With the exception
of the days when the best singers of the Pope's choir sing, the music
in St. Peter's is not good. The organ is as antiquated as the organist,
who plays with all the stops pulled out.

The center of the church was filled with wooden benches and chairs. The
altar was brilliantly lighted with hundreds of wax candles; the columns
around it were hung with tawdry red damask curtains, which, in my
opinion, rather took from the dignity of this magnificent church.

The Swiss Guards ushered people to their seats. They looked very
picturesque in their costumes of bright red and yellow, slashed
sleeves, and brass helmets.

In due time the serious and somber chamberlains, in their black satin
and velvet costumes, appeared; next came the bishops, in their purple
robes; and directly preceding his Holiness the Pope were the cardinals,
in red. Then came the twelve men carrying the gold pontifical chair in
which the Pope was seated; they walked very solemnly and slowly.

Every one dropped on his knees, and the Pope raised his thin white hand
to bless the kneeling crowd.

He mounted the steps of the high altar and began reading mass. His
voice was very feeble and scarcely audible.

It was very impressive. It would be impossible to give you an idea of
the intense solemnity of this scene, especially for me, as I have no
talent for description. Women wept and waved their wet handkerchiefs;
the sterner sex would have done the same, I dare say, if they had not
been ashamed to show so much emotion.


_March 10, 1888_.

The Emperor Wilhelm of Germany died yesterday. Though he was so very
old, the news of his death was unexpected and cast a gloom over Rome.
Of course, all gaieties are ended, and court mourning ordered for three
weeks. King Umberto left directly for Genoa to meet the new Emperor,
who started from San Remo on his way to Berlin. The dinner for King
Umberto's birthday, which was to have been on the 14th, has been
_decommande_.

The Prince of Naples has already left for Berlin to represent the King
at the Emperor's funeral--his first official act since he has become of
age.


_May 1, 1888._

My dear Aunt,--My letters are very uninteresting. I cannot help it.
There is nothing going on in society. In fact, many of the Italians
have left Rome, and the colleagues are resting on their oars--those who
have any to rest on. I am resting on my "Pinafore" oars. How lucky we
had it when we did!

Taking advantage of this moment of inactivity, the Roman ladies
arranged a charity performance, for which Marquise Del Grillo (Madame
Ristori) promised to give her services. She chose the famous play
"Marie Antoinette," which is supposed to be one of her best. The tickets
were to be procured only from the ladies of the committee (of which I
was one), and, though they cost a fabulous price, the theater was
crammed to suffocation.

Madame Ristori's acting was, of course, perfect, her voice musical, her
Italian delicious, and her gestures were faultless. If one might dare
criticize such an artist, one could say that her movements might have
been a little more queenly, but a queen's grace and dignity must be
very difficult to acquire from sheer imagination. Also her dress was
far from what it ought to have been. I am sure no French dressmaker had
the making of _that_ gown. In the first act Marie Antoinette, in the
_apotheose_ of her glory, wore voluminous skirts and crinoline,
according to the famous picture. Madame Ristori wore a crinoline, to be
sure; but her dress was too short in front and showed her low-heeled
shoes of white satin, and when she moved about her gown of heavy
brocade swayed from side to side like a pendulum.

One recognized the great artist in the scene in the prison, where she
bade the king and her children adieu. This was very touching, and there
was not a dry eye in the audience. I know that _I_ sniffed and wept and
blew my nose, and was quite ashamed of showing my feelings so
explosively.

I went to see her on her reception-day (the next Friday) and found her
in her every-day surroundings, her pretty daughter hovering about with
teacups and cakes, everything looking very home-like and prosaic, and
Marie Antoinette eating sandwiches with a healthy appetite and talking
of the latest gossip. I could hardly believe that I had shed so many
tears over her sad fate a few nights ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sad news of the death of Emperor Frederick came day before
yesterday from San Remo. Every one had been expecting his death for
months. The Italians loved him, and mourn him as if he had been their
own. There is court mourning for three weeks.


MONZA, _October 1, 1888_.

My dear Aunt,--You ought to have a map of Europe continually under your
eyes, and little pins to stick in the places where we last were. Space
and distance are nothing to your "wandering jew(el)s." Going from Italy
to Denmark and back again twice a year, we are obliged to traverse the
whole of Europe, and, as "all roads lead to Rome," we can choose the
one we like best.

Wherever we go we are enigmas to our fellow-travelers, who can never
decide what nation we belong to. Johan talks Danish to me; we talk
French to the governess, German to the valet, Italian to my maid, and
English alternately. I think we would have puzzled the builders of the
tower of Babel at that confusing moment when they all burst forth in
unknown tongues.


ROME, _October 15, 1888_.

My dear Aunt,--We are having a series of entertainments in honor of the
new Kaiser. This is his first official visit since he has become
Emperor. He arrived here on the 11th at four o'clock.

We were invited by M. and Mme. Huffer to see the _entree_. They being
Germans, their decorations surpassed all others. Carpets out of every
window, flags flying, and the German coat of arms placed in every
available spot on their beautiful palace in the Via Nazionale. The
King, accompanied by the Prince of Naples, followed by the Duke of
Genoa, Duc d'Aosta, M. Crispi, Marquis Gravina, and Marquis Guiccioli,
and other notabilities, drove to the station through a double line of
troops on both sides of the street.

The usually dirty waiting-room in the station was hung with tapestries
taken from the Quirinal and the splendid Louis XV. furniture taken from
the beautiful Palace of Caserta.

The train which preceded the Emperor's, decked out with garlands and
flags, came in sight, the traditional red carpet was laid down, the
final orders shouted, and the Imperial train appeared. The soldiers
presented arms, and the military bands struck up the German national
hymn. The King wore the uniform of a general. He advanced to meet his
Imperial guest. They embraced and kissed each other on both cheeks,
then they presented the princes and the different members of their
suites.

The Emperor was in the red uniform of the Hussars and looked very young
and handsome.

In the first _berline_ (as they call the demi-gala blue landaus) were
the Emperor and the King; in the second were the Prince of Naples and
Prince Henry of Prussia (the Emperor's brother); in the third the Duc
d'Aosta and the Duke of Genoa; in the fourth, Count Herbert Bismarck
and the German Ambassador (Count Solms). The other carriages, of which
there must have been ten, contained the military and civil members of
both the sovereigns.

There was a great demonstration in front of the Quirinal Palace. The
Emperor and the King came out on the balcony amid screams of "_Eh!
viva!_" One old man--a German, I suppose--who was covered with medals
shouted at the top of his lungs. "_Hoch!_" hoping to make a sensation,
but the Emperor made no sign that he heard it.

The next day (Friday), as had been arranged long beforehand, the
Emperor made his visit to the Pope; the carriage from the Quirinal
brought him to the residence of Herr von Schloezer (the German Minister
to the Vatican), where the Emperor lunched and changed his uniform.

Schloezer's account of the luncheon was very amusing. His household was
apparently not arranged for the reception of emperors. He and his
secretary were in great straits to provide the proper luxuries for
their august guest. Schloezer possessed nothing so frivolous as a
mirror, therefore he sent to borrow ours. We sent him the one we
thought best suited to the occasion. It was so different from
Schloezer's modest belongings that the Emperor's quick eye guessed
instantly that it was a stranger, and said, "Where did this come from?"

I give you Herr von Schloezer's account in his own language.

"I had no extra toilet things to put into the Emperor's room, but,
fortunately, I had bought a cake of soap in Berlin; this I put on a
piece of marble I had picked up in the Forum, which I thought would do
for a soap-dish. The Emperor went into the adjoining room to change his
uniform, and suddenly appeared in the doorway, holding out his wet
hands, and said, '_Mein liebe_ Schloezer, can't you give me a towel?'
_Donnerwetter!_ said Schloezer, that was the one thing that I had
forgotten."

The luncheon was (excepting the famous wines on which he prides
himself) of the simplest kind of Italian repasts, of which macaroni,
frittura mista, and cutlets with saffron (_a la Milanais_) formed the
chief feature. The Emperor was in the best of spirits and enjoyed it
all, interlarded as it was with Schloezer's unique remarks.

The Emperor's own horses and carriages and _piqueurs_ (brought
expressly from Berlin for this one visit to the Pope) were waiting
before the German Legation to convey his Majesty and Herr von Schloezer
to the Vatican. The whole route through which they drove was lined with
a double row of the national troops to the very steps of the Vatican.
Every window was filled with people anxious to catch a glimpse of the
handsome and youthful Emperor as he passed by in his open victoria;
Prince Henry and Count Bismarck followed in another of the Emperor's
carriages.

At the early hour of half past nine the _haute societe_, the Ministers,
the Senators and Deputies--in fact, _all Rome_--were summoned to meet
the Emperor at the Campidoglia. It was to be lighted for the first time
with electricity--a great event. People were to meet in the
statue-gallery. After all were assembled, the King, the Queen, and the
Emperor entered, followed by the princes and their different suites.
The Emperor was dressed in the uniform of the _garde de corps_ (all
white) with a silver breastplate and silver helmet. He was an
apparition! and did not look unlike one of the statues. Or was he a
Lohengrin who had come in a swan-drawn skiff down the Tiber to save
some Italian Elsa?

There were some presentations made. I, for one, was presented to his
Imperial Majesty, and was charmed with his graciousness. We talked
English, which I think rather pleased him, for he made some facetious
remarks on things and people and actually laughed.

The next evening, the 18th, the fireworks and the illumination of the
Forum, the Colosseum, and the Palatino, were the entertainment after a
_diner de famille_.

The Diplomatic Corps was bidden to the Villino. The place was rather
too small to contain all the guests. Fortunately, it was a pleasant
evening; there was a full moon which lent charm to the scene. Bengal
lights, to my mind, are the cheapest form of illumination, but the
fireworks--for which the Italians are so renowned--were splendid.
Rockets of all colors, bursting in mid-air and sending down showers of
lighted balls, were never-ending, and everything belonging to
pyrotechnics was in profusion and perfection.

The _bouquet_ (which is the French for the _apotheose_) surpassed
everything I had ever seen before. It lasted several minutes. When
everything has burned out, only the brilliant "W" with an Imperial
crown remained, and faded gradually away.


ROME, _March, 1889_.

Dear Aunt,--Rome is placarded all over with blood-curdling pictures of
"the Wild West Show" and portraits of our friend Buffalo Bill. I call
him "our friend," although I can't say I know him very well. We
traveled in the same car with him for a whole week on our way to
California ten years ago. That is not enough, is it?

I had never seen a Wild West Show and was most eager to go; besides, I
wanted to see "our friend" in his professional character. We made up a
large party and went there _en bande_.

The tents were put up not far from the Vatican gardens, behind Castel
St. Angelo. None of us had ever been to such a performance, and we were
all delighted at the marvelous feats of lassoing by the cowboys and the
rifle-shooting of the cowgirls, who looked so pretty in their short
leather skirts and leggings. One of them threw pieces of silver in the
air and shot them in two with her rifle. Everything was wonderful.

Duke Sermoneta, who went with us, having read on the posters that
Buffalo Bill professed to tame any wild or vicious horse, wished to
test Buffalo Bill's ability, and perhaps with a little maliciousness
had ordered some of the wild horses from his estate to be brought to
Rome.

These untamed horses are like those that used to run in the _corsi dei
Barberi_ during the carnival in Rome when Rome had carnivals. The Duke
was very sure that no one could tame them, much less put a saddle on
them; the audience, no doubt, thought the same. There was quite an
excitement when the frightened things came rushing into the arena and
stood looking about them with terrified eyes. But the cowboys knew very
well what to do. They quickly lassoed them, and somehow, before we
could see the whole process, they were forced to the ground, plunging
about and making desperate efforts to get up. Finally, after many
attempts, a saddle was placed on them, and lo and behold! the ferocious
wild horses were conquered and, as meek as Mary's little lamb, were
ridden around the arena to the accompaniment of great clapping,
screaming, and applause. Every one was as enthusiastic as the Duke
Sermoneta over the stubborn and agile young Wild-Westers. Then Buffalo
Bill's herald came forward and proposed that the Italian _campagna_
boys, who had brought the Duke's horses, should mount the American
bucking horses. The Duke gave his consent readily. He was very willing
that his men should show what they could do. Well, they showed what
they could _not_ do; they could not keep on the horses a minute, even
if they managed to get on; they turned somersaults in every direction,
fell off, and rolled about on the ground. The audience roared.

Buffalo Bill appeared on a beautiful horse, holding his gray sombrero
in his hand, acknowledging the applause. He looks very handsome with
his long, fair hair falling on his shoulders and his Charles-the-Second
fine face.

The Duke said, "How I should like to speak to that man!"

We said that we knew him and that perhaps we could get him to come to
us. I wrote on my card: "It would give M. de Hegermann and myself much
pleasure to speak with you. We traveled in the same train with you to
California some years ago, if you remember." I sent the card by a
little page who was selling popcorn. At the first opportunity Buffalo
Bill came, preceded by the boy. He said he "remembered us perfectly." I
introduced him to the Duke, who, after having complimented him on his
"show" and laughed over the awkward attempts of _his_ boys, asked him
if we might see the camp.

No gentleman from the court of Louis XV. could surpass Buffalo Bill's
refined and courteous manners. He said if we would wait until the
performance was over he would "show us about."

We did wait, and went all over the camp with him, and saw everything
that was to be seen, and smelled the different fried things which
lurked in every corner. Buffalo Bill beckoned to some of the cowboys to
come forward and named them to us. I think they were delighted. They
had such good, honest (and even handsome) faces. My heart warmed to
them.

One said to me, "Why, you talk English as good as an American!"

"That is not wonderful," I answered; "I am an American."

"Is that so?" he asked. "Well, America's a pretty good place, ain't it?
A good sight better than over here--that is what I think," and,
pointing to the Duke Sermoneta said, "Is that gent American, too?"

"No," I answered. "He is an Italian. Those were his horses you tamed
this afternoon."

"Is that so? Well, I would not like to tell him that them boys of his
can't ride worth a cent and the horses ain't worth their hide."

I hoped that Duke Sermoneta had not overheard this conversation.

Buffalo Bill showed us a young Indian woman who had had a baby a few
days ago.

"It was baptized this morning," he added. "What do you think it was
called?"

"Is it a boy or a girl?" asked the Duke, looking at the brown, wizened
face of the little thing, which was swaddled in an old shawl.

"A girl," answered the young mother, in English.

"Then I suppose you called it Roma," I said.

"No," said Buffalo Bill. "It is the custom among the Indians to give to
the baby the name of the first thing the mother sees after its birth."

"Then they must have named it Tent," I said.

Buffalo Bill laughed. "No, you must guess again. It was called Saint
Peter's."

"Poor little girl!" said the kind-hearted Duke, and put a gold piece in
the ready and delighted hand of the mother.


ROME, _1890_.

Dear ----,--Signor Sonsogni, the promoter of music and art, gave
several librettos of operas to different composers in Italy, and
promised a large reward to the victorious competitor.

Signor Crispi kindly offered me his _loge_, thinking that it would
interest me to be present at one of the performances. There had been
many of these before, but nothing remarkable had so far been produced.

We arrived in the theater while they were playing a short opera of two
acts, which was unfavorably received and quickly condemned with
contempt and hisses.

The judges looked bored to death and discouraged, and the audience
seemed ready to growl and grumble at anything.

Mugnoni led the orchestra in his usual excitable manner. If any of the
operas had been good for anything they would have shown at their best
under his masterful baton.

Then came the "Cavalleria Rusticana."

Already when the overture was played the audience was enchanted, and as
it progressed the enthusiasm became greater and greater, the excited
audience called for the _autore_ (author).

Mascagni, urged and pushed forward from the sidewings, evidently
against his will, appeared, looking very shabby in an old gray suit
with trousers turned up, as if he had just come in from the street. His
hair was long and unkempt, his face haggard and thin--evidently he had
been starved and unwashed for weeks. This really was the case.

He bowed modestly and with a _naif_ awkwardness which was very
pathetic. The Italian public, just as wild in its enthusiasm as it is
merciless in its disapproval, rose as one man with a bound and cheered
vociferously. But when the Intermezzo was played there was a burst of
thundering applause, clapping of hands, and shouts of enthusiasm. I
never heard anything like it.

Mascagni was called at least twenty times before the curtain. Any other
composer would have beamed all over with joy and pride at such an
ovation, but Mascagni only looked shy and bewildered. The tears rolled
down my cheeks as I looked at the poor young fellow (he is only twenty
years old), who probably that very morning was wondering how he could
provide food for his wife and baby. Fancy what his emotions must have
been to wake up so unexpectedly to glory and success!

[Illustration:
FRANCESCO CRISPI
Prime Minister of Italy. From a photograph taken in 1887.]

Mascagni, his wife, and his baby lived in a garret, and had not money
enough to buy even a candle. The only instrument he had when he wrote
the opera was an accordion. His little wife is nineteen, and the baby
is one year old.

Italy thought it possessed another Verdi. The next day after his
triumph Leghorn (his birthplace) gave him the citizenship of the town.
Sonsogni handed him a large sum of money (the promised prize), and
Mascagni had orders to begin on another opera. Will that be as good?
One says that necessity is the mother of invention; it seems that in
this case poverty was the father of "Cavalleria Rusticana."


_1890._

Dear ----,--Johan is named to Stockholm, and we must leave Rome.
Needless to say that I am broken-hearted to leave Italy and the Queen.


MILAN, _September 16_.

Dear ----,--We went yesterday to bid good-by to their Majesties, who
are at Monza, and for J. to present his letters of _rappel_.

We arrived in time for luncheon; there were no other guests.

After luncheon we sat out under the trees by the side of the pretty
lake; there was an awning put there, and we stayed all the afternoon in
the shade of the large trees which bordered the lake. The King was very
gay; he wanted every one to row out in the small boats that were there;
then he and the Prince took another boat and tried to collide. The King
pretended that he could not row, and made such hopeless attempts that
all those in the other boats were splashed with water.

On taking leave of her Majesty, which was done with a great deal of
weeping on my part, she handed me a beautiful sapphire-and-diamond
brooch and a very large photograph signed by her dear hand _en
souvenir_. The King gave Johan his photograph and the decoration of _la
couronne d'Italie_. The day passed only too quickly. I cannot tell you
how miserable I was to take leave of their Majesties, who had always
been so kind and gracious to me.

But what use is it to mourn my fate. Nothing can change the fact that
we are bidding good-by to Italy.




STOCKHOLM, 1890-1897




STOCKHOLM, _October, 1890_.

Dear L.,--We arrived here (our new post) at an early hour in the
morning. We found the secretary and carriages waiting for us, and drove
to the hotel, where we stayed until our apartment was quite ready. Our
furniture from Rome has already arrived, so all we have to do now is,
like coffee, to settle.

We have taken the same house that has been the Danish Legation for the
last forty years, and where Johan used to live when he was secretary
here twenty years ago.

The apartment is very large. It has twenty-four rooms, ten windows on
Drottning Gatan, and thirteen on the side-street. The ballroom has five
windows (three on one street and two on another); a large _salon_, two
smaller _salons_, a library, and a spacious dining-room; and it has
(quite rare in Stockholm) a _porte-cochere_. The Chancellery is in the
courtyard, having its separate entrance and staircase.

The evening before we left Copenhagen we had the honor of dining with
the King and Queen of Denmark, at Amalienborg. It was a family dinner,
J. and I being the only guests. After dinner the Queen talked a long
time with me and handed me the letter she had written to the Queen of
Sweden.

"I told her," she said, "that I was very fond of you, and I knew that
she would be equally so. And how the Duke of Nassau [her brother]
admired you and your singing."

"If your Majesty hadn't said it, I never would have believed that the
Duke liked my singing. I was under the impression that he would have
liked me better without the singing."

"Yes," the Queen said, "I confess that he is not musical, and does not
like _all_ music, but he really did like to hear you sing. He told me
so."

"Of course he knows," I answered, "but he is the last person from whom
I expected to receive a compliment."

As their Majesties retired, the Queen held out her hand, and when I
stooped to kiss it she kissed me affectionately on both cheeks. The
King, on shaking hands with me, said, "_God Reise_" which is Danish for
_bon voyage_.

The first days in a new post are always very busy ones. My first visit
was to _the doyenne_ of the _Corps Diplomatique_, Baroness Ph. She gave
me a list of visits to be made, and a quantity of her own cards with
_pour presenter_ with mine.

Yesterday J. was received by the King, and presented his _lettres de
creance_.

Although J. had been Secretary of Legation, and had been groomsman at
the marriage in Stockholm of the Crown Prince of Denmark to Princess
Louise (niece of King Oscar), and was very well known to the King, all
the regular formalities had to be gone through with. J. made his
traditional official speech to the King, both standing; and the King
solemnly answered with an elaborate assurance that the relations
between Sweden and Denmark had always been of the best and that they
would remain so.

When the ceremonious utterances were ended, the King put his arm on
J.'s shoulder and said: "Now let us sit down and have a good talk
together of old times." The King "thee-and-thoued" Johan, and said,
"_Her, du. Naar kommer din husfru?_" which in English means, "Listen
thou. When is thy wife coming?" It is so strange that the Swedish
language has no word for _you_. One must either address people by their
title, which is sometimes very awkward, or else say _thou_.

I was dreadfully puzzled when I first came here. Right opposite my
window was a sign, "_Dam Bad Rum!_" I said: "How queer! People
generally cry up their wares, not down. Who ever heard of a seller
saying that his rum was as bad as that?" I found out afterward that the
sign was merely to let people know that a ladies' bath-room was to be
found there.

The next excitement was my audience with the Queen, and thereby hangs,
if not a tale, a teapot with a tempest in it. I must tell you all about
it. I hope you will appreciate the tremendously complicated position in
which I was placed.

It seems that in the time of Queen Christina of Sweden, one hundred and
fifty years ago, the ladies of her court wore black silk or satin
dresses and sleeves of a certain pattern. The court has seen no reason
to make any change of dress since that time. To-day it wears the same
style of dress and the same _sleeves_--the cause of the tempest!

In answer to my request for an audience I received a letter from the
_grande maitresse_, saying that the Queen would receive me on Thursday
next; the _doyenne_ of the _Corps Diplomatique_ would present me. Then
followed instructions: my dress was to be a black satin ball-dress, a
train of four meters, lined with black silk, _decollete_, white _glace_
gloves, _et les manches de cour_. I had no idea what _les manches de
cour_ were, and, naturally, I went to the _doyenne_ to find out.

If I had announced that I intended to throw a bomb under the King's
nose the effect could not have been more startling than when I said
those fatal words, "_Les manches de cour_."

_Madame la doyenne_ was so overcome that for a moment speech left her.
She proceeded to tell me that in order to keep on the right side of the
colleagues it would be advisable _not_ to wear the sleeves.

"Why not?" I asked, perplexed. "My husband says it is only on this one
occasion that a foreign minister's wife is required to wear the
sleeves."

She acknowledged that this was true, but the diplomatic ladies had
refused to wear them, and it was as much as peace and happiness were
worth to displease the colleagues.

"How can they refuse?" I asked.

She explained that the idea of wearing the sleeves was disagreeable to
them; therefore the court had passed over the point and made a
compromise: the Queen received them at the summer palace,
Drottningholm, _en toilette de ville_. In this way the difficulty had
been temporarily overcome, but now it seemed they wished me to draw the
chestnuts out of the fire.

"What am I to do?" I asked. "The only thing I can see is to leave
Stockholm, my home, and my family, and come back in the summer when I
can wear a bonnet."

I meant this as a tremendous satire, but she took it quite seriously
and said, "That would be wiser."

I smiled and, handing her the letter I had in my hand, I said, "In this
letter from the _grande maitresse_ she said you were to present me."

"Of course I am to present you, but I refuse to wear the sleeves."

"If such is the case," I said, "what would you advise me to do?"

She answered: "I would advise you to avoid wearing the sleeves. You
will make a precedent which all the _Corps Diplomatique_ will resent."

"Why should the ladies object to the sleeves?" I ventured to ask. "Are
they so unbecoming?"

"It is not that they are unbecoming, but the Ministers' wives dislike
being dictated to. They say that they represent their sovereigns, and
object to be told what they shall wear and what they shall _not_ wear."

I remarked that at the Court of St. James's no lady ever dreamt of
objecting to wear the three plumes and the long tulle veil prescribed
by _that_ court, and I could not see any difference so long as it was
their Majesties' wish.

To this she replied, "I think you will regret it if you offend the
whole _Corps Diplomatique_."

On this I took my leave and drove straight to the _grande maitresse_.
My back was up, and even if the _Corps Diplomatique's_ back was up,
too, I was determined to do nothing to displease the Court of Sweden. I
explained the situation to the Baroness Axerhjelm, who already knew it,
of course, better than I did. I could see it was a sore point.

When I asked her to explain to me about the sleeves she offered to send
for them that I might see them, and to lend me her sleeves that I might
copy them.

When I looked at the offending sleeves I did not think they were so
appalling--only two white satin puffs held in with straps of narrow
black velvet ribbon. On a black corsage they could not be so dreadful,
especially as the fashion now is sleeves puffed to exaggeration. How
silly!

We received visit after visit and many letters from the now irate
Corps--so many that we were quite bewildered. J. looked through the
archives of the Legation to see if he could find anything bearing on
this subject, but in vain. The mighty question does not seem to have
troubled my predecessors. They seem to have worn the sleeves and gone
on living.

J. remembered that the wife of his former Minister, on the occasion of
the marriage of the Crown Prince, wore them. I decided to write to the
Queen of Denmark to ask her advice, telling her of the threatened
antagonism against me.

This is her letter in reply:

    I advise you, dear Lillie, to do as their Majesties desire. The
    Crown Princess always wears the sleeves when in Stockholm, and I
    think it would be more polite and less awkward if you wore them
    also.

Therefore I had them made. Thursday came: my dress was ready and the
obnoxious sleeves in their places, I quite admired them, and would not
have minded wearing them every day. Still, I could not but think how a
whole ballroom of ladies with them on must have appeared in Queen
Christina's time.

Although it was the duty of the Baroness to accompany me, I was not
surprised when I received a long letter explaining how a severe
headache had suddenly swooped down on her and would deprive her of that
pleasure.

That was her way of getting over this _impasse_.

The situation was awkward. This refusal at the eleventh hour was very
annoying. I was not expected alone, but alone I should have to go.
There was no alternative, and the absence of the _doyenne_ must explain
itself as best it could.

I arrived in solitary grandeur, and was conducted in state to the
_salon_, where the _grande maitresse_--with the sleeves, of
course!--was ready to receive me. She did not seem in the least
surprised at seeing me alone; possibly the _doyenne_ had written her
own account of the headache. I could see that she applauded the stand I
had taken, so I felt that if I had lost favor with my colleagues I had
gained it at court.

We went together to the _salon_, where we found the Queen. She rose and
gave me her hand, and I bowed low over it. She was dressed all in
black, with the white satin sleeves conspicuous under a long lace veil
which hung from her head. She is very fine-looking, tall, and imposing,
with a quiet and serious manner. She looks the personification of
goodness.

I gave her the letter the Queen of Denmark had sent her. Then she
talked of her brother (Duke of Nassau), and said he had written about
me and my singing, when we were both guests at _Chateau Furstenberg_.
The Queen added, "My brother is not musical" (indeed he was not), "but
he said no singing had ever pleased him like yours." I bowed and tried
not to look incredulous. "The King," she said, "is looking forward with
great pleasure to seeing you again. He remembers a certain song you
sang. Was it not 'Beware,' or something like that?"

I did not think it unlikely. I had sung it often enough, goodness
knows.

I replied I did sing a song called that.

The dire step had been taken, and as far as sleeves were concerned the
incident was closed.

When I reached home I changed my dress and drove to the house of the
"suffering" _doyenne_. She had not expected such quick inquiries, for
she looked the picture of health; and I met on the staircase a court
lackey evidently bent on the same errand. She stammered a great many
things about her headache, and how, when she had that particular _kind_
of headache, she was incapacitated from any effort. I sympathized
deeply with her.

Her first question was, "Did the Queen have on the sleeves?"

"Certainly," I answered, curtly.


_January, 1891._

Dear L.,--King Oscar is a king after one's ideas of what a king ought
to be. He looks the king every inch of him, and that is saying a good
deal, because he is over six feet. He has a splendid physique, is
handsome and of much talent. He is a writer and a poet, and speaks all
languages. You must be told that some kings are kings; but King Oscar,
there is no doubt about what he is!

At a concert the other evening he came and sat by me, and began talking
of music, of _his_ singing, and _my_ singing, and so forth, and
finished by saying, "Would you like to have me come to you some day and
sing?"

"Of course, your Majesty," I said. "I should be delighted. When may we
have the honor of expecting you?"

"How would next Thursday be?" he asked. "And would half past two be
agreeable to you?"

I replied, "Any day or any hour will suit me," although it was in fact
the only day which did _not_ suit me, as it was my reception-day.

"I hope that we may be quite by ourselves," said the King. "Only you
and the members of your Legation."

This I could easily promise, as I should have, in any case, closed my
doors.

"Your Majesty will stay and have a cup of tea. I hope."

"With pleasure," he answered, "if that will not make my visit too
long."

"Too long, your Majesty! How could it be too long?"

"Well, then, you may expect me."

How prepare for _les details_? Madame de Sevigny writes somewhere,
"_que les details sont aussi chers a ceux que nous aimons, qu'ils sont
ennuyeux aux autres_."

The servants laid the traditional red carpet on the staircase. Palms
and plants were put in every possible place.

At two o'clock the servants were already on the watch. The
_porte-cochere_ was wide open and the _concierge_ all in a flutter. The
piano-tuner, who had just spent an hour tuning my Bechstein, had
departed when a cart drew up in front of the door. What do you think it
was? Nothing less than the King's own piano, an _upright_ one, though
it did connive at _deception_, as you will see. It was one of those
pianos with which one could, by turning a key, lower the whole keyboard
by half-tones, so that a barytone could masquerade as a tenor and spare
the pianist the trouble of transposing the music, and no one would be
the wiser.

This was emotion No. 1.

Emotion No. 2: a carriage which stood before the door brought Mr.
Halstrum, the pianist.

Emotion No. 3 was another carriage full of things--a music-stand, a
quantity of music-books, his Majesty's spectacles, and a mysterious
basket.

Emotion No. 4: the servants, with all their heads out of the window,
spied a carriage coming full tilt up the street. In it was M. Odman,
the best tenor from the Opera.

Finally the royal equipage, of which there could be no doubt this time,
was seen from way down the street. J. descended the stairs to receive
his Majesty as his carriage entered the _porte-cochere_. I stood at the
door of the apartment, and the King in his usual friendly manner said a
hearty, "_God dag, god dag, Fru Hegermann_!"

He was attended by only one chamberlain. We went into the _salon_.
After a little while the King said, "What shall I sing for you?" and
handed me a list of songs.

"Anything your Majesty sings will be delightful," I answered, eagerly.

"Yes, but you must choose," the King said.

I chose one I wanted to hear, but the King had already decided
beforehand what he wanted to sing. (I might have spared myself the
trouble.) He went toward the piano, but before he sang he took out of
the mysterious basket an egg, which he broke and swallowed raw, to
clear his voice. He began at the first song on the list, "Adeleide"
(Beethoven), and sang that and one after another of those on the list.
It seemed queer to have the _roles_ reversed in this way. I generally
sang for royalty, but here royalty was singing for me.

[Illustration:
KING OSCAR
From an autographed photograph taken in 1896.]

The King and I sang the duet from "Romeo and Juliet" and his brother's
romance, "_I Rosens doft_," which I had sung with the King in Paris many
years ago. I sang some of my songs--"Beware," of course. I wondered
when the tenor, whom I was longing to hear, would come on the program.
He only came once, and that was when he sang a duet with his Majesty, a
duet which the King had had arranged from the Jacobite song called
"Charlie is my Darling."

The tenor, whose English was not his strong point, sang with great
pathos "Cha-r-r-r-r-r-r-lie es my tarling," as if a love-sick maiden
were calling her lover. When the King sings he throws his whole soul
into the music. If Providence had bestowed a beautiful voice on him he
would have done wonders, but one cannot expect a sovereign to give much
time to cultivating his talents.

Our music finished, tea was served, and his Majesty, apparently pleased
with his visit, left at five o'clock.

Here is something the King wrote in my, album which is very
characteristic of him: "If you do anything, do it without delay and
with your whole heart and mind."


_January, 1891._

Dear L.,--I am going to give you a detailed account of the visit of the
Crown Prince and Princess of Denmark, their annual visit for the King's
birthday. Johan left the evening before to go to Kathrineholm, the last
station before Stockholm, in order to meet their Highnesses, and from
there to take the train and arrive here with them. Several of the
King's household did the same.

I was at the station at eight o'clock. It is pitch-dark here at that
hour. I pitied J. when I thought of his having to dress in full uniform
in the little hotel at Kathrineholm.

The King and his four sons and gentlemen and ladies belonging to the
court and society quite filled the room appropriated to royalty in
Stockholm station.

The train steamed in, and steps were placed at the door of the car. The
Crown Princess descended, followed by the Crown Prince, Prince
Christian, Princess Louise (the eldest daughter), and Prince Hans (the
King of Denmark's brother).

There was a great deal of kissing. The Princess was beaming with joy,
and said a word to every one.

The dinner at court was at six. It was a family dinner, and as such the
Queen was able to be present. As a rule, she is not present at large
dinners, because of her health. The King gave his arm to our Princess,
the Crown Prince took the Queen. Prince Carl gave me his arm and put me
on the left of the King.

During the repast the King asked me if I had read his book of travels.
I regretted to say that I had not. Then he called his _chasseur_, who
always stands behind his chair, and told him to beg the adjutant to see
that a copy of the book should be sent to me.

He talked a great deal of Paris, of his admiration for the Empress
Eugenie, and how he had enjoyed his visit during the Exposition of
1867. He said, "Do you remember our excursion in my little boat when
you, the Princess Mathilde, and Marquis Callifet did me the honor to
come with me?"

"Yes, I remember very well, but I think the honor was on our side."

"Do you remember," he said, "the guitar, and those delightful songs you
sang--'Beware?' Do you remember?"

I remembered, certainly, and wondered if I had ever sung anything else
in my life.

"And our going to the Rothschilds' place near Boulogne," he continued,
"where the porter refused to let us enter the park?"

"Yes," I replied. "But when he heard who you were all the doors were
thrown wide open."

"Those were pleasant days," the King said with a sigh of recollection.
"I was a good friend of yours, and never will I change."

"I hope you never will, your Majesty."

"Never," he said. "When once I am a friend, I am a friend for always,
and I shall always be a good friend to you." And, taking up my hand
from the table, he kissed it--a most embarrassing moment for me!

       *       *       *       *       *

Our ball was a great success. Perhaps you don't know how festivities
belonging to royal visits are managed. Entertainments are prearranged
three or four weeks before the arrival of the royal guests.

I had never entertained royalty before, therefore I was naturally
rather nervous. I sent to Nice for kilos of flowers, and to Rome for
mosaic brooches and little _fiaschettis_, which I filled with perfume.
I sent to Paris for canes and card-cases and silver pencils, and
arranged a surprise for my guests. This was a fancy-dress quadrille, to
be danced by sixteen young people at the beginning of the cotillon.
Four couples were dressed as shepherds and shepherdesses in
different-colored satins, with powdered hair and bright ribbons. The
other four were dressed as _incroyables_.

The great problem was how to arrange the different suppers, of which
there must be five or six. The royalties must have a room to
themselves. There must be three separate suppers for the other guests,
two for the dancers, and two buffets going on all the evening.

In the ballroom a dais was arranged with a red brocade for a
background, on which were two red chairs for the King and the Crown
Princess.

After giving the last orders J. and I stood at the doors to receive our
guests, who soon began pouring in. People in Sweden are always very
punctual, and arrive precisely at the time for which they are invited.
Of course, when royalty is present one should be a little earlier.

Here the host always names the hour when the carriages are to be
ordered. I think this is very wise, because if the poor horses had to
stand out in the cold, waiting until their masters chose to go home,
they would freeze to death. Fortunately, my dress, ordered from Paris,
arrived just the day before.

At half past nine the servant announced the arrival of the royal
carriages. J. and the secretaries flew downstairs, two servants raced
after them, each carrying a candelabrum of six lighted candles. After
J. had helped the King from the carriage he took the candelabra from
the servants and preceded the King up the stairs to where I stood,
according to custom, on the threshold of the door. I presented to the
Crown Princess a large bouquet of red and white roses (the Danish
colors), with long streaming ribbons to match, and a smaller bouquet to
the Princess Louise.

The _tambour_, a curious name given to an antechamber in Sweden, seemed
overflowing with dazzling uniforms and showy liveries. It was a very
cold night, and all the guests were muffled up to the tips of their
noses when they came in. The display of india-rubbers was stupendous.
You can see how necessary were the twenty-two large porcelain stoves
which, in Sweden, are built into the walls. For my ballroom I was
obliged to add an American stove of the kind one fills once a day from
the top.

The King gave me his arm, and as we entered the _salon_ every one
courtesied to the ground. Then the Crown Princess came in with J.

Tea was passed, and when the usual ceremonies like presentations and
greetings were finished, the _quadrille d'honneur_ commenced.

The King took his place on the dais and watched the dancing.

At eleven o'clock supper was announced. In entering the supper-room the
King gave me his arm, the others following.

We were fifteen at our table, ten of whom were royalties.

J. did not sit down to supper with us, as it is not the custom in
Sweden for the host to absent himself from the rest of his guests.

Now came the moment for the surprise!

When the royal guests were seated on the dais, sufficient space was
made in front of them, the door opened from a side-room, and the
dancers entered.

I think those sixteen young people showed much self-denial to be
willing to forego the early pleasures of the ball, as they had to do,
and give up the time when others were dancing to being dressed, wigged,
powdered, and painted. I had to put four rooms at their disposal, two
for the ladies with their maids, one for the gentlemen and their
valets, and one for their refreshments and supper.

The shepherds and shepherdesses looked and danced their quadrille
charmingly. The music for this was the mazurka from "Romeo and Juliet."
When the _incroyables_ came in there was a murmur of admiration. They
were beautifully dressed. They wore black satin costumes, and the
ladies had white ruffs round their necks. The gentlemen wore high
collars and lace jabots. Each had a long stick in his hand and a
monocle in his eye. The shepherds stood back while the _incroyables_
danced their quadrille. The music of this was the "Gavotte Louis XIII."
As I had chosen the eight prettiest girls in Stockholm, the effect was
perfectly enchanting. After the second quadrille they joined forces and
danced a _ronde_ to the music of "_Le Galop Infernal_" of "_Orphee aux
Enfers_" (Offenbach). It was a great success, and the King desired them
to dance it over again.

The King thought it must have been a tremendous undertaking, but I told
him that it was no trouble to me, as the ballet-master from the theater
had taught them.

These young people stayed in their pretty costumes for the cotillon,
which commenced directly after their dance.

In Sweden people are not _blase_ as to cotillon favors. They are not
accustomed to receive anything more elaborate than flowers and little
bows, so I think they all went home happy with their gifts.

There is such a queer custom here. During the cotillon, at the same
time with the ices, beer is served, and something they call
_mandel-melck_ (milk mixed with almond essence). The young ladies also
have to be sustained every little while by huge glasses of the blackest
of porter.

The royal guests left at two o'clock; then we had a sit-down supper for
those remaining. At five o'clock I found myself in my bed, tired out
but happy that everything had gone off so well.

The next day the Crown Prince of Sweden had arranged a tobogganing
party at Dyrsholm. We were a very gay company of twenty-four, meeting
at the station to take the little local train to Dyrsholm, and arriving
about twelve o'clock.

Here we found an excellent luncheon which his Royal Highness had
ordered, and which was, oh, so acceptable to us hungry mortals! On
excursions of this kind in this cold latitude one is obliged to be very
careful not to eat and especially not to drink too much, as there is
always danger of congestion.

It was a glorious day, the sun shining brilliantly in a clear sky, but
bitterly cold. The thermometer, I was told, was eighteen below zero; I
would have said thirty. We ladies were muffled up to our ears in fur,
our feet buried in _pomposhes_, which are long, india-rubber boots
lined with fur, and when we stood in the snow we had great shoes lined
with straw.

Everything about us was white; the trees, were loaded with icicles and
snow. The hill down which we toboganned was very steep, ending in a
long slide over the frozen lake. The snow on both sides of our path was
piled up four feet high at least. The fun of toboganning is the bunker.
The sudden rise gives you such an impetus, and on the other side you
get such a tremendous bump that generally one, if not _both_, of you
fall off head first in the snow.

One must be an adept to manage these sleds. The Crown Prince
toboganned, as he did everything else, to perfection. Of course, each
prince had his own sled and invited some lady to go with him. The lady
generally sits in front, with her legs stretched out, and holds on to
everything she can, her clothes in particular. The gentleman sits
behind, steering with his feet.

The Crown Prince went often alone, and then he would lie flat on his
stomach and steer with his long legs, as if he were sculling a boat. I
did not feel the least nervous when I went with him, but I confess I
did feel a little shy when I had to put my arms round his neck and
clutch him for dear life when we jumped the bunker. He preferred having
his companion behind him.

The _revers de la medaille_ was the toiling up the long slope in the
intense cold. I wondered if the pleasure was worth the toil, but if one
did not go down on the sleds one would have to stay on the top of the
hill and freeze.

We enjoyed this sport till darkness put an end to it; then we returned,
tired, cold, and hungry to town, to dine hurriedly and be ready for the
theater at eight o'clock--a gala performance.

[Illustration:
THE KING OF SWEDEN
From a photograph taken when he was Crown Prince Gustav. The crown and
robe were worn at the formal opening of the Riksdag by his father, King
Oscar.]

J. and I were invited to sit in the royal box. The opera was "Orphee,"
by Glueck. The Crown Princess suffers agonies when she hears music
(everything sounds false to her sensitive ears). Therefore, to spare
her, they had chosen the shortest opera.

In the _entr'actes_ refreshments were served in the small _salon_ which
is kept in reserve for the King. It is the same room where King Gustave
III. retired when he attended the ball which proved so fatal to him on
the night of his assassination. The libretto of "_Ballo in Maschera_"
by Verdi, is made on this subject, and the scene laid in Boston.


STOCKHOLM, _1892_.

Dear L.,--The opening of the Rigsdag is a great event in Stockholm. The
_Corps Diplomatique_ met in the room in the palace called Kronesal. The
walls are covered with the three gold crowns of the Swedish coat of
arms painted on a blue background. They passed on through the rooms of
the Order of the Sword, which had just as many swords on its walls as
the other had crowns. You can never make a mistake as to where you are!
The ladies were told to wear _toilette de ville_, and the gentlemen to
dress in gala uniform.

Just before the time the King was to come in we were ushered down a
little narrow staircase which led into the Rigsdag, passed in front of
the throne, and went up a still narrower staircase to the gallery
reserved for the diplomats, which seemed very shaky. Some day when the
Rigsdag is opening there will be a collapse of diplomats.

The body of the hall was filled with the gentlemen, all the members of
the two Chambers in evening dress and the court officials in their
uniforms.

When the Queen is present, which is not often, she sits opposite the
_Corps Diplomatique_, surrounded by the ladies of the court, who wear
little white fur capes over their shoulders.

The galleries on both sides were filled with the nobility and society.
The throne on which King Oscar sat is on a raised platform filling the
whole end of the hall. The throne is unique, made of silver, silver
lions supporting it on both sides. Back of the throne was a long blue
velvet curtain hanging from the canopy.

Everything was ready and every one in his place. A deep silence reigned
throughout. There was a blast of trumpets; every one stood up, and the
King came down the same little staircase we had. He looked very
majestic in his splendid robes of ermine, over which hung the blue
Order of the Seraphim, the highest order in Sweden, and of course all
his other decorations. The crown he wears is magnificent, made of
costly jewels, and, I should think, very heavy, causing the King to
hold his head very straight and steady. He looked up at the _loge_ of
the diplomats, made a slight inclination of the head, then mounted the
few steps of the throne and sat in his silver chair.

The Crown Prince came next, followed by Prince Carl and Prince Eugen.
The three are as tall as the King. They wore blue velvet mantles
trimmed with ermine, their uniforms showing underneath, and as if they
had been handed down, but not let down, from former and shorter
Princes.

They wore crowns which seemed difficult to balance on their heads.

The King took the Proclamation from the hands of his _Rigskanzler_ and,
standing up, read it in a loud and clear voice. He did not use his
eye-glasses, because the letters were made so large that he could read
without them. It was a fine and thrilling moment.

The Rigsdag being opened, the King left as he had come.


STOCKHOLM, _1892_.

Dear L.,--Prince Chira, one of the sons of the King of Siam, came to
see us to-day. He has just returned from St. Petersburg. We were very
glad to see him again. We knew him so well in Copenhagen, where he has
been living for some years. He has been in the Danish army, and,
although only nineteen years old, has passed the most difficult
examinations, and is now an officer. He talks English, French, and
Danish with equal facility. When at Aalholm he entered into all our
games and charades with enthusiasm.

He did not mind at all being dressed up as a Sambo, and favored
particularly a yellow wig. He has very yellowish skin, almond eyes, and
beautiful white teeth. He came to see us straight from the castle,
where he had been to see the King. He was very enthusiastic about his
Majesty (who is not?). He told us how the King had taken the grand
cordon of the Seraphim Order off his own shoulders and hung it on his.
The King being a giant, and Prince Chira about the size of a boy of
ten, you can imagine how the cordon fitted him. Chira said, "I reached
up to about the King's waist, and when the King put the cordon on me it
trailed on the ground, and I kept tripping over it when I left the
room. It is most awkward," he added, laughing, "and I must wear it
to-night at the big dinner at court which the King gives me."

"Leave it with me, and I will have a tuck made in it and send it to you
before dinner." This he did. We measured off how much of a tuck should
be made, and sent it to him in time. He came the next day to thank me
and bid us good-by. He said, "I looked splendid last night _in my
cordon_."

In June and July it is never really dark in these latitudes. The sun
shines till eleven o'clock, the birds sing and bustle about during the
so-called night, and the cocks begin to crow at absurd hours. They must
be perplexed as to what they are doing all these months. The early bird
has to be very early to get off with the worm.


BAYREUTH, _August, 1893_.

Dear L.,--At last my dream of dreams has become a reality--under what
enchanting conditions! Mrs. L., my beloved friend, invited me to stay
three weeks with her in the apartment which she has taken, 28
Opernstrasse, which was the habitation of Wagner's special doctor. Mrs.
L.'s other guests were her sister, her niece, and Mr. and Mrs. Brimmer
from Boston. Johan promised to join us later. Mrs. L, had her own cook
and servants, and we lived like princes of the blood. A walk about the
streets in the morning, then a sumptuous lunch, and then a little
_siesta_ to fit us for the rest (or rather fatigue) of the day.

At a little before four the carriages were at the door and we drove up
the hill to the Shrine, passing the foot-sore and weary pilgrims
toiling on their way. The servant took our hats and coats, for no one
must wear a hat in the audience, and no one needed a coat in this awful
heat.

[Illustration:
THE RIKSDAG OF SWEDEN
From a photograph showing the opening of the Riksdag at Stockholm,
January, 1897. The De Hegermann-Lindencrones were _doyen_ and _doyenne_
of the diplomatic corps; he stands in the gallery on the left, fourth
from end.]

The signal to enter the auditorium is given by a blast of trumpets,
generally the four bars of the most well-known melody in the
to-be-given opera. The only boxes in the theater are in the rear, and
Madame Wagner sits with her family in the middle one. After the people
have taken their seats the house becomes pitch-dark, and from the
depths of the unknown one hears the first notes of the overture. Then
the curtains are noiselessly drawn up. After this no one dares to
breathe--woe to the unlucky one who gets a fit of sneezing or a
tickling in the throat; better die at once than be the recipient of all
the inward curses that are hurled at you! The first act generally lasts
an hour, and the people emerge from the stifling auditorium into the
fresh air with a sigh of relief. The Germans make dashes of kangaroo
leaps toward the casks of beer, and then rush for the tents where they
get something to eat at the price of blood.

The _entr'acte_ lasts an hour; then we hear the blasts of the four
heralds again, which is the signal for the second act to commence, and
so on until ten o'clock at night. Then _home_, where we find a gorgeous
_diner-soupertoire_ which triumphantly ends a day of emotion.

Wagner's operas, which lay about on our tables, all seem to have been
given by him to _meinem lieben Freund_, the doctor. How I regret that
dishonesty did not get the upper hand! How easy it would have been for
me to have purloined a book and its signature, but I am proud to say
that I resisted, and my collection of autographs is to this day devoid
of anything from Richard Wagner, showing that virtue is not always its
own reward, since I regret having been virtuous.

The off days were also delightful. We drove to the Hermitage, lingered
in the grounds belonging to the gentle and clever Margraefin, and
wondered if her tiny little court was not a trifle _ennuyenx_! One
could fancy her sitting under the shady trees of the _charmille_,
sewing beads on some bags, specimens of which were exhibited to us by
an officious menial, and were of the most hideous description. I say
hideous because I hate beads and all their works. I have just finished
reading her memoirs, and I can only think how small their talk must
have been--how narrow their visions!

We drove to the other pretty resort, Bellevue, and meandered about the
rococco gardens, and sat on the stone benches surrounding the lake, and
watched the graceful movements of the swans as they tried to avoid the
spray from the fountains. We tried not to see the native music-lovers
who clustered in crowds about the tables, which were covered with red
checker-board table-covers and drinking-mugs. They sit under these
lovely shady groves for hours, in their thick coats, which they wear in
any season and in any climate, their ponderous field-glasses slung over
their fat shoulders and their pockets bulging with guide-books and
postal cards, swallowing by barrelfuls the cool and beloved beer and
eating _Butterbrod_ by platefuls.

On Saturday evenings Madame Wagner--called familiarly Frau
Cosima--opens her _salon_, and every one goes who can get an
invitation. There is generally music, and the best-artists from the
Opera-house are delighted to sing. Also the inevitable pianist who is
"the finest interpreter of Chopin." (Did you ever know one who was
not?)

Very interesting evenings, these, because one sees all the notabilities
that flock to Bayreuth. Princes, plebeians, and artists meet here in
the limitless brotherhood of music.

Madame Nordica has been singing throughout this season. Her Lohengrin
is Van Dyke, and Gruning plays Tristan to her Isolde. Her voice is
charming, and she acts very well, besides being very good to look at.
She has a promising _affaire de coeur_ with a tenor called Dohme,
Hungarian by birth, and, I should say, anything by nature. He is
handsome, bold, and conceited, and thinks he can sing "Parsifal."
Madame Nordica has, I believe, sung for nothing, on the condition that
her _fiance_ should make his _debut_ here previous to taking the world
by storm, but Madame Cosima, with foresight and precaution, has been
putting him off (and her on) until the last day of the season, which
was yesterday. Then Frau Cosima allowed him to make his appearance,
upon which he donned his tunic, put on the traditional blond wig, took
his spear in hand, and set forth to conquer. His first phrase, "_Das
weiss ich nicht_" which is about all he has to say in the first act,
was coldly received. However, his bare legs and arms were admired from
the rear as he stood his half-hour looking at the Holy Grail. In the
second act, where he resists Kundry's questionable allurements, he did
passably well, though he gave the impression that even for a _reiner
Thor_--the German for a virtuous fool--she had no charms. She was a
masterful, fat, and hideous German lady, and when she twisted a curl
out of her yellow wig and sang, "_Diese Loche_" and cast her painted
lips at him with the threat, "_Diese Lippe_" he remained hopelessly
indifferent, with a not-if-I-know-it expression on his face. He was
neither a singer nor an actor, and did not have a shadow of success.
But he thought he had, and that was enough for him. It is not allowed
in Bayreuth to show any sign of approval (or the contrary) until the
curtain falls on the last act of the last performance. Then the public
calls the artists out _en masse_. Parsifal came with the others, and
looked more like an Arab beggar than anything resembling a Parsifal.
Madame Nordica took her _fiance_ off the next day. She received from
Madame Cosirna a lace fan, with thanks, for her exertions during the
Bayreuth season, but she was repaid enough by the satisfaction of
seeing her _fiance_ make his _debut_, his first and last appearance, I
fancy.

They went to Nuremberg the next day and had rooms near ours. We could
hear her trilling with joy during their dinner duets, and when I went
to see her in her apartment the Conquering Hero told stories about
himself which I accepted at a fifty-per-cent. discount. Madame Nordica
has certainly the loveliest of voices. What a pity the tenor of her
life should not have a better chance to run smooth, for run smooth it
will not with such a _Thor_ in her possession.


STOCKHOLM, _June, 1894_.

Dear L.,--You will wonder why you have not heard from me for such a
long time, but we have just returned from a trip to Norway. You know J.
is accredited there as well as in Sweden, and he has to put in an
occasional appearance, and we thought while he was putting that in we
would put ours in with it. Our party included Nina and Frederick.

For five days we careened over mountains and dales, driving, sailing,
riding Norwegian ponies, and always enjoying ourselves to the utmost.
One who has not seen the Norwegian _fjords_ does not know how beautiful
and picturesque the scenery is. You must come some day and see it for
yourself.

We reached Bergen the 24th of June, the longest day of the year. There
is no question of its being really dark, only between 1 and 2 A.M. you
cannot see to read. It is a lovely time to travel, because you can
travel the whole twenty-four hours.

Bergen is a very pretty town, with clean streets and nice shops. The
jewelry, silver, and fur shops are really quite wonderful, but--there
is always a thorn to every rose--the smell of fish pervades the town.
Go where you will, you cannot escape it. You don't wonder at this when
you visit the fish-markets and see the monsters which are brought out
of the deep every morning. They look like small whales.

Nina and I, with the energy of the American woman who knows what she
wants and knows how to get it, were determined to see Grieg in his
surroundings. We hired a carriage in Bergen and started on our
pilgrimage. It needed not only the energy of an American, but the
tongue of a Dane and the perserverance of Danaides. The Griegs live in
the most unget-at-able place that you can imagine, because he does not
want any one to get at him.

However, after driving for miles and worrying the life out of our
driver by poking him in the back with our umbrellas and asking him if
we had not arrived and when we should arrive, and such useless
questions, our poor tired steed climbed a long hill where the road
suddenly ended its course. We were obliged to leave the carriage and
make the rest of the hill on foot, only to encounter, on arriving at a
gate bearing these large and forbidding letters: "_Her boer Edward
Grieg, som oensker at vaere fri for folk._" ("Here lives Edward Grieg,
who wishes to be let alone.")

But Nina and I were not to be balked by such a trifle as Edward Grieg's
wishes, and with some difficulty we managed to unfasten the hasp of the
wooden gate. We expected to see a dragon or a ferocious bulldog fly at
us, but all was peaceful within, and we walked into the lair without
being molested, and marched boldly to the front door of the villa.
There Mrs. Grieg opened the door to us and was (she said) delighted to
see us. "And," she added, "how happy Grieg will be, too!" This, we
thought, was doubtful, but Grieg pretended to be very "happy."

We stayed as long as we dared, and, on being offered tea and cakes and
urged to stay longer, we were shown, as a great privilege, the little
summer-house at the bottom of the hill where Grieg retires when he
wishes to compose, and where Mrs. Grieg or any other angel dare not to
tread. He has a grand Steinway. This is about the only American thing
which Grieg does not hate. He said that he would have been a rich man
if America had given him a royalty on his music, which is, as he said,
played in every house in America. They bemoaned that they were overrun
by American lady reporters. That was the reason they had put that
notice on the gate--to keep them off the premises. They would beg, he
said, "just to look at the garden and pluck a little _ukrut_ [weed],
and then go away and write all sorts of nonsense, as if they had
dragged all my secrets out of me. They are terrible," he added, "your
lady compatriots."

[Illustration:

FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM GRIEG

    A LETTER FROM GRIEG
    [Translation.]

    CHRISTIANA, _Nov. 30, 1891_.

    My wife's and my own heartiest thanks for your kind telegram. I
    received it eight days too late by a perfectly incomprehensible
    and unfortunate mistake, but the joy over your greeting was none
    the less therefor. We remember so often and so willingly the
    beautiful time in Rome where you showed us so much kindness. We
    hope and wish to have a glimpse of you at not a too distant day,
    perhaps in Stockholm. With best greetings to your husband from us
    both.

    Your devoted

    EDWARD GRIEG.]

Grieg played some of his latest compositions, which were perfectly
exquisite, and played them as only he can. He was full of fun, and
told us of an American songstress who had been one of those who
had "got in." She insisted on singing for him "_Jeg elsker dig_"
and made a cadenza of her own at the end. He said Mrs. Grieg
almost fainted, and that his own hair had not finished standing on
end ever since. He played this awful cadenza for us, and I must
say it was ridiculous. Mrs. Grieg sings delightfully--_nothing but
Grieg, of course_. She has not a strong voice, but sings with
exquisite pathos and charm.

Grieg loves to talk of his rude behavior and dwell with pleasure
on his brusque speeches. He said a young American lady asked him
to teach her one of his songs, and after she had sung it he turned
round on the piano-stool and said:

"Are you singing for your living?"

"No," she answered, "I sing for my pleasure."

"Don't you think that dancing would be pleasanter?" he asked.

It was evident that they saw us go with regret; we certainly left
them with regret. They looked, as they stood there together waving
farewell, like two little gray elves; she with her short gray
dress and short gray hair; and he with his long gray coat and long
gray hair--a Grieg study in gray.


STOCKHOLM, _September, 1894_.

Dear L.,--Just as I was going to get a little rest, who should
come to Stockholm but the Prince of Naples? I begged him to give
us one evening before he left, which he promised to do. He seemed
as glad to see us as we were to see him.

"What would your Highness like best," I asked him, "an official
dinner followed by a reception, or a little dinner with a dance?"

"Oh, madame, the little dinner and a little dance, by all means."

So a little dinner it was. He does not care for dancing, but he
knew the lancers and quadrilles, and we danced those. We played
"Fox and geese"; I fancy, from seeing his amusement, that he had
never had a real romp in all his life. To finish, we danced a
Virginia reel. This was new to him and pleased him immensely. He
insisted upon going through the entire dance until every couple
had done its part.

A few days later King Oscar sent me the decoration of _Litteris at
Artibus_, which I shall wear on great occasions. This decoration
is a gold medal, and the ribbon that goes with it is blue. Queen
Christina of Sweden instituted the order. The medal is only given
to women of merit, artistic or literary. Jenny Lind, Frederika
Bremer, and Christina Nillson, and others have it.

I have become the _doyenne_ of the Diplomatic Corps. I intend to
make my colleagues walk very straight. So far my duties consist of
dancing in _quadrilles d'honneur_ and always being taken into
supper before every one else, and having the first place
everywhere; I take precedence of all guests. These honors do not
turn my head.


STOCKHOLM, _April, 1897_.

Dear L.,--We have been named to Paris.

Never did people have such a time getting away from a place.

All our furniture except a sofa and two chairs had been packed,
and was already on the way to Paris.

The entire morning I was busy receiving notes and bouquets of all
dimensions, tied with every imaginable national color.

We breakfasted with our colleagues from Germany, who had the
apartment above us. While still at table a royal chamberlain
announced that King Oscar was coming in half an hour to bid us
good-by. Heavens! How could we receive his Majesty without carpets
or curtains, only the sofa and two chairs! What a predicament! But
our good and kind friends came bravely to the rescue. They offered
to send down rugs, palms, and flowers, so that we could receive
our royal guest in the curtainless room. Well, the palms and
plants did certainly make the room look more inviting. J. camped
on the one chair, and the King and I sat on the sofa. The King
stayed half an hour. We were as sorry to leave him as he was to
have us go. He kissed me on my forehead, and kissed J. on both
cheeks, and said, "I shall come to Paris to see you."

J. escorted the King down-stairs and put him in his carriage,
while I wiped away a tear.

The royal visit over, our borrowed plumes were returned. Hardly
was the apartment bare again when there came a court lackey
telling our bewildered valet that the "Crown Prince would be at
the house in a short moment." Our colleagues most amiably sent the
rugs, etc., down again, and we sat in state and waited.

The Prince came, bringing a large photograph of himself, and said
many nice things, expressing his sorrow that we were going to
leave Stockholm, and bade us good-by.

The time was gradually approaching when I should put on my hat to
depart.

There were still a lot of things to be attended to at the last
moment. Our people had to be bid good-by and paid, and thousands
of trifles, as you may imagine, to be thought of, and I began to
despair of getting away. I seriously proposed to J. to pretend to
leave, bidding people good-by at the station, and stop at the
first place, to return the next morning and finish quietly what
seemed so impossible to do then.

What was our dismay, then, at receiving a telephone message from
Prince Carl, asking if I could receive him. Of course, I answered
I would be proud, and our colleagues above, learning of this new
complication, sent, without begging, the useful and ornamental
things which had adorned our _salon_ before.

Prince Carl came. He brought me a little bunch of
lilies-of-the-valley, intending a gentle allusion to my name. We
were very sad at the idea that we were to part, but part we must,
and pretty soon. The tired rugs were taken back once more.

Prince Eugen kindly telephoned that he wished to say good-by. It
was already so late that there was no question of the rugs, for it
was within an hour of our departure; therefore we were obliged to
receive the Prince without any accessories. He came with a little
offering of flowers. However, that did not make any difference,
because we all stood up. It is the custom here in Stockholm that
every one goes to the station to speed the parting guest. The
station was overcrowded. We were showered with the good wishes of
two hundred and fifty people, and flowers were in such quantities
that we had to have an extra compartment for them.

[Illustration:
A LETTER IN ENGLISH FROM KING OSCAR]




PARIS, 1897-1902




PARIS, _May, 1897_.

Dear L.,--I can hardly believe that we have been here a month. The
time has slipped by, as it has a way of doing when one is
frightfully busy; in my case it was particularly exasperating.

Johan's secretary took rooms for us at the Hotel Chatham, which
was not a very good choice, as you will see.

The day for Johan to present his _lettres de creance_ was fixed
for the 20th of April. M. Crozier, the gentleman who introduces
Ambassadors and Ministers to the President, appeared with two
landaus, escorted by a detachment of the _Garde Nationale_.

The little courtyard of the hotel could not contain more than the
carriages; the horsemen were obliged to stay in the very narrow
rue Daunou, which they filled from one end to the other.

While the two gentlemen were exchanging their greetings I slipped
out and walked down the rue de la Paix, which I found barred from
the rue Daunou as far as the rue de Rivoli.

I felt very proud when I thought from whom it was barred.

I went into a shop while the brilliant _cortege_ was passing and,
feigning ignorance, asked the woman at the counter:

"What is this procession?"

"_Oh! C'est un de ces diplomates_" she said, shrugging her
shoulders.

I left the shop without buying anything--a paltry revenge on my
part; still it was a revenge.

We have found a suitable apartment in the rue Pierre Charron, and
I have just now begun to look up some of my old friends. Alas!
there are not many left, but those who are seem glad to see me. My
first official visit was to Madame Faure. This was easily managed.
I simply went on one of her reception-days. An Elysian master of
ceremonies was waiting for me, and I followed him into the _salon_
where Madame Faure sat, surrounded by numerous ladies. A servant
wrestled in vain with my name, "Crone" being the only thing he
seized, but the master of ceremonies announced to the President
that I was the Danish Minister's wife, after which things went
smoothly. To leave no doubt in the other guests' minds that I was
a person of distinction and the wife of a Minister Madame Faure
asked me innumerable questions about _Monsieur le Ministre_.

We were scarcely settled when there came the awful catastrophe of
the burning of the _Bazar de Charite_, about which you have
probably read. I had promised to go to it, and I can say that my
life literally hung on a thread, for if my _couturiere_ had kept
her word and sent my dress home at the time she promised I should
certainly have gone and would probably have been burned up with
the others. Marquise de Gallifet also owed her life to my not
going. She came to make me a visit and lingered a little. This
_little_ saved her life. She entered the fated bazar just a moment
before the fire broke out, and therefore managed to escape.

Frederikke and I drove to the offending dressmaker. (How I blessed
her afterward!) When we passed the Cours la Reine we were very
much astonished to see a man without a hat, very red in the face,
waving two blackened hands in the most excited manner. He jumped
into a cab and drove away as fast as the horse could gallop. Then
we saw a young lady, bareheaded, in a light dress, rushing through
the street, and another lady leaning up against the wall as if
fainting. The air was filled with the smell of burning tar and
straw, and we noticed some black smoke behind the houses. I
thought it must come from a stable burning in the neighborhood. We
had been so short a time in Paris that I did not realize how near
we were to the street where the bazar was held.

At half past five we drove through the rue Francois I'er on our
way home and saw a few people collected on the Place, otherwise
there seemed nothing unusual. When we passed through the avenue
Montaigne we met Monsieur Hanotaux (Minister of Foreign Affairs)
in a cab, looking wildly excited. He stood up and screamed to me,
"_Vous etes sauvee_." What could he mean?

I thought that he was crazy. I screamed back, "_Que dites vous_?"
but he was already out of hearing. It was only when we reached
home that we learned what had happened and understood what he had
meant.

How dreadful were the details!

The bazar was in a vacant lot inclosed by the walls of surrounding
houses, from which the only exit was through the room where a
cinematograph had been put up. This, being worked by a careless
operator, took fire.

The interior of the bazar consisted of canvas walls, of which one
part represented a street called _Vieux Paris_.

The bazar was crowded; the stalls were presided over by the most
fashionable ladies of Paris, and there were many gentlemen in the
crowd of buyers.

When the fire broke out a gentleman whose wife was one of the
stall-holders stood up near the door and cried out, "_Mesdames,
n'ayez pas peur. Il n'y a pas de danger_," and quietly went out,
leaving people to their fates.

Then came the panic.

Young ladies were trampled to death by their dancing-partners of
the evening before. One of them was engaged to be married, and
when her _fiance_ walked over her body, in his frenzy to escape,
she cried to him, "_Suivez moi, pour l'amour de Dieu!_" He screamed
back, "_Tout le monde pour soi_," and disappeared.

She was saved by a groom from the stables opposite. She was
horribly burned, but probably will live, though disfigured for
life. Under the wooden floor were thrown all the _debris_--tar,
shavings, paper, etc. This burned very quickly, and the floor fell
in, engulfing those who could not escape; the tarred roof and the
canvas walls fell on them. What an awful death!

The kitchen of a small hotel, which formed one side of the vacant
lot, had one window about four feet from the ground. This was
covered with stout iron bars. The cook, when he realized the
disaster, managed to break the bars and, pushing out a chair, was
able to drag a great many women through the window. He and the
stable-boy were the only persons who seemed to have done anything
toward helping.

Of course, around the uprooted and demolished turn-stile was the
greatest number of victims, but masses were found heaped together
before the canvas representing the street of _Vieux Paris_. The
poor things in their agony imagined that it really was a street.
It was all over in an hour. It seems almost incredible that such a
tragedy could have taken place in so short a time. And to think
that the whole catastrophe could have been averted by the
expenditure of a few francs! When the architect heard that there
was to be a cinematograph put up he pointed out the danger and
begged that some firemen should be engaged. The president of the
committee asked how much this would cost and, on being told twenty
francs for each fireman, replied, "I think we will do without
them."

The Duchesse d'Alencon and the wife and daughters of the Danish
Consul-General were among the victims. The dead were all taken to
the Palais de l'Industrie and laid out in rows. Through the whole
night people searched with lanterns among the dead for their loved
ones. It was remarked that, though there were many men's canes and
hats, there was not one man found among the burned. Not one man in
all Paris acknowledged that he had been to the Bazar.

Within an incredibly short time subscriptions amounting to over a
million francs were collected. From America came many messages of
sympathy and a great deal of money. But no one could be found
except the cook and the stable-boy who had done anything to merit
a reward. After giving them large sums the rest of the money went
to form a fund for the building of a chapel in commemoration of
the disaster.


PARIS, _1897_.

Dear L.,--Social life here is very confusing and fatiguing;
physically, because distances are so immense. People live
everywhere, from the Ile St.-Louis to the gates of St.-Cloud.
Hardly a part of Paris where some one you know does not live. The
very act of leaving a few cards takes a whole afternoon.

In reality there are three societies which make life for a
diplomat, whose duty it is to be well with every one, very
complicated and unending. The official season for dinners,
receptions, and _soirees_ is in the winter; French society, just
returned from the Riviera and Italy, has its real season in
spring, when Longchamps and Auteuil have races and Puteaux has its
sports. The autumn is the time when strangers flock to Paris; then
commence the restaurant and theater parties. How can any lady have
a reception-day where people of all countries, all politics, and
all societies meet? Impossible! I have tried it, and I am sorry to
say that my receptions are dead failures. Still, I persevere, as I
am told it is my duty to receive.

When our first invitation to the ball of the Elysees came I was
most anxious to see what it would be like. Is it not strange that
the cards of invitation are the same used in the Empire. "_La
Presidence de la Republique Francaise_" stands instead of "_La
Maison de l'Empereur_." I have the two before me, the old and the
new, and they are exactly alike, color, paper, and engraving!

The Diplomatic Corps has a separate entrance at the Elysees. We
were met and conducted by a master of ceremonies to the room where
the President and Madame Faure were standing. M. Faure is called
_un President decoratif_. He is tall, handsome, and has what you
might call princely manners. The privileged ones passed before
them and shook hands, quite _a l'Americaine_. I was named by M,
Crozier and got from M. Faure an extra squeeze by way of
emphasizing that I was a new-comer.

We then passed into the _salon_ where our colleagues were
assembled, and did not move from there until the presidential pair
came in at eleven o'clock. At these balls there are a great
many--too many--people invited. I have been told that there are
six thousand invitations sent out. To one gentleman is assigned
the duty to stay in the first _salon_ and pass in review the
toilets of the promiscuous guests and judge if they are suitable.
When he sees a lady (?) in a high woolen dress with thick and
soiled boots in which she has probably walked to the ball, he
politely tells her that there must be some mistake about her
invitation, and she walks meekly back to her _comptoir_.

When M, and Madame Faure had finished receiving, they came into
the room where the diplomats were; and the President, giving his
arm to the lady highest in rank (the _protocole_ arranged the
other couples) we marched through the crowd of gazers-on, through
the ballroom, where some youths and maidens were whirling in the
dance, through the palm-filled winter garden, where the people
were crowded around a buffet, and through all the _salons_ until
we reached the last one, quite at the end of the palace, where a
sumptuous buffet awaited us. At one o'clock we returned home. It
amused me to see old Waldteufel still wielding his _baton_ and
playing his waltzes as of old. I wanted to speak to him, but,
being in the procession, I could not stop.

Yesterday I had a visit from Adelina Patti. I had not seen her for
a long time. It seemed only the other day that I had written a
letter condoling with her on the death of Nicolini, her second
husband. This time she was accompanied by her third husband, Baron
Cederstrom, a very fine-looking Swede whose family we knew well in
Sweden. The _diva_ looked wonderfully young, and handsomer than
ever. When they came into the _salon_ together one could not have
remarked very much difference in their ages, though he is many
years younger than she is.

Massenet comes often to see me. He is a great man now. He and
Saint-Saens are the most famous musicians of France at the present
moment. Massenet has never forgotten old kindnesses; and, no
matter where he is, whether on a platform at a concert, or in a
drawing-room full of people, he always plays as a prelude or an
improvization the first bars of a favorite song of his I used to
sing. He sends me a copy of everything he composes, and always
writes the three bars of that song on the first page.

Among others we find our friend Marquise de Podesta. She is a sort
of lady in waiting to Ex-Queen Isabella of Spain. I went to see
her at the Queen's beautiful palace in the avenue Kleber. I was
delighted when she asked me if I would like to make the
acquaintance of the Queen. I went two days later to what she
called an "audience." The Queen received me in a beautiful room
lined with old Gobelin tapestry and furnished with great taste.
She is rather heavy and stout and wears a quantity of brown hair
plastered over her temples, which does not give her the height a
Queen ought to have. She was very amiable, asked many questions
about places and people I knew, and before I was aware of it I
found myself spinning out lengthy tales. I should have much
preferred she do the talking.

[Illustration:
JULES MASSENET AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS CAREER
From an autographed photograph taken in 1894.]

The Empress Eugenie is now here. And fancy! living at the Hotel
Continental, right opposite the gardens of the Tuileries. I have
not seen her for six years (since Cap-Martin). Baron Petri, who
always accompanies her, answered my note asking if I might come to
see her, saying that the Empress would receive me with pleasure.
You may imagine my emotion at seeing her again. I found her seated
at the window facing the Tuileries. How could she bear to be so
near her old home? As if reading my thoughts, she said: "You
wonder that I came here to this hotel. It is very sad. There are
so many memories. But it seems to bring me nearer _mon fils bien
aime_. I have him always before me. My poor Louis! I can see him
as a little boy, when he used to drive out in his carriage, always
surrounded by the _cent gardes_." She told me of the terrible
journey she had made to South Africa. She had wished to go over
the same route that the Prince had taken on his way to Zululand.
How dreadful it must have been for her! Can one imagine anything
more tragic? Her only child, whom she loved beyond anything in the
world, whom she hoped to see on the throne! The future monarch of
France! a Napoleon! to be killed by a few Zulus, in a war not in
any way connected with France. The Empress appeared weighed down
with grief; nevertheless, she seemed to like to talk with me. I
wish I could have heard more, but the arrival of the Princess
Mathilde interrupted us, and I left.

The papal _nonce_ (Ambassador of the Pope) had his official
reception last week in his hotel, rue Legendre, which is far too
small to hold all the people who went there. All Paris, in fact.
No one is invited to these receptions, but every one thinks it a
duty and a politeness to attend; consequently, there are a great
number of people who walk in, are presented, and walk out.

The _nonce_ is a charming man, simple in his manner, kind and
gentle. I felt very proud the other evening to be on his arm after
the dinner at the Minister of Foreign Affair's, and walk about
with him. When we passed by some of the unclothed Dianas and
Venuses the dear old man held up his hand to cover his eyes: "_Non
devo guardare!_" Nevertheless I caught him peeping under his
eyelids. He came on my Thursday to see me, accompanied by
Monsignore Montagnini, his secretary, and sat a long time
lingering over his teacup, and made himself very agreeable to the
many ladies present.

The _nonce_ accepted our invitation to dine on the 26th (he fixed
the day himself). That evening I received a note from the
secretary to say that the _nonce_ had forgotten that the 26th was
Ash Wednesday, and, naturally, could not have the pleasure, etc.

Prince Valdemar, the youngest son of the King of Denmark, and
Princess Marie, his wife, were dining yesterday with us, with
Prince George of Greece, who is extremely agreeable and handsome.
She (the Princess Marie) when in Paris stays with her parents, the
Due and Duchesse de Chartres, in their beautiful palace, known In
Paris for its artistic architecture and its onyx staircase.

[Illustration:
A NOTE FROM MASSENET
This was a reply to a letter of introduction which Madame de
Hegermann-Lindencrone had written Miss Geraldine Farrar to
Massenet. He taught her subsequently _Manon_.]

The Princess desired to meet President Faure for some reason, and,
as she could not do that In her father's house, she desired us to
arrange a meeting on the neutral ground of the Legation. On the
day fixed they met here In the afternoon. I remained out of the
_salon_, and only returned when the tea-table was brought in. The
President partook of his tea with graceful nonchalance.


PARIS, _1897_.

Dear L.,--You ask, "What are you doing?" If you had asked what are
we _not_ doing I would have told you, but what we _are_ doing
covers acres of ground. We are in a whirlwind of duties and
pleasures, dinners, _soirees_, and balls. It would bore you to
death to hear about them. Many of my old friends are still in
Paris; those _you_ knew are Countess Pourtales (just become a
widow); Marquise Gallifet, who is more separated from her husband
than ever. She remains Faubourgeoise St.-Germain, and he favors
the Republic.

I find Christine Nillson here. From Madame Riviere she has become
Countess Casa-Miranda. She has a pretty little hotel near us,
where she sings not, "neither does she spin." I meet her at dear
old Mrs. Pell's Sunday-afternoon ladies' teas. Nillson and I are
the youngest members of the club. You may imagine what the others
must be in the way of years. Mrs. Pell gives us each (we are
twelve) a gold locket with a teacup engraved on its back, and a
lock of her once brown hair inside, and we assemble and eat
American goodies made in an ultra-superior manner by her _chef_.

Our occupations or amusements depend very much upon whom we are
with. A whole army of doctors has just descended on us, and we are
doing the medical side of Paris. One day we went to see Dr. Doyen,
the celebrated cutter-up of men. He said that operations other
doctors spent an hour over _he_ did in ten minutes. It sounds a
little boastful, but after what I saw I am sure that it is true.
He has a very large hospital where he preaches and practises and
gives cinematographic representations of his most famous
operations. It was very interesting, because at the same time that
we were looking at him in the pictures he was sitting behind us
explaining things. Strange to say that one or two of the doctors
with us fainted away. The ladies did not faint, neither did they
look on. The operation which took the most time was the cutting
apart of the little Indian twins, Radica and Dodica. This last one
(poor little sickly thing) was dying of tuberculosis, and the
question was whether the well one should be separated or die with
her sister. While this was going on the little survivor came to
the door and begged to be let in (she was tired of running up and
down the corridor); therefore we knew that the operation had
succeeded, which helped to make it less painful to witness.

We visited, in company with these same doctors, the Pasteur
Institute, young M. Pasteur accompanying us. We began at the rooms
where they examined hydrophobia in all its developments. Persons
who have been bitten by any animal are kept under observation, and
they have to go to the Institute forty times before they are
either cured or beyond suspicion. There are two large rooms
adjoining each other, one for the patients and the other for the
doctors. Every morning the unhappy men and women are received and
cared for.


_May 15, 1898_.

My dear L.,--We have just come home from bidding our Crown Prince
and Princess good-by at the station.

On Thursday Madame Faure and her daughter came to see me. On
bidding them adieu I said I hoped the President had not forgotten
the photograph of himself which he had promised me. Madame Faure
answered, "_Vous l'aurez ce soir meme, chere Madame_." That very
evening while we were dining with Count and Countess Cornet we
heard that Felix Faure had suddenly died. To-day we learned how he
had died. Not through the papers, but secretly, in an undertone
and with a hushed voice.

I think that the French papers ought to take the prize in the art
of keeping a secret. One could never imagine that a whole nation
could hold its tongue so completely! There appeared no sensational
articles, no details, and no comments on the President of the
French Republic's departure from this world. Everything in the way
of details was kept secret by the officials. In our country, and,
in fact, in every other country, such discretion would have been
impossible; the news in all its details would have been hawked
about the streets in half an hour. Here was simply the news that
Felix Faure had died.

A week later the President's funeral took place at Notre Dame.
Seats were reserved for the _Corps Diplomatique_ by the side of
the immense catafalque which stood in the center of the cathedral.
Huge torches were burning around it. After every one was seated,
in came the four officers sent by the German Emperor. Four giants!
The observed of all observers! Their presence did not pass
unnoticed, as you may imagine. They seemed more as if they were at
a parade than at a funeral. The music was splendid; The famous
organist Guilmant was at the organ, and did "his best." I believe
Notre Dame never heard finer organ-playing. I never did.

The streets were full of troops; the large open square in front of
the cathedral was lined with a double row of soldiers. The
diplomats followed on foot in the procession from Notre Dame to
Pere la Chaise, traversing the whole of Paris.


PARIS, _1899_.

My dear Sister,--You may think what a joy it is to me to have my
dear friend Mrs. Bigelow Lawrence staying with me here. Every day
we go to some museums and do a little sight-seeing. She is
interested in everything.

The new President (Loubet) gave us for one night the Presidential
_loge_ at the Grand Opera, and I cannot tell you how delighted we
were to hear Wagner's "Meistersinger" given in French, and
marvelously executed. All the best singers took part. The
orchestra was magnificent beyond words. The artists played with a
delicacy and a _culte_ not even surpassed at Bayreuth. In the
_entr'actes_ we reviewed--seated in the luxurious, spacious _loge_
where the huge sofas and the _fauteuils_ offered their hospitable
arms--our impressions, which were ultra-enthusiastic. Near us was
Madame Cosima Wagner, whom one of our party went to see. She
expressed the greatest pleasure at the performance, not concealing
her surprise that a representation in French and in France could
be so perfect. If that most difficult of ladies was satisfied,
imagine how satisfied _we_ must have been!

[Illustration:
FELIX FAURE WHEN PRESIDENT OF FRANCE
From a photograph taken shortly before his sudden death and sent
by his widow to Madame de Hegermann-Lindencrone.]

As a _bonne bouche_ we took Mrs. Lawrence to Madame Carnot's evening
reception. These receptions are not gay. They might be called
standing-_soirees_, as no one ever sits down. The guests move in a
procession through the _salons_, the last one of which is rather a
melancholy one. In the middle of it is a square piece of marble lying
flat on the floor, and a quantity of withered wreaths and faded
ribbons piled up on it. They are the souvenirs of the late President's
funeral. Madame Carnot, a most charming lady, wears a long black veil
as in the first days of her widowhood, and receives in a
widowed-Empress manner.

Mrs. Lawrence's visit is the incentive for active service in the army
of musicians. The President often sends me the _ci-devant_ Imperial
_loge_ at the Conservatoire. In old times I used to think how splendid
it would be to sit here! Now I have the twelve seats to dispose
of--six large gilded Empire _fauteuils_ in front, and six small ones
behind. There is always a bright coal-fire in the _salon_ adjoining,
but it does not take away the damp coldness from a room where a ray of
light or a breath of fresh air never can penetrate. The concerts seem
exactly the same as they used to be; they do not appear to have
changed either in their _repertoires_ or in their audiences. Beethoven,
Haydn, and Bach are still the fashion, and the old _habitues_ still
bob their heads in rhythmical measure.

The chorus of men and women look precisely as they did when dear old
Auber was _directeur_ (twenty-five years ago). I think that they must
be the same. The sopranos are still dressed in white, and the
contraltos in black, indicative of their voices' color.

Pugno with his pudgy hands played the Concerto of Mozart in his
masterful manner. One wonders how he can have any command over the
keyboard, he has such short arms and such a protruding stomach.

As a modern innovation Pierno's "_Creation_" was given, beautifully
executed, but received only with toleration.

Just to go up the familiar worn staircase brought the old scenes
vividly before me. Then it was a great piece of luck to obtain a seat
within its sacred walls, and such an event to go to a concert that I
can still remember my sensations.


PARIS, _1899_.

My dear Sister,--You ask me to tell you about the "Dreyfus affair."

It is a lengthy tale, and such a tissue of lies and intrigue that
common sense wonders if the impossible cannot be possible, if wrong
cannot be right. You probably know more of the details of the case
than I do, if you have followed it from the beginning, as I am just
beginning to follow.

I assure you it is as much as your life is worth to speak about it;
and, as for bringing people together or inviting them to dinner, you
must first find out if they are Dreyfusards or anti-Dreyfusards,
otherwise you risk your crockery. The other day I was talking to an
old gentleman who seemed very level-headed on the start. Perhaps I
might learn something! I ventured to say, "Do tell me the real facts
about the Dreyfus affair." Had I told him that he was sitting on a
lighted bomb the effect on him could not have been more startling.

"Do you know that he is the greatest traitor that has ever lived? He
gave the _bordereau_ to the German government."

"What is a _bordereau_?" I asked.

He seemed astonished that I did not know what a _bordereau_ was. "It
is a list of secret documents. He gave this three years ago."

"Who discovered it?" I inquired.

"It was found in the paper-basket of the German Embassy, and Monsieur
Paty du Clam knew about it."

"And then?"

"Well, then he was arrested and brought before the _conseil de
guerre_, found guilty, and degraded before the army."

"Did he confess that he wrote the _bordereau_?"

"No! On the contrary, he swore he had not, but the generals decided
that he had. So he _must_ have!"

"The generals may have been mistaken," I said. "Such things have
happened."

"Oh no. It is impossible that these officers could have been
mistaken."

"What did he say when he was accused?" I continued.

"I hardly think that he was told of what he was accused."

"Do you mean to say," I cried, "that he did not know that he was
suspected of high treason?"

"He must have known that he wrote the _bordereau_," he replied.

"_If_ he wrote it," I interrupted. "Was he not condemned only on his
handwriting?"

"Yes," replied my elderly friend, whose head I had thought level. "But
to discover the truth one had to resort to all sort of ruses in order
to convict him and convince the public."

"Why did the generals want to condemn him, if he was not guilty?" I
asked.

"They had to condemn some one," said my friend, who was beginning to
be dreadfully bored. "The generals found Dreyfus guilty, therefore
Dreyfus was guilty without doubt."

"Do you think that if an injustice has been done it will create a
great indignation in other countries and will affect the coming
Exposition?" I inquired.

"Ah," said my wise friend, "_that_ is another thing. I think myself
that it would be prudent to do something toward revising the judgment;
everything ought to be done to make the Exposition a success."

And there the matter rested.

I doubt if his friendship stood this test. Any one who takes Dreyfus's
defense is looked upon as an enemy in the camp. I devour the papers.
_Le Matin_ seems to be the only unprejudiced one. J. reads the others,
but I have no patience with all their cooked-up and melodramatic
stories.

On the 11th of September the King of Siam gave the diplomats an
opportunity to meet him at a reception in the new and beautiful
Siamese Legation.

The King is good-looking, and tall for a Siamese. He talked English
perfectly and showed the greatest interest in everything he had seen.
When he left Paris a few days later he bought three hundred dozen
pairs of silk stockings for his three hundred wives. Quite a sum for
the royal budget! One can't imagine bigamy going much further than
that, can one? And he is only forty-two years old!

I was very glad to meet Colonel Picquard at a dinner in a Dreyfusard
house. All that I had heard of him made me feel a great admiration for
him. I was not disappointed. He is a most charming man, handsome, with
such an honest and kind face. I hoped he would talk with me about
Dreyfus, and said as much to my hostess, who in her turn must have
said "as much" to him, for he came and sat by me. I did not hesitate
to broach the tabooed subject. He said: "I do not and have never
thought that Dreyfus was guilty. He may have done something else, but
he never, in my belief, wrote the _bordereau_. I had not known him
before. I was the officer who was sent to his cell to make him write
his name; they forced him to write it a hundred times. He was
perfectly calm, but it was so cold in his room that his fingers were
stiff and his hands trembled. He kept saying, 'Why am I to do this?' I
was convinced then and there of his innocence. I could have wept with
compassion when I saw how unconscious the poor fellow was. I was also
on duty," he added, "when Dreyfus was conducted to the Ecole Militaire
the day he was degraded before the troops: his epaulettes were torn
from his shoulders and his sword was broken in two. I never could have
imagined that any one could endure so much. My heart bled for him."

Dreyfus was imprisoned _two weeks_ and subjected every day to
mysterious questionings, of which he could not divine the purpose.
Neither he nor his counsel knew on what grounds he was arrested.

Forzinetti, who was in charge of Dreyfus's prison, also believed him
innocent, and said he had never seen a man suffer as he did. He kept
repeating, "My only crime is having been born a Jew." He has been
confined ever since on the _Ile du Diable_ under the strictest
surveillance. His jailer was not allowed to speak to him. When airing
himself in the little inclosure, exposed to the awful heat, there was
always a gun pointed at him. Sometimes he was chained to his bed with
irons, and a loaded pistol was always placed by his side in case he
became weary of life. Colonel Picquard said:

"It can only be the strong desire to prove his innocence that keeps
his courage up." Colonel Schwartkopfen (the German military _attache_
in Paris) declares solemnly to any one who will listen that the German
Embassy has never had anything to do with Dreyfus, and the _bordereau_
is unknown there.

We are very anxious about the news we get from Denmark. The dear Queen
is very ill, and there is little hope of her recovery.


PARIS, _29th September_.

Dear ----,--The Queen died last night.

Every one in Paris has come to us to express his sympathy. As is the
custom in Europe, people write their names in a book placed in the
antechamber. There are several hundred signatures. In Denmark there is
mourning ordered for six months. As there is no Danish church in
Paris, a memorial service for the Queen was celebrated in the Greek
chapel. It was most solemn and beautiful. I love to hear the mournful
chants of the white-robed, solemn priests.

It was very sad to hear of the assassination of the beautiful Empress
of Austria. She was in Geneva and about to take the little boat to go
up the lake. The assassin met her and, apparently running against her
accidentally, stabbed her. She did not feel the thrust and continued
to walk on. When she stepped on the boat they noticed the blood on her
dress, and soon after, on being taken to the hotel, she died.

The French military _attache_ in Copenhagen was in Paris some days and
invited us to dinner at his mother's, who has a charming home. We met
a great many agreeable people, among whom was the poet Rostand (he is
the brother-in-law of the _attache_). Rostand was very talkative, and
I enjoyed, more than words can tell, my conversation with him. He was
most amusing when he told of his efforts "to be alone with his
thoughts." He said that when he was writing _L'Aiglon_ he was almost
crazy.

"My head seemed bursting with ideas. I could not sleep, and my days
were one prolonged irritation, and I became so nervous _que j'etais
devenu impossible_. The slightest interruption sent me into spasms of
_delire_. Do you know what I did?" he asked me.

"I suppose," I answered, "you went on writing, all the same."

"No. You could never guess," he laughed. "I sat in a bath-tub all day.
In this way no one could come and disturb me, and I was left alone."

"Tubs," I remarked, "seem to belong to celebrities. Diogenes had one,
I remember, where he sat and pondered."

"But it was not a bath-tub. I consider my idea rather original! Do you
not think that the Great Sarah is magnificent in '_L'Aiglon_'?"

"Magnificent," I said. "You are fortunate to have such an
interpreter."

"Am I not?" He was a delightful man.

He sent me a few lines of the Princess Lointaine, with his autograph.

At Mr. Dannat's, the well-known American portrait-painter, I met the
celebrated composer Moskowski. One does not expect to find good looks
and a pleasing talker and a _charmeur_ in a modern artist. But he
combines all of these. He said:

"I shall die a most miserable and unhappy man."

"Why?" I inquired. I feared he would confide in me the secrets of his
heart, which is at present mostly occupied with his handsome and giddy
wife. These, however, he kept wisely to himself.

"I am like Rubinstein," he said. "He was wretched because he could not
write an opera. I also wish to write an opera, but I cannot."

"Who could, if not you?" I said. "I think your Concerto one of the
most beautiful things I have ever heard."

"You flatter me," he said, modestly, "but, alas! you cannot make me a
writer of operas. To-morrow afternoon is the _repetition generale_ at
the Cologne Concert of my Concerto. Teresa Careno plays the piano
part. Would you allow me to accompany you, if you would like to go?"

Did I accept? Yes!

Teresa Careno surpassed herself, and the Concerto was enthusiastically
received. Siegfried Wagner led the orchestra in a composition of his
own. He was very arbitrary and made the artists go over and over again
the same phrase without any seeming reason. One poor flutist almost
tore his hair out by the roots. Wagner was so dissatisfied with his
playing that he stopped him twenty times. At last, as if it were a
hopeless task, he shrugged his shoulders and went on.

[Illustration:
LINES FROM "LA PRINCESSE LOINTAINE" WITH ROSTAND'S
AUTOGRAPH]

Count and Countess Castellane (Miss Gould) gave a great entertainment
to inaugurate their hotel-palace in the Bois. The young King of Spain
was their guest of honor, and the smiling hostess clung to his arm
throughout the entire evening, introducing people as they passed. She
did not know every one's name nor half of their titles.

The cotillion was short and the supper long, and both were costly. The
King of Spain is not handsome, but he has charming manners and a
determined jaw and a very sympathetic smile. We met him again at the
Grand Prix in the President's pavilion. It was a most brilliant sight.
Every one in Paris was there, and the toilets of the ladies were of
the _dernier cri_.

The King of Sweden kept his word and really did come to Paris. A
dinner for him at the Elysees included us (the only persons who were
not French except the Swedish Legation). We are, as you know, what
they call "_une legation de famille_." I was more than enchanted to
see the King again. He promised to come and take tea with me the next
day.

"Who would your Majesty care to meet?" I asked him.

"My old lady friends whom I used to know here before," the King
answered.

"Your Majesty does not mean all of them--that would be a legion."

"No, no," he laughed. "Not _all_, only ..." and named several.

Every one came, although invited at the eleventh hour. It was a merry
meeting, and such _souveniring_!

The King walked to my house accompanied by Herr Ancacronra, and the
gentlemen whom the French government attached to his Majesty during
his visit. They were surprised that a King should prefer walking
through the streets to being driven in a landau from the Elysees.

The King brought several photographs, which he distributed to his
friends, and, wishing to write his name on them, desired me to give
him "a nice pen with a broad point." Oh dear! Not a "nice" pen could
be found in the house! And one with a broad point did not exist. As
for the ink, it was thick at the bottom and thin on the top. He had to
stir it about each time he put the pen in.

I was more than mortified.


PARIS, _1899_.

Dear L.,--Ambassador Eustis has been replaced by General Porter. It is
fortunate for America that we have so clever and tactful a gentleman
for our representative, especially in this moment of the
Spanish-American War. The French sympathies are (or were) with the
Spaniards, and the articles in the newspapers are, to say the least,
satirical of the "Yankees."

When the reporters interviewed the Ambassador they got such a clear,
straight, and concise view of the situation that they changed entirely
their attitude, and _now_ at last the papers tell the truth.

General Porter and his wife have taken the beautiful Spitzer Hotel and
are the personifications of hospitality. The marble staircase is
draped with the American flag. They receive in the ancestral hall
filled with knights in armor, and the guests sit in medieval chairs.
The picture-gallery, which is famous, is lighted at _al giorno_. I
fancy that most of the pictures have been taken away; however, there
are a few in each of the small rooms, through which the guests wander
with their heads at an angle giving an impression of subtle criticism.

General Porter always has a story _a propos_, no matter what you are
talking about. I wish I could remember some of the best. This one I
_do_ remember. He said: "I never believe but half of what is told me,
but," he added, laughing and pointing to a lady, who recently had
twins, "this does not apply to _her_." He borrowed from Coquelin the
following, "All American women are like pins--they go just as far as
their heads allow them." Is this original? I think it good if it is.

Do you remember Countess de Trobriand?

Well, she is still flourishing at the ripe age of eighty, and gives
_soirees_ in her apartments in the Champs Elysees. Some one said of
these entertainments that they were not _assez brilliant_ to be called
_trop brilliant_, but might be called _de trop_....

Zola is mixing himself up with _l'affaire_ (that is what one calls the
Dreyfus tragedy; there is no other "affair" that counts), and is
making himself very unpopular. He does not mind what he writes, and
his attacks reach far and wide and spare no one. If he stirs up mud at
the bottom of the well he does it in order to find the truth. At any
rate, he is honest, though he has had to pay dear for the best policy.
I do not read his books, but I have a great admiration for him. The
public feeling is so strong against him that crowds of the populace
rush about the streets pushing, howling, and screaming at the top of
their lungs, "_Conspuez Zola!_" which I cannot translate in other
words than, "Spit on Zola!" Mrs. Lawrence and I met a mob while
driving through the Place de la Concorde, and a more absurd exhibition
of vindictiveness cannot be imagined.

Poor Zola has been condemned to pay a fine of--how much do you think?
Twenty-five thousand francs! He would not or could not pay. The
authorities put all his worldly goods, which they valued at twenty
thousand francs, up at auction, and went, on the day of the sale,
belted with their official scarfes and armed with pretentions, and
commenced the farce of the auction. An old kitchen table was the first
thing to be sold. Two francs were offered. "Going, going, go--!" when
a voice struck in, "_Twenty-five thousand francs._" This sudden turn
nonplussed the authorities. The auction was called off and came to an
untimely end because no one knew exactly what to do.


_May, 1900._

Dear ----,--The opening of the Exposition was a grand affair. I never
saw so many people under one roof as there were yesterday at the Salle
des Fetes. The order in the streets was something wonderful. The
police managed the enormous crowd as if it had been composed of so
many tin soldiers.

The ladies of the Diplomatic Corps and the wives of the foreign
commissioners sat with Madame Loubet in a tribune, on very hard
benches. The President stood on a raised platform overlooking the
multitude, surrounded by his Ministers, his official suite, and the
Ambassadors and Foreign Ministers in full uniform. It was a most
brilliant sight.

M. Loubet made his speech in as loud a voice as he could command, but
I doubt if it was very audible. Several orchestras played before and
after the speeches.

Since then I have been many times to the Exposition, and the only
fault I can find with it so far is that it is too enormous; but I
admire the cleverness of the architects, who have brought Paris into
the middle of it and made it a part of it. Both sides of the Seine are
utilized in the most practical manner.

Every country has its own superb building in the rue des Nations.
Frederick is the _commisaire_ from Denmark. The Danish Pavilion is the
first to be finished and is called a success. We baptized it with
great _eclat_. There were speeches and champagne, and the Dane-brog
was hoisted amid hurrahs of our compatriots.

The _tapis roulant_ (moving sidewalk) is a very good scheme, as it
takes you to every point. As yet people are a little shy about it and
will stand and stare a long time before venturing to put their feet on
it.

The _fetes_ at this time of the Exposition are overpowering. All the
Ministers are outdoing themselves. They think nothing of inviting five
hundred people to dinner and serving twenty courses. I sat next to M.
L'Epine, _prefet de police_, and a more restless companion I never
had, although when quietly seated in his place he is a most charming
one. We had not been five minutes at the table before several
telegrams were brought to him. A riot in Montmartre, a fire in the rue
St. Honore, or a duel at the Ile de Puteaux, and he was up and down,
telephoning and telegraphing, until finally before the end of the
dinner he disappeared entirely. There were two concerts in different
_salons_ during the evening, one vocal and the other orchestral, each
guest choosing that which he liked best.

I go every day to the Exposition. There is always something new and
interesting. Yesterday it was a lunch with Prince Carl and Princess
Ingeborg (our Crown Prince's daughter, who married her handsome cousin
of Sweden) at a restaurant called _Restaurant bleu_, under the shadow
of the Eiffel Tower. The Prince wished to make the acquaintance of Mr.
Eiffel, and the Swedish Minister, who was present, secured the
distinguished architect's company.

He went with us to the very top of his modern tower of Babel, even to
his own particular den, which is the highest point, where he alone has
the right to go. The sensation of being up in the clouds is not
pleasant, and as you change from one elevator to the other and cast
your eyes down the giddy space you tremble. The view of Paris spread
out under you is stupendous, but I would not go up there again for
worlds.

The princely pair dined with us the same evening _en toilette de
ville_, and we went to the rue de Paris to see Sadi-Jako. The Japanese
Minister, who sat in the box next to us, introduced her when she came
in during the _entr'actes_ to pay her respects to him. She is very
small, and has the high, shrill voice which the Japanese women
cultivate. She is the first woman who has ever acted in a Japanese
theater. Otherwise the acting has always been done by men. Sadi's
husband performs also, and in a dreadfully realistic manner. He
stabbed himself with a sword, and with such vigor that real blood, so
It looked, ran down in bucketfuls over the stage, and he groaned and
writhed in his death-throes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Paris would not be Paris if it did not keep us on the _qui-vive_.
Every kind of celebrity from everywhere is duly lionized. Paris, never
Republican at heart, still loves royalty in any shape, and at the
merest specimen of it the Parisians are down on their knees.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had the heavy-eyed Krueger straight from the Transvaal. Paris
made a great fuss over him, but he took his lionization very calmly.
At the Opera people cheered and waved their handkerchiefs. He came
forward to the edge of the _ioge_, bowed stiffly, and looked intensely
bored. The _protocole_ furnishes the same program for each lion. A
dinner at the Elysees, a promenade, a gala opera, _et voila_.

Fritjof Nansen, the blond and gentle Norwegian explorer, has just
finished his visit here. As a Scandinavian friend he came for a cup of
tea and made himself most agreeable, and was, unlike other
celebrities, willing to be drawn out. He told us of some of his most
exciting adventures. Starvation and exposure of all sorts belong to
explorers.

No one would think, to look at the mild and blue-eyed Nansen, that he
had gone through so many harrowing experiences.

"The worst were," he said, "losing my dogs. I loved them all. To see
them die from want of food and other sufferings broke my heart."

I am sure that what he said was true, he looked so kind and good.

Among other personages of distinction Paris greets is the Shah of
Persia. The Elysees gave him the traditional gala dinner, to which the
diplomats were invited. The ballroom was arranged as a winter-garden,
with a stage put at the end of it. The ballet from the Opera danced
and played an exquisite pantomime, but the august guest sat sullen and
morose, hardly lifting his Oriental eyes. People were brought up to
him to be introduced, but he did not condescend to favor them with
more than a guttural muttering--probably his private opinion, meant
only for his suite. He merely glanced at us and looked away, as if too
much bored for words. M. Loubet stood on one side, and Madame Loubet
sat in a _fauteuil_ next to him, but he had nothing to say to either
of them. The government had put Dr. Evans's beautiful and perfect
villa in the Bois at his disposition. The persons belonging to the
house say that it is swimming in dirt, and they never expect to get it
clean again. The suite appear to have no other amusements than driving
about the streets from morning to night. The Elysees must have a
hundred carriages in use for them. Last evening there was a gala
performance at the Grand Opera for the _blase_ Shah. They gave
"Copelia," with the lovely Mauri as _prima ballerina_. The audience
made no demonstration, although it ought to have shown a certain
amount of Te Deumness, on account of the Shah's escape from an attempt
on his life. He was miraculously saved, and will go on living his
emotionless life for ever and ever. May Allah protect him ... from us!

Speaking of Orientals, the Chinese Minister has taken a very large
apartment in the Avenue Hoche. Evidently they expect to entertain on a
large scale. The wife is called lady, but _he_ is not called lord; the
two pretty daughters look more European than Chinese, having
pink-and-white complexions.

His Excellency was frightened out of his wits when M. Loubet, desiring
a private interview, sent for him. He, not knowing European ways,
thought his last hours had come, and, expecting speedy extermination,
hid himself.

Milady, though half American, did not know exactly what Ascension day
meant and asked her Chinese servant. He replied, "Great Churchman gone
topside to-day."

Mr. Peck is the American commissioner to the Exposition, and Mr.
Thomas Walsh is one of the members of the commission. He gave a
colossal dinner at the restaurant at d'Armenonville, and begged Mr.
Martin, who knows every one in Paris, to select the guests. It was
only on the evening of the dinner he made the acquaintance of the one
hundred people to whom he was host.

Nordica sang after dinner, and sang charmingly, as is her wont.

Mr. Walsh invited us to the American section. We sat on the tarred
roof of a restaurant, where lunch was served _a l'Americaine_. My
heart gladdened at the thought of hot griddle-cakes and corn fritters;
but although everything was delicious, sitting on a tarred roof and
being served by a loquacious black tyro was not appreciated by the
foreign element.

A lady--I won't tell you her name, though you know it--showed the
greatest interest in the house Mr. Walsh is building in Washington,
and desired greatly to advise him and help him choose furniture for
it. She thought Louis XVI. style very suitable for one _salon_, and
proposed Renaissance style for the library, and Empire for the
gallery, and so forth. Mr. Walsh said, in his dry way, "You must
really not bother so much, madame; plain Tommy Walsh is good enough
for me." After which she lost interest in him and gave him up.

We were horrified to hear of King Humbert's assassination at Monza. He
was such a good man and loved his country so devotedly. To be struck
down by one of his own people seems too cruel. How dreadful for Queen
Margherita!

Court mourning is ordered for three weeks.


PARIS, _1900_.

Dear L.,--Just a few lines from me to-day to answer your question, O
merciless and adorable friend! Dreyfus has been brought back from the
dreadful island where he has been confined these last five years. Five
years of torture! He was taken to Rennes to be tried. His lawyer,
Labori, has driven the judges almost out of their senses.

The sensational attacks of Zola and his sudden "_J'accuse_," the
suicide of Henry, the repeated demissions of the Ministers and
Generals, _la femme Voilee_, the disappearance of Esterhazy (stamped
as a first-class scamp), the attempt to get Labori's papers by
shooting him--the ludicrous and tragic episodes have at last come to
an end. Dreyfus is declared innocent, and people are beginning to
realize what has happened.

Bjoernstjerne Bjoernson, the famous Norwegian poet, has, from the
beginning, taken Dreyfus's defense and written article after article
in the papers and proclaimed in every manner his belief in his
innocence. He hurried to Paris when he heard that Dreyfus had
returned. We were very glad when an invitation came from the Swedish
Minister (Mr. Ackermann) to lunch with the great author. I wish that
you could see him, for to see him is to know him. He has the kindest
and noblest face in the world. I wept over his account of the
interview between him and Dreyfus. The day and hour were fixed for his
visit. He found Madame Dreyfus alone. She begged him to wait a moment,
because her husband was so agitated at the thought of seeing him that
he could not trust himself to appear. When at last Dreyfus came into
the room Bjoernson opened his arms. Dreyfus fell weeping into them and
sobbed, "_Merci! Merci! Vous avez cru en moi_"--Bjoernson replied:
"_Mon ami, j'ai souffert pour vous, mon pauvre ami_." Of course, this
is only a very little part of what he told me, but it was all in this
strain. He said that during the interview, which lasted an hour,
Dreyfus did not utter a word of reproach against his tormentors.

[Illustration:
BJOERNSON
From a photograph taken in 1901.]

Bjoernson gave a tea-party at his daughter's house in Passy, and
invited us. I hoped that possibly Dreyfus might be there, but he was
not. However, I had the pleasure of seeing Colonel Picquard again, and
we had a long talk together. Afterward, when I bade Bjoernson good-by,
he stooped down and kissed me on my forehead before the roomful of
people. Imagine my embarrassment at this unexpected and gratuitous
token of friendship, but, the kisser being Bjoernson, every one knew
that the accolade was merely the outpouring of a kind and good heart.


PARIS, _August 15, 1900_.

The hottest day we have had! The thermometer was way up in the clouds.
My maid, in doing my hair this morning, informed me of this fact. We
conferred about my toilet for the afternoon _fete_ in the Elysees
Gardens. We heard that twelve thousand people were invited. Certainly
I should be lost in a crowd like that and need not be dressed in my
best. My maid thought a rather flimsy gown of about year before last
would be good enough. Johan thought that he would be so entirely out
of sight that he was on the point of not going at all. Well, we had a
queer awakening. I was very much astonished when the master of
ceremonies met me at the entrance and led me into the garden, where
the vast lawn was one mass of humanity. He bade me take the first
seat. I said to myself, "It is only for the moment; I shall have to
move farther on later, when a higher-ranked lady arrives." Not at all!
I remained in the place of honor, to the right of Madame Loubet, to
the very end.

In the middle of the lawn were placed a dozen large red arm-chairs
before which a strip of carpet was stretched, where we sat.

Three performances were arranged for the afternoon. To the right was a
Japanese theater where Sadi-Jako and her troupe played their
_repertoire_. In the center was a Grecian temple, before which a
ballet of pretty girls danced on the grass in Grecian dresses. The
effect was charming. To the left was a little Renaissance theater
where people of different nationalities danced and sang in their
national costumes. I never saw anything so wonderfully complete. Only
the French can do things like that. When the moment arrived for the
official promenade, you may imagine how I felt when I saw Monsieur
Loubet approach me and offer me his arm. After all, I was the first
lady! Why was I not dressed in my best?

Monsieur and I walked at the head of the procession. We made the tour
of the gardens and through the whole palace, gazed on and stared at by
the entire crowd of the twelve thousand spectators, until at last we
reached the _salon_ where the buffet was established.


PARIS, _1902_.

Dear L.,--You might think that we are nearly exhausted, but health and
energy seem to assert themselves, and we bob up like those weighted
playthings children have. We have turned heads-up from our journey to
Denmark. We celebrated our silver wedding at Aalholm. I won't bother
you with the usual phrase, "How the time has flown!" Twenty-five
years! You have seen what an ordinary wedding in Denmark is like. You
can coat this one with silver, and then you will but know half the
excitement. The setting being Aalholm, the chief actors J. and I, the
chorus being family and friends, you may imagine that this _fete_ left
nothing to be desired. Guests came from everywhere to the number of
forty. Even our best man came from Norway. Deputations and telegrams
dropped on us by the hundreds; presents of silver in every form and
shape. My dress was silver, and silver sprays in my hair, and J. wore
them in his buttonhole. The dinner arranged by Frederick on viking
lines was splendid. Speeches at every change of plates. I wept tears
of pathos. An address of five hundred names, adorned with water-color
sketches of our different Legations, bearing a silver cover and a coat
of arms, was presented by the Danish colony in Paris. It was all very
touching and gratifying.

The famous beauty, Countess Castiglione, departed this world a few
days ago. She was the woman most talked of in the sixties.

When I first saw her she was already _passee_. There is nothing that
has not been said about her, but of this I know absolutely very
little. She used to live in Passy, and was called "_La recluse du
passe_." She was so extraordinarily dressed and always created a
sensation.

For the last thirty years no notice had been taken of her. I quote the
_Figaro_:

"Countess Castiglione in her day was considered the most beautiful
woman living. A classical beauty, but entirely without charm. For the
last years she has lived, after having arrived at the age of eighty,
in a dismal apartment in the Place Vendome, friendless, forgotten, and
neglected."

All her mirrors were covered with black stuff of some kind; she did
not wish to see the sad relics of her beauty.

At eleven o'clock every evening she took a walk with her maid around
the Place Vendome. She stayed in bed all day, never rising till
twilight, and receiving no one but one or two old admirers who were
faithful to the end.

Her things (_haillons_ they were called in official language) were
sold at auction--piles of old ball-shoes, head-gear, gloves stiffened
with moisture and age. Apparently, she never gave anything away, but
hoarded her treasures, which after her death were swept in corners and
smelled of mold and damp.

We are named to Berlin. I am very sorry to leave Paris; I was getting
quite accustomed to its little ways. Johan went to the Elysees to
present his _lettres de rappel_. It seems only yesterday he went to
present his _lettres de creance_. The President gave him the Grand
Cordon of the _Legion d'honneur_, and to me the beautiful _service de
Sevres_ called "_La Chasse_," a _surtout de table_ of five pieces.
This is only given to royalty or Ambassadors. One cannot buy it, as it
belongs to the French government. I heard that they hesitated between
giving me that or a piece of Gobelin tapestry. I was glad they chose
the _surtout de table_. It will be useful in two ways--as a subject of
conversation and as a beautiful souvenir of our stay in Paris.




BERLIN, 1902-1912




BERLIN, _January 22, 1903_.

Dear L.,--J.'s presentation of his _lettres de creance_ to the Emperor
was a small affair compared with former functions, which were combined
with gala coaches, powdered coachmen, and _pourboires_. It was simply
taking a train to Potsdam, in which there was a section called
_Kaiserlich_. The Minister of Foreign Affairs accompanied him, as was
his duty. In a royal carriage from the court they were driven to the
Neues Palais. J. was met by the _Introducteur des Ambassadeurs_ (Herr
von Knesebeck) and conducted into the presence of the Emperor, where
J. made his speech. The Emperor was very official and ceremonious when
he responded, but in the conversation afterward was affability itself.
J.'s audience with the Empress was very hurried, because of the Crown
Prince of Denmark, who had arrived the night before in Berlin. He
stayed two days at Neues Palais.

I arrived two weeks after this. The custom here is for a Minister's
wife to be presented by the _doyenne_ (Madame Sjoegeny) to the _grande
maitresse_ (Countess Brockdorf) on one of her reception-days _before_
the _Schleppenkur_. I found her very charming. My audience with the
Empress was fixed for a date a week later, and the Swedish and the
Peruvian Ministers' wives were to be received at the same time.

We met in the _salon_ of Countess Brockdorf on the day appointed, and,
preceded by her, went together to the _salon_ of the Empress, where we
found Her Highness already waiting. We sat about in a circle. The
Empress talked French with us and was most gracious. She has a
wonderful figure; her white hair and youthful face and her lovely,
kind smile make her very beautiful. She said that the Emperor
remembered me from Rome and Prince Henry (her brother-in-law)
recollected having met me at Monza.

I went in company with these same two ladies at an audience to the
Princess Henry, who lives in the pretty pavilion on the left of the
palace, overlooking the canal. She only comes to Berlin when there are
_fetes_ at court, otherwise she and the Prince live at Kiel.

Our next visit was to Princess Friedric-Leopold, the Empress's sister.
She lives in a palace in Wilhelm-strasse when in Berlin. She is very
lively, talkative, and extremely natural in conversation. She has a
beautiful country place near Potsdam.

The _Schleppenkur_ is a great event in Berlin. It takes place before
the birthday of the Emperor. I had never seen anything like this
ceremony, and it interested me very much. Perhaps it will you. It
takes place at a very early hour in the evening--eight o'clock. This
makes it necessary for one to begin to dress at six. Naturally, you go
without any dinner--a cup of bouillon is considered sufficient to keep
you alive.

It is the custom for diplomats to engage for the evening a
_Schutzmann_--a heavy mounted policeman. Our particular one was
waiting for us before our house and rode by the side of our carriage
until we arrived at the entrance of the _Schloss_. He looked very
important, but I do not think he was of much use. However, it seems
that a _Schutzmann_ comes under the chapter of _Noblesse oblige_, and
we took him. He did a great deal of horsemanship, but never dared to
disobey the chief policeman's orders, and when we arrived at Portal 4
we had to wait for the file like other people. He did not call up our
carriage at the end, but had to be called up himself by the police
force; then he appeared, bristling with energy, and galloped at our
horses' heads to our door, where we laid our offering in his hand and
bade him good night. The _Schutzmann_ is one of our privileges and
nuisances. I felt sorry for people who had been standing in the cold
street for hours to watch the procession of carriages and the gala
coaches (which the Ambassadors use on this occasion), because they
only get a glimpse through the frost-covered windows of glittering
uniforms and dazzling diamonds. Your dress (instructions as to which
are printed even to the smallest detail on the back of your
invitation) must be a ball-dress, with a train four meters long, short
sleeves, and a _decolletage_ of the Victorian period, and white kid
(_glace_) gloves.

[Illustration:
EMPEROR WILHELM IN THE UNIFORM OF THE GUARDS]

[Illustration:
THE EMPRESS OF GERMANY ON HER FAVORITE MOUNT]

We arrived at the Wendel entrance and mounted the long and fatiguing
staircase before we reached the second story where the state
apartments are. In the hall of the _corps de garde_ were several
masters of ceremony, who received us with deep bows. I wondered what
certain large baskets which looked like clothes-baskets were, and was
told that ladies wearing boas or lace wraps around their shoulders
were expected to drop them into these baskets. They would then be
conveyed to the other staircase, where, after the ceremony, we would
find our servants and carriages--and, we hoped, our boas! We passed
through different rooms where groups of ladies were assembled. The
_Corps Diplomatique_ filled two rooms. The ladies were in the first
one, which leads to the Throne Room.

The Hungarian and Russian ladies wear their national costumes, which
are very striking and make them all look like exotic queens. The
English ladies wear the three feathers and the long tulle white veil,
which make them look like brides. We others wear what we like,
ball-dresses of every hue, and all our jewels. No one can find fault
with us if our trains, our _decolletage_, our sleeves and gloves, are
not according to regulations.

The chamberlains arranged us, consulting papers which they had in
their hands, after the order of our rank. Being the latest member, I
was at the very end, only the wives of two _charges d'affaires_ being
behind me. The one directly behind me held up my train, just as I held
the train of the Peruvian Minister's wife in front of me. I hope that
I have made this clear to you. The _doyenne_ stood by the door which
led into the Throne Room through which she was to enter. Four meters
behind her was her daughter holding her train, and behind her were the
ladies who had not already been presented at court.

The room not being long enough, we formed a serpentine curve,
reminding one of the game called "Follow the leader." It must look
funny to any one not knowing why we were so carefully tending the
clothes of other people. I never let go the train of the colleague in
front until she reached the door of the Throne Room, where I spread it
out on the floor. Then, as the lady passed into the room, two lackeys,
one on each side of the door, poked the train with long sticks until
it lay peacock-like on the parquet.

[Illustration:
TWO VIEWS OF ROYALTY
From photographs taken at Lyngby, near Copenhagen, in 1894. In the
facing photograph the former Czar of Russia is seen, with black hat
and light clothes, holding his favorite dog. From left to right the
others are: the Princess of Hesse; the Princess Marie; Prince Waldemar
with his dog; a _dame d'honneur_; King Christian X. of Denmark; and
the present Czar of Russia. The man at the extreme left of the picture
is the present King, George of Greece.]

This is rather a critical moment. One has a great many things to think
of. In the first place, you must keep at the proper distance from your
predecessor. Of this you can be pretty sure, because if you walk too
fast there is the restraining hand of the chamberlain to prevent you.
Still, there is always the fear of dropping your fan or tripping over
the front of your gown or of your tiara falling off.

When I came in I saw His Majesty standing on the throne, stately and
solemn. For two hours he stands thus. With a mass of officers on my
right and a few chamberlains at intervals on my left I advanced very
slowly and, I hope, with a certain dignity. I saw the train of my
colleague turn the corner around the officers. Two other lackeys
darted forth and pronged my train in place. I made my courtesy first
to the Emperor and then to the Empress, who stood at his left.

Next to her Majesty stood the _grande maitresse_. I put myself by her
side and presented Frederikke and our secretary's wife, and the
_grande maitresse_ said their names to the Empress. Then as we passed
out a servant picked up our trains and threw them over our arms,
disappearing through the door of the immensely long gallery which is
filled with pictures commemorating the numerous battles and events of
the last forty years. I wondered, when I looked at the stretch of
carpet, how any one carpet could be made so long.

As I am the latest arrived Minister's wife, I and my two acolytes were
the last persons to enter the _Weissesaal_ where the buffet stood.
This buffet extended almost the whole length of the vast room. We
refreshed ourselves. My little self was in sad need of being
refreshed, and I devoured the sandwiches spread out temptingly under
my eyes, and drank some reviving champagne, and waited for my better
half, who, with the other better halves, was making his bow to the
sovereigns. The ladies of the _Corps Diplomatique_ pass before the
throne first and are followed by the gentlemen; then come the
highest-ranked princesses, and so forth. It is very fatiguing moving
about with one's court train dragging on one's arm, and I for one know
that I was glad when we went down the marble staircase and found the
servant who had sorted our boas from the baskets. There is no
antechamber at the foot of the staircase, so one must stay exposed to
the wintry blasts when the door is opened to let people out. It is
extraordinary how long it takes ladies to disappear after their
carriages are announced. They say a few last words, linger over the
picking up of their skirts, and go out leisurely; also the servant
seems unnecessarily long mounting his box, settling himself before the
coachman drives away.


BERLIN, _January, 1903_.

Dear ----,--The 21st was the Emperor's birthday.

The whole city is beflagged, and there are all sorts of illumination
preparations. "W's" in every dimension and color, the Emperor's bust
surrounded by laurel leaves, and flags in every window. Johan went in
gala uniform to the chapel in the _Schloss_, where a religious service
is always held, after which every one goes to congratulate his Majesty
and see the _defile cour_ afterward.

In the evening was the gala opera. Johan dined at Count Billow's (the
_Reichskanzler_) at five o'clock, while I dressed for the theater. We
were obliged to be there at eight o'clock sharp. "Sharp" is the word
here. There is no loitering where the Emperor is concerned. Everything
is on time, and his Majesty is sometimes _before_ the hour mentioned,
but never _after_.

The Opera-house is rather small, but was beautifully decorated with
garlands of artificial flowers hanging from the center of the dome
down to the balconies, and from the proscenium boxes to the orchestra.
In the center of the house is the royal box, the balustrade of which
is covered with real flowers. From all the balconies are hung
beautiful carpets covered with festoons. The whole interior was a mass
of color.

The Emperor and Empress sat, of course, in the front of the box, while
the other chairs were filled by royal guests who had come to Berlin to
congratulate the Emperor. The King of Saxony, the King of Wuertemberg,
and the other German royalties, all sat in the royal box. The
Emperor's sons had their seats in the balcony.

The Ambassadors occupied the four proscenium boxes. The highest
princesses of the German nobility sat in the next balconies. The
_Corps Diplomatique_ occupied the boxes and balconies adjoining the
royal box. All the officers and secretaries of the Embassies sat in
the parquet.

When the audience was seated the _directeur generale des theatres_
entered the royal box, came forward, and rapped with his stick three
times, a signal that their Majesties were about to enter. The royal
party came in very quietly and took their places. Every one in the
house, of course, stood up and bowed. It was a pretty sight from our
balcony to see all the men's heads in the parquet bend down while they
saluted their Majesties. It looked like the swaying of wheat by the
wind.

Gradually all the lights were turned out and the overture commenced.
The opera was "Carmen" and Madame Destinn sang.

In the _entr'acte_ the diplomats and the ladies and gentlemen in the
first balcony were begged to go in the foyer, where they were
presented to the different royalties assembled there.

The Empress was covered with magnificent diamonds and pearls, and the
jewels displayed by all these royal ladies, and all the glittering
uniforms of the princes and officers made a splendid sight.

The Emperor came toward me with a gleam of recognition, and commenced
in an entirely unceremonious way, shaking me heartily by the hand:

"How do you do? It's a long time since I saw you."

"Not since Rome, when your Majesty was there in 1889," I answered.

"So long ago? I remember it so well! As if it was yesterday!"

"I, too," I said. "I remember your Majesty being in the Statue Gallery
of the Capitol, where you looked like one of the statues itself, in
your white uniform."

"I remember," he said. "It was a dreadful glare."

"It was the first time they ever put electricity in the Capitol."

"They put too much in," he said, "and such a lot of people! Dear me! I
shall never forget it. Didn't I look bored?"

"No, your Majesty looked very serious and as handsome as a Lohengrin"
I answered.

"Lohengrin, really! I did not see any Elsa I wanted to save."

"Oh, I meant only a Lohengrin _de passage_," I replied.

The Emperor laughed. "That is good."

"I recollect what your Majesty wrote on the photograph you gave
Monsieur Crispi."

"Really? What was it? I don't remember."

"You wrote: '_Gentilhomme, gentilhomme; corsaire, corsaire et demi_'."

"What a good memory you have!" he said, and added, very kindly, "I am
very glad to have you and your husband here, and I hope you will like
Berlin. But"--holding a finger warningly--"don't look for many
Lohengrins."

In case, my dear, you don't understand this, I will tell you what it
means: If you are nice to me I will be equally nice to you, _but_ if
you are horrid I will (pokerly speaking) see you and go you one
better.


BERLIN, _January, 1903_.

Dear ----,--Every diplomatic lady has a reception-day. Mine is
Thursday. Last Thursday there were one hundred and sixty people.

My first receptions in January were very perplexing, because so many
people came whom I did not know and who did not know me. Our two
secretaries, Frederikke and I have a code of signals which help me
over many a rough place. Visitors leave their cards in the
antechamber. The secretary stands in the first _salon_ and waves them
into the large _salon_ where I am. If I raise my eyebrows the
secretary knows that I depend upon him to find out who the person is,
and the name, if possible. He, therefore, gets the card and shows it
to me by some magical twist. Sometimes he manages to whisper the name.
Often I fail to grasp either the whisper or the card; then I am lost,
and flounder hopelessly about without bearings of any kind, asking
leading-questions, cautiously feeling my way, not knowing whether I am
talking to a person of great importance or the contrary. When at last
my extreme wariness and diplomacy get hold of a clue, then I swim
along beautifully on the top of the wave.

Frederikke helps me by taking odds and ends off my hands and sorting
them out behind her teacups. All the young people flock about her, and
with their laughter and flutterings add a gay note to the official
element around me.

The Emperor desires that all his officers should be accustomed to
society, and they receive orders to make afternoon visits, which they
do--poor things--I suppose, much to their distaste. As no one knows
them and they do not know any one, it must be very awkward for them.
They come six at a time, leave a package of cards in the antechamber,
present themselves, and each other. They click their heels, kiss the
hand of the hostess, give a hopeless glance about them, move in a body
toward the tea-table, return, and go through the same ceremony, and
leave together, making a great clinking of swords and leaving an odor
of perfumed pomade.


BERLIN, _January, 1903_.

Dear L.,--I have been to my first court ball here, I will describe
this one to you, and never again.

The invitation we received was very large. It told us that we were
invited by order of his Majesty, King and Emperor, to appear at the
Koeniglicheschloss, Thursday, at eight. We were accompanied, as usual,
by the policeman on horseback. It amused me, while we were waiting in
the carriage, to see standing before one of the entrances to the
palace a whole line of soldiers with _serviettes_ hung over their
shoulders. They were there for the purpose of washing the dishes after
the supper.

As I have said before, the _Wendel treppe_ is very high and tiresome
to mount. We found the hall of the _corps de garde_ filled with
youthful pages whose ages are anywhere from fifteen to twenty. They
were dressed in red coats, with large frills of lace, held in place by
their mothers' best diamond brooch, and neat little low shoes with
buckles and neat little white silk legs.

I glided along the polished floor through the different rooms, which
were empty, save for the numerous chamberlains. All had papers and
diagrams in their hands, and they told the gentlemen as they passed
who they were to take in to supper, and the name of the supper-room.
Each room has a name, like "Marine Room," "Black Eagle Room," and so
forth.

The long gallery was filled with officers, whose uniforms were of
every imaginable color and description, and gentlemen who looked as if
they had just stepped out of a picture-frame. They wear their calling
on their sleeves, as it were. The Academician has a different costume
from the judge. I noticed a clergyman in his priestly robes, his
Elizabethan ruff around his neck, his breast covered with decorations.
He was sipping a glass of hot punch and smiling benignly about him. He
had a most kind and sympathetic face. I would like to confess my sins
to him, but just now I don't happen to have any to confess.

Tea was passed about while we were waiting to enter the ballroom. In
the _Weissesaal_ the _Corps Diplomatique_ has a raised platform
reserved for it on the right of the throne where we ladies, beginning
with the ambassadress, stand, following precedence. On the other side
are all the princesses of the German nobility. I was shown to my place
on the platform.

When the two thousand people collected in this room raised their
voices a little more than was seemly, the master of ceremonies pounded
his stick on the floor--_there was to be no loud talking_--silence
reigned a moment, and then the unruly guests burst out again, and were
again reduced to silence by another and more ominous thump. The
orchestra began the march of "Tannhaueser." This was the signal for
the entrance of the sovereigns. No one dared to breathe. People
straightened themselves up, the ladies stepped down from their
platform. From the middle arcades the young pages--twenty-four in
number--entered in pairs. Then came the Oberhof Marshal alone,
followed by the four greatest personages in Berlin, the Duke Trachenberg,
Prince Fuerstenberg, Prince Hohenlohe, and Prince Solms-Baruth. After
them came the Emperor with the Empress on his arm. Every one bowed.
They were followed by the five sons of the Emperor--the Crown Prince,
Prince Adalbert, Prince Eitel Fritz, Prince August Wilhelm, and Prince
Joachim; then all the princes and princesses of the house of Prussia.

[Illustration: THE THRONE-ROOM OF THE ROYAL PALACE, BERLIN]

It was a very imposing sight as they all marched in. When the Emperor
and the Empress reached the throne they made a stately bow to each
other and separated, the Empress turning to the _doyenne_ (the first
ambassadress) and the Emperor crossing to the Ambassadors. Each _chef
de mission_ stood in front of his secretaries and presented them.

My place was between the wives of the Swedish and the Brazilian
Ministers. My neighbor was very unhappy because she was not able to
use her eyeglasses. Eye-glasses are one of the things that are not
allowed, nor are such things as boas or lace wraps.

The Empress spoke to all the ladies in either German, French, or
English. She was accompanied by the _grande maitresse_, who stood
near.

Right behind the Emperor are two gentlemen who are always within
speaking distance. The first is the tallest young man to be found. He
wears a red uniform, white knee-breeches, very high boots, a
breastplate representing a brilliant rising sun, and a high blazing
helmet surmounted by a silver eagle. This makes him the most
conspicuous person in the room, so that you may always know where the
Emperor is by seeing the young officer's towering helmet above the
crowd. The other is General Scholl, a dear, kind old gentleman, who is
dressed in the costume of Frederick the Great's time, with a white
wig, the pigtail of which is tied with black ribbon, a huge jabot of
lace with a diamond pin on his breast.

All the other court persons wear dark blue dress-coats, with gold
buttons, and carry in one hand the awe-inspiring stick, and in the
other the list for the suppers. Some of them are rather vain about
their legs, and stand profile-wise so that they can be admired. They
do look very well turned out, I must say, with their silk stockings
and low buckled shoes.

The ladies of the _Corps Diplomatique_ are not always as observant of
court rules as they ought to be, and their _decolletage_ is not always
impeccable. If Worth sends a corsage with the fashionable cut--what do
they do? They manage, when they stand on their platform _en vue_, to
slip their shoulders out, thereby leaving a tell-tale red mark, only
to slip the shoulders in place when royalty has its back turned.

The Empress was followed by a second tall young officer. He wore a red
uniform and a hat with a high red feather, easily seen from a
distance. Countess Brockdorf, to distinguish her from other ladies,
wears a long black mantilla on her head and looks like a _duegne a
l'Espagnole_. The other ladies of honor stand near the Empress in the
background. I forgot to say that the wives of foreign Ministers have
_fauteuils_ on their platform, behind which stand their secretaries'
wives.

The ball was opened by the Crown Prince, who danced with the youngest
_demoiselle d'honneur_, then the other princely couples joined. None
but the princes have the privilege of dancing at first. The _valse a
deux temps_ only is permitted. The court likes better the
old-fashioned method of revolving in circles round and round the room,
but occasionally it permits the lancers.

The young ladies and gentlemen, who had been practising their dancing
for weeks, began their gavotte. The ancient _ballet-danseuse_ sat up
under an arch in the ceiling, and held up a warning finger if any
mistake happened. The dances they learn are gavottes and minuets,
which are very ingeniously arranged. Some of the officers looked
rather awkward when they had to point their toes or gaze in the eyes
of their partners. During one of these dances the Empress went off
into the gallery, next to the ballroom, and ladies new to the court
were brought up and presented to her.

Princess Henry and Princess Leopold then made the tour of the guests.
Each time a royal person came to speak to us we were obliged to
descend from our platform, in order to be on the same level. The
Emperor talked with all the ladies. To me he spoke in English, which,
of course, he speaks perfectly. He was dressed in a Hussar uniform,
and held his casque in his left hand, and offered his right. He showed
me a new decoration he had just received from the Sultan. He pointed
out the splendid diamonds, and seemed very pleased with it.

A _Vortaenzer_ (the leader of the dance) is chosen in the beginning of
the season. His duty is to arrange all balls and lead all cotillions
that are given by society during the winter. He gives advice,
indicates the officers who dance well--in fact, arranges everything.
The young people pass three delightful flirtatious weeks learning
these gavottes and minuets. Many a happy couple date their bliss from
those dancing-lessons.

As I knew who was to take me in to supper, I waited in my place until
my partner, the Minister of Justice, came to fetch me. I was very
happy to be portioned off to such a charming gentleman. We were told
to go in the Marine Room, where were the Emperor and the Empress. Each
Prince had a table for twelve, over which he presided. At ours was
Prince Adalbert, the Emperor's naval son. A supper for two thousand
guests sounds rather formidable, does it not? With a slight difference
in favor of the first three rooms, the same supper is served to all. A
supper here is just like a dinner, beginning with soup, two warm
dishes, an entree, dessert, fruit, and coffee.

On our return to the ballroom there was some more dancing. The last
dance was the prettiest of them all. Their Majesties took their places
on the throne, stood watching with a pleased smile the procession of
dancers who came in, four pairs at a time, from the last door of the
ballroom. In each group the four officers belonged to the same
regiment. First they danced a gavotte, and then twirled off in a
waltz. Then the other four couples came in. There were forty or fifty
couples altogether. When they had all entered they formed a fan-shaped
line and advanced toward their Majesties, making the deepest of
courtesies. Then they spread out and made a large circle. The Emperor
and the Empress bowed their thanks, and the dancers retired, and the
orchestra sounded a fanfare. The ball was over. The Emperor offered
his arm to the Empress, and all the Princes followed in the same order
in which they had entered. As we went through the long gallery
servants handed glasses of hot punch about, which were very acceptable
before going out in the cold air. I happened to glance in the open
door of a room we passed and saw a Mont Blanc of _serviettes_ piled up
to the ceiling, and next to that room was a regiment of soldiers
wiping plates.

After the _Schleppenkur_ and before the Kaiser's birthday comes the
_Ordens Fest_. It is a yearly entertainment the Emperor gives to those
who have received the Prussian Order of the Red Eagle, the highest in
rank of the elder members, and all the newly made. Johan has just
received the decoration.

Here every one sees all sorts of people, from cab-drivers to princes.
There is a luncheon for two thousand guests. The Emperor and the
Empress walk about and talk to as many as they can. The other evening
we went to the Winter Garden, and the head waiter said to Johan, "I
have not seen you for a long time, your Excellency--not since we
lunched together at the _Schloss_ at the _Or dens Fest_."


BERLIN, _1903_.

Dear L.,--The dear old King of Denmark came to Berlin to pay a visit
to the Emperor. He arrived the night before last. We went to fetch him
at the station. Johan was instructed to take rooms at the hotel for
the suite, but the Emperor begged the King to stay at the _Schloss_,
which he consented to do. The next morning the Emperor came to Berlin
and drove the King out to the Neues Palais at Potsdam, where there was
a luncheon. Johan said it was quite touching to see how tender and
affectionate the Emperor is toward the King. Johan and his secretary
were the only persons present outside the family. It was very amusing
(Johan said) after luncheon to see the young Princess Victoria Louise
and Prince Oscar, who went about with their fingers on their lips. J.
wondered why. The Crown Prince told him that his young brother and
sister talked so much that he had bribed them to keep silent for ten
minutes and had promised them a mark each. They got the two marks! The
Kaiser has great affection for the King. His speech of welcome when he
drank the King's health at lunch was very touching.

This afternoon the King came to take tea with us. I had not seen him
since the death of the Queen. It was a great pleasure to have him in
my house. He and I sat in the large _salon_, while Johan, the King's
adjutant, and a German gentleman attached to the King during his stay
here remained in the next room. The King only talked about the Queen.
I, who loved her so much, was all tears. His Majesty once in a while
would put his hand on mine and say, "You loved her." We had our tea
alone. He told me that the Queen's room in Amalienborg remains just as
she had left it. My photograph was on the mantelpiece in her boudoir,
and the cushion that I had embroidered for her was still on her
_chaise-longue_. Nothing there was to be disturbed.

As the King left I pointed to the portrait of himself he had given me,
which was hanging on the wall. I said:

"I prize this, your Majesty, more than anything I own, because you
gave it to me yourself."

"I was better-looking then than I am now. Is that not true?"

"Your Majesty is always handsome in _my_ eyes," I answered.

"Dear madame, you make me vain." And he took my hand, and the kind
King kissed it like a _preux chevalier_ of the old school.

As I followed him to the door he said, "Do not come any farther; you
will take cold. I will bid you good-by here." He is about eighty-five
years old, and as youthful in his movements as a young man.

J. said, "I am sorry we have no lift."

[Illustration:
QUEEN LOUISE OF DENMARK
From a photograph taken in 1878. She was the wife of King Christian
IX., and the mother of Queen Alexandra of England, Empress Dagmar of
Russia, King George of Greece, and various royalties.]

"I do not need a lift; I can still run down the stairs." Which he did
in a surprising manner.

The King left that evening; and as he begged me not to come to the
station, J. went without me.


_February, 1903._

As Johan is accredited to the Court of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, we were
invited to a great court ball which was to be given. We arrived at
Schwerin at twelve o'clock, and found the _marechal de la cour_, the
court servants and carriages at the station awaiting us. We were not
installed in the castle, but at the Grand Duchess Marie's palace in
the town itself. The _marechal_ who met us informed us that we were
expected to luncheon at one o'clock. We just had time to change our
dresses and drive to the castle. The lady of honor and the _marechal
de la cour_ received us in the hall on the ground floor, and the
elevator took us up to the _salon_ where the Grand Duke and the Grand
Duchess were awaiting us.

The Grand Duchess is very charming and very handsome. She is the
daughter of the Duchess of Cumberland, granddaughter of King
Christian. We had luncheon in one corner of the vaulted hall--a
luncheon of twenty people. I sat on the right of the Grand Duke, who
was most amiable. After luncheon the Grand Duchess took me into her
boudoir and showed me all her souvenirs--photographs of Bernstorff, a
screen painted by the Queen of Denmark, and aquarelles of Gmunden, her
home. She has all the charm of her dear mother and her beloved
grandmother.

At four o'clock we left and drove about Schwerin, making the
obligatory visits. A court carriage with a lackey was put at our
service during our stay. I rested, having rushed about since eight
o'clock in the morning.

Our apartment in this palace looked as if the mistress had just left
it. The drawing-room is filled with knick-knacks, a piano with music
on it, and tables with writing-materials. At seven o'clock we dined
with the grand master of ceremonies and his wife at their palace. A
dinner where you know none of the guests and no one knows you must
naturally be uninteresting, and this one did not prove the contrary.
At half past nine we went again to the _chateau_ to attend the ball. A
chamberlain met us at the antechamber and preceded us into the
ballroom. The grand-ducal pair came toward us, and I was led to my
place on a raised dais. I danced the _quadrille d'honneur_ with the
Grand Duke. Very nearly every one in the room was presented to me, and
I found among them many people I had known before--therefore we had
some subjects of conversation, for which I was thankful.

The _chateau_ is a _bijou_. It has a winding staircase which is worthy
of Blois. We mounted this to go to the supper-room. The supper was
served at small tables, and was excellent. Frederikke danced the
cotillion, and we stayed until the end. It had indeed been a long day
for me. The next day we drove to the _chateau_ and bid their
Highnesses good-by.


BERLIN, _1904_.

Dear L.,--At one of the Towers's costume balls Mr. X, of American
renown, dressed conspicuously as Jupiter (of all ironies!), stalked
about, trying to act up to his part by shaking in people's faces his
ridiculous tin bolts held in white kid-glove hands, and facetiously
knocking them on the head. He happened, while talking to a lady, to be
right in front of the young Prince. A friend tapped him discreetly on
the shoulder, giving him a significant look. "What is the matter?"
said Mr. X, in a loud voice, glaring at his friend. A gentle whisper
informed him that he had better turn round and face the Prince.
"Heavens!" said the ungracious Jupiter. "I can't help it; I'm always
treading on their toes" (meaning the Prince's).

Speaking of indiscretions, I was told (I cannot say whether it is
true) that Mrs. Z, one of our compatriots, having met the Emperor in
Norway, where their yachts were stationed, and feeling that she was on
familiar enough terms, said to him:

"Is it not lovely in Paris? Have you been there lately?"

"No, I have not," answered the surprised Kaiser.

"Oh, how queer! You ought to go there. The French people would just
love to see you."

"Do you think so?" said the Emperor with a smile.

Thus encouraged, she enlarged on her theme, and, speaking for the
whole French nation, continued, gushingly, "And if you would give them
back Alsace and Lorraine they would simply adore you."

The Kaiser, looking at her gravely, as if she had solved a mighty
problem, said, "I never thought of that, madame."

The dear lady probably imagines to this day that she is the apostle of
diplomacy. She came to Berlin intending (so she said) to "_paint
Berlin red_." She took the list of court people and sent out
invitations right and left for her five-o'clock teas, but aristocracy
did not respond. Berlin refused to be painted.


BERLIN, _September, 1905_.

Dear ----,--The Kaiser went to Copenhagen on the _Hohenzollern_. Johan
and I met Frederick and Nina and stayed with them during the Emperor's
visit. There was a very large dinner at Fredensburg, a dinner at
Charlottenberg (the Crown Prince's _chateau_) in honor of the Kaiser.
Prince Carl, who is about to be made King of Norway, was there.
Princess Maud was in England. The King seemed to be in the best of
spirits, and the two sovereigns laughed and joked together. The
Emperor has a great affection for the King, and loves to show his
respect and devotion. He often puts his arm around the King's shoulder
when talking to him. I will just add here that Johan received another
decoration, and Frederick, who is now Minister of Foreign Affairs,
received a grand cordon, as well as a bust in bronze of the Kaiser. My
gift from the Emperor is a beautiful gold cigarette-case with his
autograph in diamonds on the front, with the imperial crown, also in
diamonds.

The Kaiser went to a dinner given in his honor at the Y's.... Johan,
Frederick, Nina, and I were among the guests. At the end of the rather
long dinner a little episode happened which shows how quick the
Emperor is to understand a situation and perceive its humorous side.
According to custom, the Emperor occupies the hostess's place, with
her at his right. Herr Y made signs to his wife across the table, and
in a stage whisper begged her to find out from the Emperor if he
wished coffee served at table or in the adjoining _salon_. The hostess
apparently neither heard nor understood; at any rate, she said nothing
to the Emperor. The host asked again, in a stagier whisper, and made
signs with his head toward the other room. Still no answer. The
Emperor, looking over to me (I sat next to the host), said, with a
merry twinkle in his eye, "Something wrong in the code of signals." A
few moments after he said quite casually to the host, "Would you mind
if we had coffee in the other _salon_?"

The Emperor that evening was in excellent spirits. In his short
mess-jacket he looked like a young cadet. He told us several amusing
anecdotes and experiences in a most witty manner. Nina said to him:

"Your Majesty, I have been looking in all the shop-windows to-day to
see if I could find a good photograph of you. I wanted to bring it,
and was going to ask you to sign it, but--"

"But you could not find anything handsome enough, _hein_?" inquired
the Emperor, laughing.

"That is true," Nina answered. "Your Majesty's photographs do not do
you justice."

Beckoning to an adjutant, the Emperor said, "I want you to send to the
shops and bring what photographs of me you can find."

The man departed. Although it was nine o'clock and most of the shops
must have been shut, he did manage to bring some. Then the Kaiser
examined the photographs, with a little amusing remark on each. "I do
not think this is handsome enough--I look so cross. And this one looks
conceited, which I don't think I am. Do you?"

"Not in the least," Nina answered.

"In this one," he remarked, "I look as if I had just ordered some one
to be hanged. And this one [taking up another] looks like a Parsifal
_de passage_"--referring to something I had once said.

"I did not say Parsifal, your Majesty. I said Lohengrin."

"All the same thing," said he.

"Not at all," I said. "One was a knight, and the other was a fool."

"Well," he laughed, "I look like both."

He did not like any of the photographs, and sent to the _Hohenzollern_
for his own collection. His servant came back almost directly (he must
have had wings) and brought a quantity of portraits, which were much
finer and larger than those from the shops. He begged us to choose the
one we liked best, and he wrote something amusing on it and signed his
name.


BERLIN, _January, 1906_.

Dear ----,--The sad news of the death of our adored old King arrived
this evening. We were very surprised, as the last account we had heard
of him seemed more hopeful. Though he was so very old (eighty-six
years), he had a wonderful constitution and always was so active. I am
glad that I saw him when he was here last year and had such a pleasant
afternoon with him.

Johan was one of the pall-bearers at the King's funeral at Roskilde. I
did not go on to Copenhagen. There was a funeral service here at the
Scandinavian chapel. We are to have mourning for six months.


BERLIN, _June 6, 1906_.

Dear L.,--If I were going to be married and had to go through all the
ceremonies which attend the marriage of a German princess, I think I
would remain an old maid.

I will tell you what the wedding of the Princess Cecilia of
Mecklenburg was like. As it was the first royal wedding that I had
ever attended, my impressions are fresh, if not interesting. I have
seen royal silver and golden weddings, but never anything like this.

The day before yesterday, the hottest day of all the tropical days we
have been having, the Princess arrived in Berlin. The Emperor and the
Empress met her at the station and drove her to Bellevue Castle, where
there was a family lunch. She had numerous deputations and visits of
all sorts until five o'clock, when she made her public entrance into
Berlin, passing through Brandenburger Tor. All the streets where the
Princess was to pass were decorated _a l'outrance_ with flags and
flowers. Carpets were hung from the balconies.

The middle of the Unter den Linden, usually left to pedestrians, was
freshly strewn with red earth for the procession of the carriages. All
the public buildings were festooned with enormous paper roses as big
as cabbages. There were high poles holding gilded baskets filled with
flowers. In order that every one of the populace should have a
souvenir these flowers were soaked in a preparation of wax, which made
them quite hard, and they were warranted to last for some time.
Streamers of paper flowers, graduating from light yellow through the
whole gamut of rainbow colors and ending in dark blue, reached to the
ground from the tops of the houses. The Opera House outdid itself. It
was wise to cover it as much as possible--it is such an ugly building.

The French Ambassador invited us to see the _entree_ from the balcony
of the Embassy in Pariser Platz. The little maidens, their heads
crowned with wreaths, had been waiting in the sun for hours with their
baskets filled with roses, which they were to throw before the
Princess as she passed.

It was a splendid procession, headed by the _Hofstalmeister_, followed
by a staff of officers spangled with orders and decorations, in the
most gorgeous uniforms. Then the blast of trumpets and a mounted
military band preceded the gala coach, only used for weddings, drawn
by six horses with huge white plumes on their heads. In the coach was
the Empress, and on her right the Princess Cecilia in a light-blue
dress, white hat, and long blue feathers.

The coach stopped in the Platz, and the Mayor of Berlin approached the
window and presented a huge bouquet and delivered an address to the
Princess, who bowed graciously and smiled.

The Empress looked very happy.

After this came all the other gala coaches, followed by the _garde du
corps_.

There was a family dinner, and after that the gala performance at the
Opera. I have already told you about these gala performances, so this
will be only a repetition, except that there were more flowers and
more carpets. All around on the ledge of the balcony there were fresh
and real roses and carnations, so that every lady could take a bouquet
away with her. Garlands of paper flowers hung the entire distance from
the ceiling to the prompter's box. One wondered how they found hands
enough in Berlin to make all these thousands of flowers.

The parquet was a garden of uniforms. The Emperor entered with the
bride-elect on his arm, and the Empress with the Crown Prince. The
Crown Prince wore the white uniform of the Guards, and a silver
helmet. The other princes followed, all entering very quietly. Every
one in the theater bowed and courtesied, and save for the rustling of
dresses and the rattling of swords there was not a sound to be heard.
The Crown Prince and his _fiancee_ sat in the middle seats, the
Emperor to the right of his daughter.

The overture was a composition made for the occasion, and played while
all the lights were blazing, in order that every one could have a good
look at the Princess.

Then gradually the theater became dark, and the opera commenced. It
was "Orphee," by Glueck. Madame Destinn sang the principal part. Her
voice is very beautiful, but she is so small, and somewhat dumpy, that
she did not look much like an Orphee. To make the opera shorter they
combined the first and second acts, and to allow Orphee to go from
hell to heaven without letting down the curtain they had invented a
sort of treadmill on which Orphee and Eurydice should walk while the
landscape behind them moved. It was a very ungraceful way of walking.
They looked as if they were struggling up a hill over rough and stony
ground.

We went into the foyer after the performance and were presented to the
Princess. I had known her as a young girl in Cannes, where her parents
lived, therefore we had something to talk about. She is very charming,
tall and willowy, and has a pleasant word and smile for every one.

The wedding-day dawned in a relentless haze. We were invited to be at
the chapel of the _Schloss_ at five o'clock. The regulations about our
court dress were the same as for the _Schleppenkur_, only we were
begged _not_ to wear _white_. My dress was yellow, with a yellow
_manteau de cour_. Frederikke wore a light-green _pailletted_ dress
with a light-green train. We were a little late in starting; our
_Schutzmann_ had waited patiently in the courtyard for a long time. We
drove through the crowded streets, lined with spectators. Each clock
we passed pointed in an exasperating way to the fact that we were
late. J.'s sword seemed always to be in the way; every time he spoke
out of the window to urge on the already goaded coachman the sword
would catch on something. The air was more than suffocating, and there
was evidently a storm brewing.

We arrived before the portal of the _Schloss_ at the last moment. Ours
was the last carriage to arrive. The pompous _Suisse_ pounded his mace
on the ground and said, warningly, "You must hurry; the Kaiser is just
behind you." And we _did_ hurry.

The staircase makes three turns for each flight, and the chapel is the
highest place in the palace, meaning seven turns for us. I grasped the
tail of my ball dress in one hand and my heavy court train in the
other and prepared to mount. On each turn I looked behind and could
just see the eagle on the top of the Emperor's silver helmet. We
hurried as I never hurried in my life, for if his Majesty had got
ahead of us on any of these turns where the two flights meet and part,
we would have been shut out from the chapel. As it was, one door was
already closed. They opened it for us, and we were the last to enter
before the princes. We crossed the chapel to reach the _estrade_ on
which stood the _Corps Diplomatique_. In my hurry I forgot to let down
my dress, and I don't dare to think how much stocking I must have
exhibited. When finally I did reach my place I was so out of breath it
took me a long time before I was in it again.

[Illustration:
THE ROYAL PALACE AND LUSTGARTEN, BERLIN]

There was a general who stood before me with his plumed hat in his
hand, and the plumes waved about like palm-trees, so near were they to
my panting!

Then the Emperor appeared with his suite, and stood at the right of
the altar. He was a little ahead of time. There were about seventy-two
princes and princesses. Each of the princesses had a page or a young
lady to hold up her train.

The Empress then entered, followed by her suite. The youngest
_demoiselle d'honneur_ held her train, which was of red velvet covered
with heavy embossed gold embroidery.

After the Empress came the Crown Prince in his white _garde de corps_
uniform. He looked very young and slender and quite pale.

A moment after the bride came in. Six young ladies held her train,
which was light-blue velvet embroidered in silver, over a white-satin
gown covered with beautiful point lace. The train was carefully spread
on the floor.

The choir of boys high up in the dome sang psalms with many verses.
Then the clergyman commenced his exhortation, which was very long. The
heat was intense. Some ladies about me thought they were going to
faint, but happily they could not make up their minds.

Although the music was delicious, I longed to hear the organ.
Especially when the ceremony was finished I hoped that we should hear
Mendelssohn's March. But there was no organ in the chapel.

It took the royal persons a long time to leave the chapel, each
princess taking up a great deal of space with her train and her
train-bearer. The last princely couple were strangely contrasted. The
young Duchesse d'Aosta, who is unusually tall, walked with a tiny
Siamese prince. We followed down the steps to the _Weissesaal_, where
the members of the Diplomatic Corps defiled before the throne and made
our courtesy--_one only_--before the Emperor. All the suites and court
gentlemen stood massed together opposite the throne. It was quite an
ordeal to walk under the fire of so many eyes, as the parquet was
without any carpet and very slippery, and the length of the room
immense.

After waiting what seemed an hour, the royalties, headed by the
Emperor and the Empress, walked past us.

The spectacle of these fifty princesses with their magnificent
dresses, blazing with jewels, made one gasp.

Besides all the royal people of Germany, representatives from other
countries were present. Prince Christian and his wife, who is the
sister to the bride, represented Denmark.

They all disappeared in the banqueting-hall at the end of the gallery.
We others sat down at tables each containing twelve people, and were
served a regular dinner.

Each table in our room had a superb _surtout de table_ in silver, and
silver drinking-cups worthy of a museum. The _menus_ and bonbons were
trimmed with white-satin frills and had the photographs of the Crown
Prince and Princess, and were laid by each plate. A dinner for three
thousand people! The young ladies and officers had their dinner at a
standing buffet.

We went back to the ballroom after the royalties had passed us again.
The clouds outside were very oppressive.

Then the traditional _Fackeltanz_ commenced. The _Corps Diplomatique_
had a platform to itself, fenced in with cords. We were so crowded
that had it not been for the cord which held us in our places we would
have tumbled out.

The ladies of the nobility also had a platform. The herald, dressed in
a short medieval, red-velvet costume, with the embroidered coat of
arms of Germany on his breast, advanced, trumpet in hand, and
announced that the _Fackeltanz_ was about to begin. The orchestra
played a gavotte; and the Crown Prince, giving his hand to the
Empress, and the Crown Princess giving hers to the Emperor, preceded
by eight pages with torches and by Prince Fuerstenberg, walked around
the room. When they arrived before the throne they made the most
reverential of bows before parting with their Majesties, who took
their places on the throne. The Princess's train was carried by four
young ladies, and by her side walked Countess Harrach, one of the
_dames de palais_. After this the Princess walked with every prince
according to his rank, sometimes with two, one on each side, and the
Prince walked with two ladies. Each tour of the _salon_ they made they
stopped in front of the Emperor and bowed and received their next
partner. Fancy what fatigue!

The storm which we had expected now really burst upon us. Peals of
thunder mingled with the strains of the orchestra, and almost shook
the ground.

At eleven o'clock the Princess had danced with every one and had made
hundreds of courtesies, and on the signal given by their Majesties
retired with her suite. We went down the _Hoelletreppe_ (in English,
_hell-stairs_), a rather diabolical name, but I hope it was paved with
better intentions than the _Wendeltreppe_, where we went up. My
intention was, _bed_.

We found our carriages and drenched coachman and dragged our trains
home to their resting-places.

We had been eight hours under arms.

Every one received a white ribbon with a little gold fringe on the
end, bearing the monogram of the married couple. It was a _honi soit
qui mal y pense_ remembrance of the royal wedding.

Prince Wilhelm Hohenzollern,[2] cousin of the Emperor, is a great
philatelist, and brought his magnificent collection of albums (eight
or ten large ones) to show me, and a pile of duplicates. His victoria
was quite filled when he drove up to our door, and his _chasseur_ had
to make two trips to bring them all up. Collectors of postage-stamps
make a brotherhood in themselves. He knew each stamp in his books, and
explained all to us.

      [2] Father of the princess who married the young ex-King
      of Portugal, Manuel, in 1913.

He has twelve thousand! I brought out my little collection very
shyly--it was so insignificant beside his. We passed two hours going
through the two collections. He left six thousand duplicates with me
to look over and chose from, so my collection was enriched by one
thousand new specimens. He told me he had inherited a whole collection
from his uncle, the King of Rumania. He came to drink with us, and was
always most amiable. He does not play cards, nor is he musical in any
way, therefore conversation was our only resource. I brought in all my
animals and put them through their tricks; the parrot played up
wonderfully. He followed me about the room, sat on my shoulder, sang,
and whistled. What amused people most was, when I sang "Medje," a very
sentimental song, he imitated a _rire-fou_ which seemed so
inappropriate that every one was convulsed with laughter. Then I
showed my doves, which were pronounced "perfect darlings." My seven
dogs did their best to amuse us. The parrot ran after them and bit
their tails, which the dogs did not resent in the least.

Prince Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia also dined with us--a very formal
dinner. He is rather serious for such a young man. He is tall and
thin, and in his high, buttoned-to-the-chin uniform he looks even
taller than he really is. He is very musical, and brought his violin
and several books of music. He only approves of Bach, Beethoven, and
Mozart in his severer moods. He likes Bach best of all. He plays very
correctly, one might say without a fault, but I have heard violinists
who play with more _brio_. He listened with kindness to a young Danish
girl who executed a dashing solo by Brahms divinely, and nodded his
head in approval when she had finished. The Prince was begged to play
several times, and he went through the entire _repertoire_ of sonatas
he had brought with him. The guests were immensely pleased, and the
_soiree_ was very successful.

His brother, Prince Joachim Albrecht, is also a very good musician,
but differs radically from Prince Wilhelm. He plays the violoncello
very well, and favors modern music. He composes ballads, and leads his
own regimental orchestra. He is as jolly and unconventional as his
brother is reserved and grave. When he dines with us he brings his
violoncello, and I accompany him on my piano. He composed two very
pretty and successful ballets, both given for charity. The first one
was danced by Frederikke and two other girls and three young officers.
It was called "_La Lecon de Danse_." On the top of the program,
instead of the English device, "_Honi soit qui mal y pense_," I put
"_Honi soit qui mal y danse_" in the same shield. Hardly any one in
the German audience saw the joke--nothing more than that it was a
_druckfehler_ (printer's error). The rehearsals were in my _salon_,
and we had great amusement over them. The second ballet was more
pretentious, and was danced in one of the largest theaters in Berlin.
It was called the "Enchanted Castle." A parvenu buys an ancestral
castle, and on his arrival there falls asleep in the great hall,
filled with the portraits of ancestors and knights in armor. The
ladies, in their old-fashioned dresses, step out from their frames,
and with the knights in armor move in a stately quadrille. After they
return to their frames, thirty young couples dance a ballet, and when
they finish, the parvenu wakes up. It was very pretty and brought in a
lot of money, and there was a question of its being repeated for the
Emperor, but this was not done.


_February, 1908._

Dear L.,--The Crown Prince and the Crown Princess gave a small
_bal-costume_. It was their first entertainment of any importance,
though there were very few people invited. As Frederikke is a dancing
young person, we were invited, enabling me to take many girls under my
protecting wing. The Emperor was dressed as the Grand Elector of
Brandenburg. The Empress had copied an old family portrait at San
Souci. She had a voluminous blond peruke and a flowing blue dress. She
looked very handsome. The Princes were generally dressed as their
ancestors and looked very familiar, as almost all of them stand in the
_Sieges Allee_. I learned much of German history that evening. The
Emperor was very kind and gave me a spirited and concise history of
those whom his six sons represented. No one except the Kaiser would
ever have had the persistency to stay booted and spurred during the
whole evening without a murmur, though he must have suffered from the
heat and been uncomfortable to a great degree. He had thick, brown
curls which hung close about his ears; thick, high, and hot leather
boots; and heavy leather gloves which he conscientiously kept on till
the very end.

The Kaiser is a wonderful personality. The more I see him the more I
admire him. He impresses you as having a great sense of power and true
and sound judgment. And then he is kind and good. I do not think him
capable of doing a mean or small action.

Mrs. Vanderbilt drove me out to Potsdam in her motor, and, going
through the forest, we passed in our hurried flight an automobile
which we did not have time to remark upon. That evening there was a
ball at court. When the Emperor spoke to me he said: "You flew by the
Empress and me like lightning this afternoon when we were walking in
the forest."

"Was that your Majesty's motor?" I asked. "We went so fast that I did
little else than hold on to my seat. It must have seemed ill-mannered
to have flown by like that."

There is to-night a _Gesinde Ball_ to which we are going. I know that
you have no idea as to what a _Gesinde Ball_ is, so I will tell you
that it is a ball given at some kind house by a kind lady. People
dress themselves up as servants. It is our wildest dream, and we are
never so happy as when we are gotten up to look like ladies' maids. I
can tell you how some of them will look--self-made and to the manner
born. I am going, since commands from superior quarters make it
imperative, as a giddy old housekeeper or a care (worn) taker who has
taken a smart gown from her mistress's wardrobe on the sly.

Several evenings later I heard your _prima donna_ with patience
(because you sent her), but not with enthusiasm. She is like a hundred
other would-be _prima donnas_ who cannot sing now and never can. These
flock to Berlin, study with all their might for two or three years,
and sing worse each year. Then they give a concert, for which they
give away the tickets. They say they must have the Berlin criticism.
In the mean time their families are eating dry bread and their friends
are squeezed like lemons. They get their criticism in some paper, cut
it out, stick it on a nice piece of paper, and send it to their
countrymen, who are out of pocket for a thousand marks or so. Then
they go back to their homesteads, discouraged and unhappy, and sing
for nothing in the village choir for the rest of their lives.

Our winters are very much alike--always the same routine. The season
commences with the reception of the _grande maitresse_, then comes the
_Schleppenkur_, the _Ordensfest_, and after that the Emperor's
birthday, with a gala opera in the evening; then the first, second,
and third balls at court, and the gala performances at the Opera when
any sovereign comes to Berlin on a visit. In Lent there is always one
entertainment at court. After Easter every one disappears and all the
blinds are pulled down. Those who remain in Berlin pretend they are
away.

The Emperor speaks French and English with equal ease, but he likes
best to speak English. He can be very lively at times, and then the
next moment just as serious again. While talking to you he never takes
his eyes off your face. He is seemingly all attention. Sometimes when
the diplomatic ladies stand side by side he glances to the next lady,
evidently making up his mind about what he will talk with her. His
voice is singularly clear, and what he says is straight to the point.
He has the rare gift of making the person to whom he is talking appear
at his very best. The life in Potsdam is, I have been told, very
home-like and cozy. The Emperor often spends the evening reading
aloud, while the Empress sits near with her knitting. They love to be
in the Neues Palais and stay there until after Christmas. Their
Christmas festivities must be worth seeing. Each prince has a
Christmas tree and a table of his own, makes his own choice of
presents, and ties up his own packages--as it were--and lights the
Christmas candles. These festivals are held in the mussel-room, on the
ground floor, original if not pretty--a combination of shells,
mother-of-pearl, and glass stone, which must be very effective in the
brilliantly lighted room.

The Empress is very fond of riding, but often drives a little
pony-carriage with two English "high-steppers." Once when the Shah of
Persia was spending the day at Potsdam the Empress offered to take him
out for a drive in the park. Half-way to their destination the lively
pace of the horses alarmed the Shah. He put his hand over hers, which
held the reins, and said in his pigeon-French, "_Vous-mourir seule_"
and got out and walked back.

The Emperor said to me, "Do you know Mr. Carnegie?"

I said that I did not.

"He is a clever gentleman," continued the Emperor. "Can you guess what
he said to me?"

I shook my head.

The Emperor then quoted Mr. Carnegie: "You and Mr. Roosevelt would
make a nice tandem."

"That shows tact and discrimination," I remarked.

The Emperor laughed. "I asked him which he thought would be the
wheel-horse?"

"What did he answer to that?" said I.

"I am afraid Mr. Carnegie did not find anything to answer just then.
He has not your talent for repartee."

"In this case," I assured his Majesty, "I should not have answered at
all, for I have no idea what a wheel-horse is. If it is the horse
which makes all the wheels turn, then it must be your Majesty."

"You see!" said the Emperor, shaking his finger and laughing.

We had the great pleasure of welcoming Prince Hans (King Christian's
brother). Johan was with him in Greece many years ago and has never
ceased to love him. He is the most polite gentleman I ever saw; he
almost begs your pardon for being kind to you. He dined with us
yesterday. We invited to meet him Prince Albert Schleswig-Holstein
(his nephew) and Prince and Princess Wied[3]. This young couple are
delightfully charming. The Prince has the most catching smile. It is
impossible not to be in good spirits when you are with him. We sat out
on the balcony after dinner and took our coffee and looked out into
the brilliantly lighted square of Brandenburger Tor with its network
of trams. I think our apartment is the most beautifully situated in
all Berlin.

      [3] Now King and Queen of Albania.


_March, 1908._

Dear L.,--The King of Spain is in Berlin now on a visit of a few days
to the Emperor. We only saw him at the gala performance at the Opera.
The Kaiser had chosen "The Huguenots." It was beautifully put on.
Madame Hempel sang the part of Marguerite de Valois, and Madame
Destinn sang Valentine. The house was decorated in the usual manner,
with carpets hanging from the balconies and flowers in great profusion
everywhere. The King of Spain sat between the Kaiser and the Kaiserin.
He looks very young and very manly. After the first act, when we all
met in the foyer, the Emperor stood by him, and sometimes would take
him by the arm and walk about in order to present people to him. I was
presented to him, but I did not get more than a smile and a shake of
the hand--I could not expect more. Johan was more favored, for the
King asked him how long he had been in Berlin. You must confess that
even that was not much.

I was compensated by having quite a long talk with the Kaiser--long
for him, as he has so many people to talk to, and he feels, I am sure,
every eye of the hoping-to-speak-to-him person in the room. He said:

"I have just been reading the memoirs of General von Moltke. Did you
ever know him?"

"No," I said, "I never saw him, but I have a letter from him, written
in 1856 to my father-in-law, dated from the Tuileries."

"He often speaks in his letters of your husband's grandparents' home
in Copenhagen--how he always felt at home and happy there, and was
always sure to find a charming circle of interesting and literary
people. You must read it; it would interest your husband, too."

"Did your Majesty ever hear about Moltke's visit to some grand-ducal
court? Moltke thought, of course, that as he had all the grand cordons
and decorations in creation, he had also that of this court. When he
was going to visit the Grand Duke he said to his servant, 'Don't
forget my decoration,' The servant looked high and low, but could not
find it, and, thinking that he had mislaid it, went and bought one.
Moltke put on his uniform, the decoration being in place on his
breast. When the Grand Duke entered he had in his hand an _etui_
containing the decoration, intending to hang it around Moltke's neck
himself. Imagine his surprise at seeing it there already!"


BERLIN, _November, 1908_.

Dear L.,--Our King and Queen visit Berlin.

When the Emperor learned of the date for the visit, and that their
Majesties were to be accompanied by the Minister of Foreign Affairs
(Frederick) he proposed that Nina should also come, and he invited
them to be his guests at the _Schloss_. This was joyful news for me.
Though Nina had just had a dreadful fall while riding and had broken
her arm and wrist, she had the courage to undertake the journey. They
traveled with their Majesties.

The _Lehrter Bahnhof_ is particularly well adapted to receive
royalties. It has a fine _facade_, and the open square in front is
large enough to contain the military bands and the hundreds of
carriages of all sorts. Today it was overflowing.

Inside the station a broad flight of steps lead down to the platform,
where was spread the traditional red carpet; the plants, bushes, and
flowers all made it look very gay and festive. The train was expected
at eleven o'clock. We hoped to get there very early, but found the
Emperor and his staff already on the platform, waiting. As our little
party arrived (we and the Secretaries) the Emperor came forward, took
my hand, and kissed it very graciously. We stood talking until the
Empress came, accompanied by all her ladies and suite. The train was
announced by many signals and many whistlings, but no train came in.
The locomotive had given out and the train had stopped a good way out
of the station. The carpet not reaching so far, their Majesties were
obliged to walk quite a distance on the wet platform. By means of
shunting and jerking the royal train was brought in under the station
roof, but nowhere near the carpet. The small steps were put up to the
carriage door, and the King and Queen descended. The Emperor kissed
the King on both cheeks. The Empress received the Queen affectionately
and gave her a bouquet, which she carried in her hand. I saw Nina's
pale face, pinched with pain, in the distance, and longed to fly to
her, but etiquette compelled me to stay to make my obeisance to their
Majesties. The band which was in the station struck up the Royal
Danish March, and we could hardly hear ourselves speak on account of
the tremendous resonance. The procession of resplendent uniforms and
the bright colors of the ladies' dresses made a brilliant sight as
they walked through the station. The Empress led the way, and we all
followed to the waiting-room, where presentations to the Queen took
place. The Empress presented every one of the ladies to the Queen,
_even me_. All the royal carriages seemed to be out--two open
barouches with four horses were for the four royalties. I drove to the
castle to see Nina, who was already installed in her regal apartment.
I went up the _Wendeltreppe_, through two antechambers and a small
_salon_, before reaching her magnificent drawing-room. It had superb
tapestries on the walls and was filled with fine old Dutch inlaid
furniture. It is called the Braunschweig suite, nine rooms in all.
Frederick had a separate staircase and entrance. Nina and I went to
the window to look out onto the _Platz_ in front of the castle, and
saw the parade pass before the Emperor and the King, who stood in the
rain while the troops marched by.

Nina had a court carriage and lackey at her disposal all the time she
was in Berlin. In the evening there was a state dinner in the superb
_Weissesaal_. Johan and I and the members of the Legation were the
only diplomats present. We all met in the Grand Gallery; the Emperor
took in the Queen of Denmark, placing her on his right, and the King
gave his arm to the Empress and sat facing the Emperor. The table was
in the shape of a horseshoe, and there were about eighty people
present. Prince Schleswig-Holstein (familiarly called Prince Abby)
took me in, and the Emperor's son, Prince Adalbert, sat on my left.
The _menu_ was in German. Some of the French dishes seemed to have
puzzled the translator. The Empress wore a dress of blue brocade and
many beautiful jewels. Our Queen wore a light-gray satin trimmed with
lace, and her famous diamond-and-pearl necklace. The Emperor wore the
Danish uniform, and the King was in the uniform of his Prussian
regiment. A military band played throughout dinner.

I was amused when the fruit and bonbons were passed. Both the princes
next to me piled their plates high with them and passed them over
their shoulders to the young gentlemen pages who stood behind each
royal person, thus depriving many ladies of the longed-for bonbons,
which were adorned with the portraits of their Majesties.

The Emperor made a very charming and touching speech in German, when
we all stood up and emptied our glasses. The King replied in German,
and we again got up and drank. After dinner every one went into the
long gallery, and their four Majesties talked very informally with us
while taking their coffee. At eleven o'clock their Majesties retired.
I was glad, for Nina's sake, that she could rest after her fatiguing
day. I knew that she was suffering agonies from her tightly bandaged
wrist. Her arm was in a plaster cast, and she carried it in a sling
cleverly hidden under her laces. The next day the Empress took the
Queen with her to visit some charitable institutions. The King and the
Queen had graciously promised to lunch at our house, which was
surrounded by a cordon of police, on foot and on horseback, in front
and in the courtyard belonging to the Legation.

At two o'clock quite a procession of court carriages entered our
_porte-cochere_, where I met the Queen, presenting her with a bouquet
tied with ribbons of the Danish colors--red and white. Our lunch was
for forty people, and was served in two rooms. The King gave me his
arm. The Emperor had sent in the morning a life-sized crayon portrait
of himself by Lenbach as a present. The whole staircase was lined with
palms and bushes, and of course there were plenty of flowers in the
rooms.

After luncheon a deputation of the Danish colony met in the large
_salons_ and were presented to their Majesties. It was after five
o'clock before every one had departed. The policemen had filed off,
and the crowds which had collected in the street disappeared.

The gala opera in the evening was like all the other gala operas I
have described. At eight o'clock every one had assembled and was in
his place. The opera was called "_Der Lange Kerl_," written at the
Emperor's command by some German composer. It was a beautiful
production, and represented Frederick the Great at Sans-Souci. In the
first act the interior of Sans-Souci was copied after the famous
picture of Mezzler where Frederick the Great is playing on the flute.
The "Long Fellow" was a giant, who, it seems, was a common soldier in
the King's regiment. Madame Destinn took the part of a peasant woman,
and washed up the pavement and prepared her vegetables for sale in the
most realistic manner. The second scene, when Potsdam wakes up in the
morning, reminded me of the opening of the second act of "Lohengrin."
The last act was very sad, and rather lugubrious, representing
Frederick the Great seated in the garden in front of Sans-Souci. There
was no singing in this act at all, only pantomime. The respectful
manner and the sad faces of the lackeys as they helped the poor old
King to his chair and covered his knees with rugs, leaving him alone,
was very pathetic.

We went into the foyer after the performance. The Empress presented
all the notable people to the Queen, and I stood near her in order to
present others if necessary.


BERLIN, _May, 1910_.

Dear L.,--Do not be surprised that you have not heard from me. We have
been motoring. A most delightful tour. One does not know the bliss of
traveling until one motors through Germany as we have just done. I
would send you my diary, but it reads too much like a ship's log. We
started from Berlin on the 1st of May and went as far as Eisenach. In
trying to climb the steep hill which leads to the halls where
Tannhauser sang his naughty description of Venusberg our motor broke
down, as if to commemorate the spot. We had to spend the night at
Eisenach for repairs. The next day we passed Gotha, where we lunched,
and passed the night at Fulda. The next day we went on to Weimar,
where Liszt's memory is as green as the trees in the grand-ducal park.

Everything is beautiful in this time of the year, and the days are
long. What could be more enchanting I leave to your imagination.

In Munich we galleried from morning to night, and were utterly
exhausted and hardly had the courage to dress for the opera; but,
having tickets, economy got the better of prudence, and we sat through
the long performance of "Don Giovanni" with _Geduld_.

Andrada, the Portuguese barytone, was very good and looked the part to
perfection. In real life I am told he is a Don Juan himself. If the
list of his victims has not yet reached _mille et un_ the fault cannot
be laid at his door. His stage victims were all fat German _Frauen_.
Zerlina wore a blond wig, showed very black eyebrows and red lips. Her
golden molars showed from afar. Our visit to the artist Lenbach and
his wife was followed by an invitation to tea the next day. Lenbach is
divorced from his first wife, married to a Countess Arnim (also
divorced). They have a dear little girl whom Lenbach has painted
several times. The studio is in a charming garden, arranged in the
most artistic manner, full of broken columns and antique relics
resembling the gardens on the Venice canals. Lenbach seen in the bosom
of his family is a different Lenbach from the one we knew in Rome and
Paris--half society man, half artist. Here he is simply _all papa_.

We motored over the mountain to Oberammergau. I do not dare to say
that I was disappointed in the performance. I suppose years ago, when
people began to go to Oberammergau, it was more interesting, but now
it is simply an enterprise, speculation kept alive by travelers and
sight-seers. As a representation it is impressive in a way, but your
illusions are dimmed by the prosaic manner in which everything is
done. I felt a little queer when I met Jesus Christ smoking and wiping
his muddy sandals with a dirty handkerchief, and saw Mary Magdalene
flirting with the chauffeurs. When we sat at a _cafe_, enjoying a mug
of beer and a sausage, we were surrounded by St. Joseph and a brood of
angels, all drinking beer. People may rave about the _Stimmung_, the
poetry, and the romance of it, but I saw beauty neither in the acting
nor in the play. I do not speak of the music, there was so little of
it. Physical comfort goes a long way with yours lovingly. To sleep in
a narrow bed having a piece of flannel buttoned between two coarse
pieces of linen, to eat bad food, to sit on hard benches for hours
under an open heaven which lets down occasionally a mild shower--this
is what the Germans call _Stimmung_ and others call "local color" and
what I call discomfort. Still, it is one of the things one must do
once in ten years. For a European to say, "I have not been to
Oberammergau," is like an American saying, "I have never been to
Niagara."

Whoever has been to see the crazy King Ludwig's _chateaux_ knows more
about them than I do, for I hated to go inside them. I gazed at the
magnificent view and wondered how any but a crazy person could have
furnished the interiors.

What a life the King led his faithful subjects! They are still taxing
all they can tax in order to pay his debts. Poor things! They won't
finish for a long time yet!


BERLIN.

Dear L.,--The visit to the Berlin court by King Edward and Queen
Alexandra is already a thing of the past, but I must tell you about it
while it is still fresh in my mind. We, as _legation de famille_, went
to the Lehrter station to meet them on their arrival. When the train
steamed in the Emperor and the Empress went forward to the door of the
carriage, and as the King and the Queen descended they all embraced
affectionately. The Empress led the Queen to the waiting-room, where
she presented all the ladies who were there. There was music inside
and outside of the station. In fact, everything was so exactly like
the reception of our King and Queen, which I have described before,
that I will not repeat myself.

King Edward looked tired and coughed constantly. The Queen, whom I had
not seen for a long time, seemed quite unchanged and charming as ever.
There is not much time on such occasions to say more than a few words
to each. We saw them drive off amid the most enthusiastic greetings
from the populace massed together in the square.

That evening there was a state banquet, served in the _Weissesaal_, at
which the Kaiser read his speech in English to the King, and the King
read his reply.

I sat between Lord Granville and Sir Charles Hardinge, between a
cross-fire of wit and fun. The court orchestra, up in the gallery,
played subdued music during the dinner, so that conversation was
possible. Their four Majesties sat next to one another on one side of
the table, and the _Chancelier de l'Empire_ sat opposite the Empress.
The English Embassy and ourselves were the only diplomats among the
hundred guests. The bonbons which were served with the fruit had
photographs of King Edward, the Queen, and the German Imperial family,
and were, as is the custom, handed to the pages. These offerings are
meant, I suppose, as a polite attention, and little souvenirs of the
occasion, but the guests for whom the bonbons are intended go away
empty-handed. These pages belong to the highest families in Germany,
and are present at all court functions, such as balls and dinners, and
stand behind the chairs of the royal personages at the table.

[Illustration:
COUNT HATZFELDT
From a recent photograph. He was Prime Minister of Germany and German
Ambassador to London, brother-in-law of Madame de Hegermann-Lindencrone.
The picture shows over sixty decorations, all the important ones of
Europe, which have been given him. It is custom that the decorations
of orders in diamonds are kept by the family after the death of the
recipient. All other orders go back to the governments bestowing
them.]

After dinner we went into the long gallery, which in one part was
arranged as a _salon_, with _fauteuils_ and chairs in circle.

To show what a wonderful memory King Edward has, he said to me:

"Do you remember a song you used to sing [I thought he was going to
say 'Beware'] with something about, 'I mean the daughter'?"

"Yes, your Majesty, I remember very well. It was, 'I know a lady, a
Mrs. Brady.'"

"Yes, that was it...'and has a daughter,' wasn't it?"

I said, "What a memory your Majesty has! Fancy remembering that all
these years. It was when your Majesty came to Sommerberg to play
tennis with Paul Hatzfeldt."

"That was a long time ago," continued King Edward. "I was stopping
then with the King and the Queen of Denmark at Wiesbaden. I remember
it all so well. Poor Hatzfeldt. You know what Bismarck said about
him?"

"Was it not something about his being the best horse in his stable?"

"That is it," the King answered. "You have a good memory, too. How is
Countess Raben?"

"You mean 'the daughter'?"

The King laughed. "Yes, I mean 'the daughter.'"

We did not stay long after the dinner, as evidently their Majesties
were fatigued after their journey. The King coughed incessantly, and
the Queen looked very tired. I think that she is beginning to look
very like her mother, the dear old Queen.

The next day hundreds of court carriages were flying about Berlin; I
wish you could see the packages of cards that were sent to us. In the
evening was the gala opera. The Opera House is always decorated in the
same way, and there is always the same audience.

"Sardanapal" was the play chosen by the Emperor for this performance.
I thought it very interesting to look at, but impossible to
understand. It was a combination of orchestral music, choruses, and
pantomime. A dreadful-looking Nubian came out before the curtain
between acts and told us in German poetry what was going to happen.
The Emperor had taken a great interest in the play, and had indicated
all the costumes himself. Every dress was a study and entirely
correct, you may be sure, if the Kaiser had anything to do with it.
The ornaments which the actors wore were copied from specimens in the
museums. The scenery was very fine, and when Sardanapal was burned up,
with his wives and collection of gold and silver things, the whole
stage seemed to be on fire. This almost created a panic, and would
have done so if the audience had not seen that their Majesties sat
calmly in their seats. It was very realistic. The Emperor told me
afterward in the foyer that the flames were nothing but chiffon,
lighted with electric lights, and blown up with a fan from beneath.
When the fire had done its work there was nothing left upon the stage
but red-hot coals and smoldering _debris_. It was all very well, if we
only had been spared the lugubrious man with the beard made of tight
black curls, who did the talking.

The next day the luncheon in honor of their English Majesties at the
English Ambassador's, Sir Edward Goschen, was full of emotion. King
Edward wore the uniform belonging to his German regiment, which,
besides being buttoned tightly and apparently much padded, has a high
and tight collar. He had received a deputation of most of the English
colony and already looked wearied before we went in to luncheon. This
was served in the ballroom, and was a long and elaborate affair. The
King sat opposite the Queen, and Sir Edward and Lady Goschen sat at
either end of the table. All the princes, the German nobility, and
ministers of state were present.

The King apparently had a good appetite, and talked with his neighbors
right and left and opposite, and seemed to enjoy himself. When we
re-entered the drawing-room the King lit an enormous cigar and,
seating himself on a low sofa, talked and smoked, when suddenly he
threw his head back against the sofa, as if gasping for breath. The
Queen, who was on the other side of the room, rushed instantly to the
King and quickly unbuttoned his collar and opened his coat. The two
English physicians who had come with the King were finishing luncheon
in another room. They were instantly called in, and they begged the
guests to leave the _salon_ in order that the King might have more
air. The King had not fainted, but on account of the tight collar, the
heat of the room, the big cigar, and the violent fit of coughing, it
was almost impossible for him to get his breath. The physicians helped
him up from the low sofa into a high chair, and took away the cigar;
but the King, as soon as he could speak, said, "Give me another
cigar." The physicians protested, but the King insisted upon the
cigar, which they were obliged to give him. The guests returned, and
the conversation rallied for a while, but the emotion of the few
moments before could not be easily calmed.

The King left the room quietly, hardly any one seeing him, reached the
automobile, and drove to the castle. The Queen followed him a few
moments later.

We were prepared to receive notice at any moment that the ball fixed
for that evening would be countermanded. But it was not, and at eight
o'clock--the hour one goes to court balls here--found every one
assembled. As usual, we took our places on the platform reserved for
the ladies of the _Corps Diplomatique_, and then, with the ceremonial
which I have so often described, their Majesties, preceded by the
pages and court notables, entered. The Emperor gave his arm to Queen
Alexandra, and the Empress entered with King Edward. It is customary
for the Emperor and the Empress to make a tour of the invited guests,
but this evening the royal persons stayed on the throne and did not
move during the dances.

King Edward and the Queen supped at the table of the Emperor, and
immediately afterward retired to their rooms and were seen no more.
During the whole evening they had not spoken to a single person.

The next morning their Majesties took their departure from the Lehrter
station. We went to bid them good-by. The Emperor, in speaking to me,
said, "You know, my uncle had such a fright the other night when he
saw the fire, he wanted to leave the theater; it was only when I told
him that the flames were chiffon that I could quiet him."

When King Edward bade me good-by he said, "Please remember me to
Countess Raben," and added, laughingly, "I mean the daughter."

Saint-Saens and Massenet came to Berlin to assist at a sort of
_Congres de musique_. Massenet was invited to lead the orchestra in
"Manon," and Saint-Saens that of "Samson and Delilah." They accepted
an invitation to lunch at our house, and I was delighted to see them
again. They had come, they said, with prejudices on fire. They were
sure that they would dislike everything German; but, having been
begged to visit the Kaiser in his _loge_ after the performance, they
came away from the interview burning with enthusiasm. How charming the
Emperor was! How full of interest! So natural! etc., etc. They could
not find words for their admiration. That is the way with the Emperor.
He charms every one.

The first of my articles about Compiegne appeared in _Harper's
Magazine_ in the summer. At the ball at court in the following January
the Kaiser came to speak to me, his face beaming with the kindest of
smiles.

"I can't tell you how I have enjoyed your articles, I read them to
myself and read them out loud to the Empress."

"How," said I "did your Majesty discover them?"

"I have always taken _Harper's Magazine_, ever since I was a little
boy. You may imagine how astonished I was when I saw something from
your pen. Your description of Napoleon the Third is quite historical.
You gave me a new idea of him. In many ways I always regret that I
never saw him. I could have once, when I was quite small. I was with
my parents at Nice, and the Emperor came there, but I did not see
him."


BERLIN, _May 1912_.

Dear L.,--On the 14th we had just returned from a long motor trip,
arriving late in the evening. How fortunate that we did not arrive a
day later! The next morning Johan was called on the telephone. The
message was from Hamburg, to say that our King (Frederick VIII) had
died there, suddenly in the night. Johan, of course, took the first
train for Hamburg.

This was dreadful news.

The King was traveling with the Queen, Princess Thyra, Prince Gustave,
and the usual suite. His Majesty had bade them good-night and
retired--alas! not to his room, for he wished to take a stroll through
the streets of the town. It was only at two o'clock that the valet
noticed that the King had not been in his room. Then he alarmed the
_Hof-Marshale_, who, with the other gentlemen, commenced a search. At
five o'clock they found his Majesty in the _Krankenhaus_. He had
fainted in the street and had been put into a cab, in which he died.
Johan stayed all the next day in Hamburg, accompanying the Queen on
board the _Daneborg_ (the royal yacht), which had been sent to take
the King's body back to Denmark.

[Illustration:
THE EMPEROR IN 1905
From an autographed photograph given to Madame de Hegermann-Lindencrone.]

The Queen was overwhelmed with grief, but showed the greatest
self-control.

It has been a distressing time indeed for the Duchess of Cumberland.
She has lost her eldest son (killed in an automobile accident on the
way to Schwerin to see his sister, the Grand Duchess) and now it is
her brother who is taken so tragically. The young duke was very unwise
to take that particular road. We had passed over the same route, or
tried to, on our way to pay a visit to the grand-ducal pair not more
than two weeks before. Our chauffeur was appalled at the dreadful
condition of the road and advised turning back. We made a great
_detour_ and avoided an accident. The Duke was driving himself, and
the ruts in the road made the car jump so that the wheel struck him
under the chin, he lost control, and the machine struck a tree,
killing the Duke instantly. The chauffeur was saved.


BERLIN.

Mr. Roosevelt and family arrived in Berlin three days ago. Society was
on tiptoe with expectation. They talked of giving Arthur Nevin's
Indian opera, "Poia," in order that the ex-President should have the
thrill of seeing his compatriots in a German setting. This idea was
abandoned, though Count Huelsen had accepted the opera and at an
enormous expense had had it mounted at the Grand Opera.

The Kaiser received Mr. Roosevelt and was charmed with him, just as
Mr. Roosevelt was charmed with the Kaiser. Of course, who could resist
the magnetic forces of these two _dii ex machina_.

Ambassador and Mrs. Hill gave a large and all-comprising reception at
the Embassy in honor of their distinguished guest, which is much too
small to contain the entire society of Berlin and _embrace_ (I like
that word) all the American colony.

To gain a little more space they very practically turned the
_porte-cochere_ into a _vestiaire_, where we took off our mantles
before crossing the carpet-covered carriage-drive.

Mr. Roosevelt was most amiable. He greeted people with a cordiality
which bordered on _epanchement_--giving their hands a shaking the like
of which they had never had before. Mr. Roosevelt remained by Mrs.
Hill's side and smiled kindly at the guests as they poured in and out
of the _salon_. That was about all the guests did--pour in and pour
out. One could not expect even the most favored to exchange more than
a few words with the great man.

Our conversations were in the style of the reception, short and
quickly done with.

MRS. HILL: "This is Madame de Hegermann. She is American, from
Cambridge, Massachusetts."

MR. ROOSEVELT: "Ah!... I am a Harvard man."

ME: "So am I! I mean I am a Harvard woman! I was born and brought up
in Radcliffe College."

MR. R.: "Ah!" (_Puzzled, trying to match the possible date of my birth
with the birth of Radcliffe College._)

ME: "Radcliffe College was my grandparents' home."

MR. R.: "Oh, I see! Well, madame, I am delighted to shake hands with
any one from Cambridge."

Johan's was like this:

MRS. HILL: "Monsieur de Hegermann was Danish Minister in Washington
some years ago."

MR. R.: "I am sorry I was not President then. Ha! ha! Pleased to have
met you, sir!"

We were told that there would be speeches under the flag, but we
poured out without anything of the kind occurring.


BERLIN, _1912_.

Dear L.,--It is not only the unexpected that arrives: the expected
arrives also.

The news we have been expecting these last years arrived yesterday.

Diplomacy has decided to divorce us.

We are to leave Berlin.

Johan ought to have left the service four years ago. According to the
_protocole_ in Denmark, a Minister must retire when he reaches the
_d'age limite_--the Ambassador retiring at the age of seventy.

The Prime Minister asked him to remain, and he did. But now it seems
that the powers that be have decided.

It is very sad, but true.

Countess Brockdorf came to make me a visit of condolence. She said
that her Majesty had begged her to express her regrets. In the course
of the visit she asked me when my book[4] would come out, and when I
told her that I thought in October she said, "I know that the Emperor
is counting on your giving him a copy." I promised that I would not
forget it.

      [4] _In the Courts of Memory_, published in the autumn of
      1912.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the day fixed for Johan's audience to present his letters of recall
we were invited to luncheon at Neues Palais with their Majesties. At
Wildpark, the Emperor's private station, a few miles from Potsdam, we
were met by his carriage and drove through the beautiful park to the
palace. The carriage stopped at the principal entrance, where a broad
red carpet was stretched from the carriage-drive to the door. Johan
got out there. Then I was driven to the other side of the palace,
where I found another red carpet. This was the entrance which leads to
the Empress's suite of apartments.

Countess Keller (the lady of honor) was waiting for me and led me to
the Empress.

Her Majesty was most gracious; no one could have been more so. We
remained talking until a lackey announced that Johan's audience was
finished and that the Emperor was waiting in the dining-room for us.
The Kaiserin kindly took me by the arm, and we went together into the
adjoining _salon_, where we found the Emperor, the Princess Victoria
Augusta, Johan, William von Kidderling (Minister of Foreign Affairs),
who is always present at these official audiences, a chamberlain, an
adjutant--not more than ten people in all.

The Kaiser, on seeing me, kissed my hand, and was, as usual, most kind
and altogether delightful. I sat at his left, the young Princess being
at his right. I tried to say how grieved we were at the idea of
leaving Berlin, where we had spent ten happy years. He was gracious
enough to say that both he and the Empress were very sorry to lose us.
He said many appreciative things about what I had written in
_Harper's_, and asked many questions showing that he had really read
them. He seemed interested to hear about the Emperor Napoleon and the
life at Compiegne. He said that he met Empress Eugenie for the first
time when in Norway, three years ago. He had made a visit to her on
her yacht, and she had "honored" him by taking tea with him on the
_Hohenzollern_. He said, "How beautiful she must have been when she
was young!"

"I saw her," I replied, "last spring at her villa at Cape Martin. She
is _still_ beautiful, though she is eighty years old."

"Eighty years!" cried the Kaiser, "and still a _charmeuse_! That is
unique."

All through luncheon I was thinking that this was the last time I
should be talking to the interesting and wonderful _charmeur_ who was
sitting next to me. The Kaiser has a way of fixing those discerning
gray eyes of his on you when he talks, and you have the feeling that
he is sifting and weighing you in his mind--and when he smiles his
face lights up with humor and interest. You feel as if a life-buoy
were keeping you afloat. He has that wonderful gift of making people
appear at their best. I gave him my book after luncheon. It looks very
fitting in its red morocco binding. He appeared greatly delighted with
it and begged me to write my name on the first page, which, of course,
I was happy to do.

The Empress exclaimed: "'Do give me one, too! Once the Emperor has it,
I shall never get it."

The Kaiser's last words to us were, "Promise not to forget Berlin!"

Forget Berlin--never!







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sunny Side of Diplomatic Life,
1875-1912, by Lillie DeHegermann-Lindencrone

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUNNY SIDE ***

***** This file should be named 13955.txt or 13955.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/9/5/13955/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
