The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Authoritative Life of General William
Booth, by George Scott Railton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Authoritative Life of General William Booth

Author: George Scott Railton

Release Date: November 4, 2004 [EBook #13958]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENERAL WILLIAM BOOTH ***




Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders




[Illustration: William Booth

Born April 10th. 1829. Died August 20th, 1912.]




The Authoritative Life Of General William Booth
Founder of The Salvation Army

By

G. S. Railton
First Commissioner to General Booth


With a Preface by
General Bramwell Booth




Copyright, 1912,
By George H. Doran Company




Preface



I have no hesitation in commending this small volume as containing so
far as its space permits, a good picture of my beloved Father and a
record of much that made his life of interest and importance to the
world.

It does not, of course, profess to cover anything like the whole story
of his many years of world-wide service. It could not do so. For any
such complete history we must wait for that later production which may,
I hope, be possible before very long when there has been time to go
fully through the masses of diaries, letters and other papers he has
left behind him.

It must not be supposed that I can make myself responsible for every
phrase Commissioner Railton has used. I know, however, that perhaps no
one except myself had anything like his opportunities, during the last
forty years, of knowing and studying my Father's life, both in public
and private, and of understanding his thoughts and purposes.

_Now we wish this book to accomplish something._ We cannot think it
possible for anyone, especially a Salvationist, to read it without being
compelled ever and anon to ask himself such questions as these:--

"Am I living a life that is at all like this life? Am I, at any rate,
willing by God's grace to do anything I can in the same direction, in
order that God may be more loved and glorified, and that my fellow men
may be raised to a more God-like and happy service? After all, is there
not something better for me than money-making, or the search after human
applause, or indeed the pursuit of earthly good of any kind?

"If, instead of aiming at that which will all fade away, I turn my
attention to making the best of my life for God and for others, may I
not also accomplish something that will afford me satisfaction at last
and bear reflection in the world to come?"

I hope also that to some, at least, the great message of this life will
stand revealed in these pages. I believe it to be that, while God can do
little or nothing by us until we are completely submitted and given up
to Him, He can work wonders of infinite moment to the world when we are.
Asked, a few months before his death, if he would put into a sentence
the secret as he saw it, of all the blessings which had attended him
during his seventy years of service, The General replied: "Well, if I am
to put it into one sentence, I would say that I made up my mind that God
Almighty should have all there was of William Booth." It was, in the
beginning, that entire devotion to God and its continued maintenance
which could, alone, account for the story told in these brief records.

The book is, of course, written in the main from the Salvationist point
of view; much of it, indeed, is simply a reproduction of my father's own
sayings and writings to his own people. This, to all thoughtful readers,
must be our defence against any appearance of self-glorification, or any
omission to refer to the work in the world that others are doing for
Christ. No attempt has been made to tell the story of The General's
"life and times," but simply to note some of the things he said and did
himself. And I trust the record may be found useful by all the many
servants of God who do not think exactly as he thought, but who yet
rejoiced in the triumphs of the Cross through his labours.

To continue and to amplify the results of his work must needs be my
continual aim. I am full of hope that this book may bring me some help,
not only towards his Memorial Scheme, which contemplates the erection
and equipment in London and other Capitals of enlarged premises for the
Training of Officers in every branch of the work, or where they already
have such buildings, the erection of new Headquarters or Halls; but
towards the maintenance and extension in every land of the work he
began.

It cannot but be a special gratification to me to know that this book
will be received with eager affection in almost every part of the
world. How could it ever cease to be my greatest joy to strive more and
more after my Father's ideal of linking together men and women of every
land and race in one grand competition for the extinction of selfishness
by the enlistment of all sorts and conditions of men in one Great Holy
War for God and for all that is good?

Whether those into whose hands this volume falls, agree or not with the
teachings of The Salvation Army, may God grant them Grace to join
heartily at least in this, my Father's great purpose, and so help me to
attain the victory for which he lived and died.

W. Bramwell Booth.
London International Headquarters
of The Salvation Army.

November, 1912.




Contents


Chapter I       Childhood and Poverty
Chapter II      Salvation in Youth
Chapter III     Lay Ministry
Chapter IV      Early Ministry
Chapter V       Fight Against Formality
Chapter VI      Revivalism
Chapter VII     East London Beginning
Chapter VIII    Army-making
Chapter IX      Army Leading
Chapter X       Desperate Fighting
Chapter XI      Reproducing The Army in America
Chapter XII     In Australasia
Chapter XIII    Women and Scandinavia
Chapter XIV     Children Conquerors in Holland and Elsewhere
Chapter XV      India and Devotees
Chapter XVI     South Africa and Colonisation
Chapter XVII    Japanese Heroism
Chapter XVIII   Co-operating With Governments
Chapter XIX     Conquering Death
Chapter XX      His Social Work
Chapter XXI     Motoring Triumphs
Chapter XXII    Our Financial System
Chapter XXIII   In Germany In Old Age
Chapter XXIV    The End
Chapter XXV     Tributes
Chapter XXVI    Organisation
Chapter XXVII   The Spirit of The Army
Chapter XXVIII  The General as a Writer

Important Events Connected with The General's Life and Work




Illustrations


William Booth
Catherine Booth
General Bramwell Booth
Mrs. Bramwell Booth
Emma Booth Tucker
Commander Miss Booth
Autograph Page




The Authoritative Life of General William Booth

Founder of The Salvation Army




Chapter I

Childhood and Poverty



William Booth was born in Nottingham, England, on April 10, 1829, and
was left, at thirteen, the only son of a widowed and impoverished
mother. His father had been one of those builders of houses who so
rapidly rose in those days to wealth, but who, largely employing
borrowed capital, often found themselves in any time of general scarcity
reduced to poverty.

I glory in the fact that The General's ancestry has never been traced,
so far as I know, beyond his grandfather. I will venture to say,
however, that his forefathers fought with desperation against somebody
at least a thousand years ago. Fighting is an inveterate habit of ours
in England, and another renowned general has just been recommending all
young men to learn to shoot. The constant joy and pride with which our
General always spoke of his mother is a tribute to her excellence, as
well as the best possible record of his own earliest days. Of her he
wrote, in 1893:--

     "I had a good mother. So good she has ever appeared to me that I
     have often said that all I knew of her life seemed a striking
     contradiction of the doctrine of human depravity. In my youth I
     fully accepted that doctrine, and I do not deny it now; but my
     patient, self-sacrificing mother always appeared to be an exception
     to the rule.

     "I loved my mother. From infancy to manhood I lived in her. Home
     was not home to me without her. I do not remember any single act of
     wilful disobedience to her wishes. When my father died I was so
     passionately attached to my mother that I can recollect that,
     deeply though I felt his loss, my grief was all but forbidden by
     the thought that it was not my mother who had been taken from me.
     And yet one of the regrets that has followed me to the present
     hour is that I did not sufficiently value the treasure while I
     possessed it, and that I did not with sufficient tenderness and
     assiduity at the time, attempt the impossible task of repaying the
     immeasurable debt I owed to that mother's love.

     "She was certainly one of the most unselfish beings it has been my
     lot to come into contact with. 'Never mind me' was descriptive of
     her whole life at every time, in every place, and under every
     circumstance. To make others happy was the end of all her thoughts
     and aims with regard not only to her children but to her domestics,
     and indeed to all who came within her influence. To remove misery
     was her delight. No beggar went empty-handed from her door. The
     sorrows of any poor wretch were certain of her commiseration, and
     of a helping hand in their removal, so far as she had ability. The
     children of misfortune were sure of her pity, and the children of
     misconduct she pitied almost the more, because, for one reason,
     they were the cause of sorrow to those who had reason to mourn on
     their account.

     "For many years before she died, love, joy, and peace reigned in
     her heart, beamed from her countenance, and spoke in her words. Her
     faith was immovably fixed on Him who is able to save to the
     uttermost. It was a common expression of confidence with her that
     'Jesus would go with her all the way through the journey of
     life--even to the end. He would not leave her. Her feet were on the
     Rock.'"

To this testimony to his mother's worth The General added:--

     "To those whose eyes may fall on these lines, may I not be excused
     saying, 'See to it that you honour your father and your mother, not
     only that your days may be long in the land, but that you may not,
     in after years, be disturbed by useless longings to have back again
     the precious ones who so ceaselessly and unselfishly toiled with
     heart and brain for your profoundest well-being.'

     "My mother and father were both Derbyshire people. They were born
     within a few miles of each other, the former at Somercotes, a small
     village within a mile or two of Alfreton and the latter at Belper.
     My mother's father was a well-to-do farmer. Her mother died when
     she was three years of age; and, her father marrying again, she
     was taken to the heart and home of a kind uncle and aunt, who
     reared and educated her, giving her at the same time a sound
     religious training.

     "Years passed of which we have but imperfect knowledge during
     which, by some means, she drifted to the small town of
     Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Here she met my father, who was availing himself
     of the waters as a remedy for his chronic enemy, rheumatism. He
     offered her marriage. She refused. He left the town indignant, but
     returned to renew his proposal, which she ultimately accepted.
     Their marriage followed. Up to this date her path through life had
     been comparatively a smooth one; but from this hour onward through
     many long and painful years, it was crowded with difficulties and
     anxieties.

     "My father's fortunes appear to have begun to wane soon after his
     marriage. At that time he would have passed, I suppose, for a rich
     man, according to the estimate of riches in those days. But bad
     times came, and very bad times they were, such as we know little
     about, despite all the grumbling of this modern era. Nottingham,
     where the family was then located, suffered heavily, a large
     proportion of its poorer classes being reduced to the verge of
     starvation. My father, who had invested the entire savings of his
     lifetime in small house property, was seriously affected by these
     calamitous circumstances; in fact, he was ruined.

     "The brave way in which my mother stood by his side during that
     dark and sorrowful season is indelibly written on my memory. She
     shared his every anxiety, advised him in all his business
     perplexities, and upheld his spirit as crash followed crash, and
     one piece of property after another went overboard. Years of heavy
     affliction followed, during which she was his tender, untiring
     nurse, comforting and upholding his spirit unto death; and then she
     stood out all alone to fight the battles of his children amidst the
     wreck of his fortunes.

     "Those days were gloomy indeed; and the wonder now in looking back
     upon them is that she survived them. It would have seemed a
     perfectly natural thing if she had died of a broken heart, and been
     borne away to lie in my father's grave.

     "But she had reasons for living. Her children bound her to earth,
     and for our sakes she toiled on with unswerving devotion and
     unintermitting care. After a time the waters found a smoother
     channel, so far as this world's troubles were concerned, and her
     days were ended, in her eighty-fifth year, in comparative peace."

     "During one of my Motor Campaigns to Nottingham," The General wrote
     on another occasion, "my car took me over the Trent, the dear old
     river along whose banks I used to wander in my boyhood days,
     sometimes poring over Young's _Night Thoughts_, reading Henry Kirke
     White's _Poems_, or, as was frequently the case before my
     conversion, with a fishing-rod in my hand.

     "In those days angling was my favourite sport. I have sat down on
     those banks many a summer morning at five o'clock, although I
     rarely caught anything. An old uncle ironically used to have a
     plate with a napkin on it ready for my catch waiting for me on my
     return.

     "And then the motor brought us to the ancient village of Wilford,
     with its lovely old avenues of elms fringing the river.

     "There were the very meadows in which we children used to revel
     amongst the bluebells and crocuses which, in those days, spread out
     their beautiful carpet in the spring-time, to the unspeakable
     delight of the youngsters from the town.

     "But how changed the scene! Most of these rural charms had fled,
     and in their places were collieries and factories, and machine
     shops, and streets upon streets of houses for the employes of the
     growing town. We were only 60,000 in my boyhood, whereas the
     citizens of Nottingham to-day number 250,000.

     "A few years ago the city conferred its freedom upon me as a mark
     of appreciation and esteem. To God be all the glory that He has
     helped His poor boy to live for Him, and made even his former
     enemies to honour him."

But we all know what sort of influences exist in a city that is at once
the capital of a county and a commercial centre. The homes of the
wealthy and comfortable are found at no great distance from the
dwellings of the poor, while in the huge market-places are exhibitions
weekly of all the contrasts between town and country life, between the
extremest want and the most lavish plenty.

Seventy years ago, life in such a city was nearly as different from what
it is to-day as the life of to-day in an American state capital is from
that of a Chinese town. Between the small circle of "old families" who
still possessed widespread influence and the masses of the people there
was a wide gap. The few respectable charities, generally due to the
piety of some long-departed citizen, marked out very strikingly a
certain number of those who were considered "deserving poor," and helped
to make every one less concerned about all the rest. For all the many
thousands struggling day and night to keep themselves and those
dependent upon them from starvation, there was little or no pity. It was
just "their lot," and they were taught to consider it their duty to be
content with it. To envy their richer neighbours, to covet anything they
possessed, was a sin that would only ensure for the coveter an eternal
and aggravated continuance of his present thirst.

In describing those early years, The General said:--

     "Before my father's death I had been apprenticed by his wish. I was
     very young, only thirteen years of age, but he could not afford to
     keep me longer at school, and so out into the world I must go. This
     event was followed by the formation of companionships whose
     influence was anything but beneficial. I went down hill morally,
     and the consequences might have been serious if not eternally
     disastrous, but that the hand of God was laid on me in a very
     remarkable manner.

     "I had scarcely any income as an apprentice, and was so hard up
     when my father died, that I could do next to nothing to assist my
     dear mother and sisters, which was the cause of no little
     humiliation and grief.

     "The system of apprenticeship in those days generally bound a lad
     for six or seven years. During this time he received little or no
     wages, and was required to slave from early morning to late evening
     upon the supposition that he was 'being taught' the business,
     which, if he had a good master, was probably true. It was a severe
     but useful time of learning. My master was a Unitarian--that is, he
     did not believe Christ was the son of God and the Saviour of the
     world, but only the best of teachers; yet so little had he learnt
     of Him that his heaven consisted in making money, strutting about
     with his gay wife, and regaling himself with worldly amusements.

     "At nineteen the weary years of my apprenticeship came to an end.
     I had done my six years' service, and was heartily glad to be free
     from the humiliating bondage they had proved. I tried hard to find
     some kind of labour that would give me more liberty to carry out
     the aggressive ideas which I had by this time come to entertain as
     to saving the lost; but I failed. For twelve months I waited. Those
     months were among the most desolate of my life. No one took the
     slightest interest in me.

     "Failing to find employment in Nottingham, I had to move away. I
     was loath, very loath, to leave my dear widowed mother and my
     native town, but I was compelled to do so, and to come to London.
     In the great city I felt myself unutterably alone. I did not know a
     soul excepting a brother-in-law, with whom I had not a particle of
     communion.

     "In many respects my new master very closely resembled the old one.
     In one particular, however, he differed from him very materially,
     and that was he made a great profession of religion. He believed in
     the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and in the Church of which he was a
     member, but seemed to be utterly ignorant of either the theory or
     practice of experimental godliness. To the spiritual interests of
     the dead world around him he was as indifferent as were the vicious
     crowds themselves whom he so heartily despised. All he seemed to me
     to want was to make money, and all he seemed to want me for was to
     help him in the sordid selfish task.

     "So it was work, work, work, morning, noon, and night. I was
     practically a white slave, being only allowed my liberty on
     Sundays, and an hour or two one night in the week, and even then
     the rule was 'Home by ten o'clock, or the door will be locked
     against you.' This law was rigidly enforced in my case, although my
     employer knew that I travelled long distances preaching the Gospel
     in which he and his wife professed so loudly to believe. To get
     home in time, many a Sunday night I have had to run long distances,
     after walking for miles, and preaching twice during the day."

The contrast between those days and ours can hardly be realised by any
of us now. We may put down almost in figures some of the differences
that steam and electricity have made, linking all mankind together more
closely than Nottingham was then connected with London. But what words
can convey any picture of the development of intelligence and sympathy
that makes an occurrence in a London back street interest the reading
inhabitants of Germany, America, and Australia as intense as those of
our own country?

What a consolation it would have been to the apprentice lad, could he
have known how all his daily drudgery was fitting him to understand, to
comfort, and to help the toiling masses of every race and clime?

In the wonderful providence of God all these changes have been allowed
to leave England in as dominating a position as she held when William
Booth was born, if not to enhance her greatness and power, far as some
may consider beyond what she deserved. And yet all the time, with or
without our choice, our own activities, and even our faults and
neglects, have been helping other peoples, some of them born on our
soil, to become our rivals in everything. Happily the multiplication of
plans of intercourse is now merging the whole human race so much into
one community that one may hope yet to see the dawn of that fraternity
of peoples which may end the present prospects of wars unparalleled in
the past. How very much William Booth has contributed to bring that
universal brotherhood about this book may suffice to hint.




Chapter II

Salvation In Youth



In convincing him that goodness was the only safe passport to peace and
prosperity of any lasting kind, William Booth's mother had happily laid
in the heart of her boy the best foundation for a happy life, "Be good,
William, and then all will be well," she had said to him over and over
again.

But how was he to "be good"? The English National Church, eighty years
ago, had reached a depth of cold formality and uselessness which can
hardly be imagined now. Nowhere was this more manifest than in the
"parish" church. The rich had their allotted pew, a sort of reserved
seat, into which no stranger dare enter, deserted though it might be by
its holders for months together. For the poor, seats were in some
churches placed in the broad aisles or at the back of the pulpit, so
conspicuously marking out the inferiority of all who sat in them as
almost to serve as a notice to every one that the ideas of Jesus Christ
had no place there. Even when an earnest clergyman came to any church,
he had really a battle against great prejudices on both sides if he
wished to make any of "the common people" feel welcome at "common
prayer." But the way the appointed services were "gone through" was only
too often such as to make every one look upon the whole matter as one
which only concerned the clergy. Especially was this the effect on young
people. Anything like interest, or pleasure, in those dull and dreary,
not to say "vain" repetitions on their part must indeed have been rare.

It is not surprising then that William Booth saw nothing to attract him
in the Church of his fathers. John Wesley, that giant reformer of
religion in England, had been dead some forty years, and his life-work
had not been allowed to affect "the Church" very profoundly. His
followers having seceded from it contrary to his orders and entreaties,
had already made several sects, and in the chief of these William Booth
presently found for himself at least a temporary home. Here the services
were, to some extent, independent of books; earnest preaching of the
truth was often heard from the pulpits, and some degree of real concern
for the spiritual advancement of the people was manifested by the
preachers.

Under this preaching and these influences, and the singing of Wesley's
hymns, the lad was deeply moved. To his last days he sang some of those
grand old songs as much as, if not more than, any others; that one, for
example, containing the verse:--

    And can I yet delay my little all to give?
    To tear my soul from earth away, for Jesus to receive?
    Nay, but I yield, I yield! I can hold out no more,
    I sink, by dying love compelled, and own Thee conqueror.

The mind that has never yet come in contact with teaching of this
character can scarcely comprehend the effect of such thoughts on a young
and ardent soul. This Jesus, who gave up Heaven and all that was bright
and pleasant to devote Himself to the world's Salvation, was presented
to him as coming to ask the surrender of his heart and life to His
service, and his heart could not long resist the appeal. It was in no
large congregation, however, but in one of the smaller Meetings that
William Booth made the glorious sacrifice of himself which he had been
made to understand was indispensable to real religion. Speaking some
time ago, he thus described that great change:--

     "When as a giddy youth of fifteen I was led to attend Wesley
     Chapel, Nottingham, I cannot recollect that any individual pressed
     me in the direction of personal surrender to God. I was wrought
     upon quite independently of human effort by the Holy Ghost, who
     created within me a great thirst for a new life.

     "I felt that I wanted, in place of the life of self-indulgence, to
     which I was yielding myself, a happy, conscious sense that I was
     pleasing God, living right, and spending all my powers to get
     others into such a life. I saw that all this ought to be, and I
     decided that it should be. It is wonderful that I should have
     reached this decision in view of all the influences then around me.
     My professedly Christian master never uttered a word to indicate
     that he believed in anything he could not see, and many of my
     companions were worldly and sensual, some of them even vicious.

     "Yet I had that instinctive belief in God which, in common with my
     fellow-creatures, I had brought into the world with me. I had no
     disposition to deny my instincts, which told me that if there was a
     God His laws ought to have my obedience and His interests my
     service.

     "I felt that it was better to live right than to live wrong, and as
     to caring for the interests of others instead of my own, the
     condition of the suffering people around me, people with whom I had
     been so long familiar, and whose agony seemed to reach its climax
     about this time, undoubtedly affected me very deeply.

     "There were children crying for bread to parents whose own distress
     was little less terrible to witness.

     "One feeling specially forced itself upon me, and I can recollect
     it as distinctly as though it had transpired only yesterday, and
     that was the sense of the folly of spending my life in doing things
     for which I knew I must either repent or be punished in the days to
     come.

     "In my anxiety to get into the right way, I joined the Methodist
     Church, and attended the Class Meetings, to sing and pray and speak
     with the rest." (A Class Meeting was the weekly muster of all
     members of the church, who were expected to tell their leader
     something of their soul's condition in answer to his inquiries.)
     "But all the time the inward Light revealed to me that I must not
     only renounce everything I knew to be sinful, but make restitution,
     so far as I had the ability, for any wrong I had done to others
     before I could find peace with God.

     "The entrance to the Heavenly Kingdom was closed against me by an
     evil act of the past which required restitution. In a boyish
     trading affair I had managed to make a profit out of my companions,
     whilst giving them to suppose that what I did was all in the way of
     a generous fellowship. As a testimonial of their gratitude they
     had given me a silver pencil-case. Merely to return their gift
     would have been comparatively easy, but to confess the deception I
     had practised upon them was a humiliation to which for some days I
     could not bring myself.

     "I remember, as if it were but yesterday, the spot in the corner of
     a room under the chapel, the hour, the resolution to end the
     matter, the rising up and rushing forth, the finding of the young
     fellow I had chiefly wronged, the acknowledgment of my sin, the
     return of the pencil-case--the instant rolling away from my heart
     of the guilty burden, the peace that came in its place, and the
     going forth to serve my God and my generation from that hour.

     "It was in the open street that this great change passed over me,
     and if I could only have possessed the flagstone on which I stood
     at that happy moment, the sight of it occasionally might have been
     as useful to me as the stones carried up long ago from the bed of
     the Jordan were to the Israelites who had passed over them
     dry-shod.

     "Since that night, for it was near upon eleven o'clock when the
     happy change was realised, the business of my life has been not
     only to make a holy character but to live a life of loving activity
     in the service of God and man. I have ever felt that true religion
     consists not only in being holy myself, but in assisting my
     Crucified Lord in His work of saving men and women, making them
     into His Soldiers, keeping them faithful to death, and so getting
     them into Heaven.

     "I have had to encounter all sorts of difficulties as I have
     travelled along this road. The world has been against me, sometimes
     very intensely, and often very stupidly. I have had difficulties
     similar to those of other men, with my own bodily appetites, with
     my mental disposition, and with my natural unbelief.

     "Many people, both religious and irreligious, are apt to think that
     they are more unfavourably constituted than their comrades and
     neighbours, and that their circumstances and surroundings are
     peculiarly unfriendly to the discharge of the duties they owe to
     God and man.

     "I have been no exception in this matter. Many a time I have been
     tempted to say to myself, 'There is no one fixed so awkwardly for
     holy living and faithful fighting as I am.' But I have been
     encouraged to resist the delusion by remembering the words of the
     Apostle Paul: 'There hath no temptation taken you but such as is
     common to man.'

     "I am not pretending to say that I have worked harder, or practised
     more self-denial, or endured more hardships at any particular time
     of my life than have those around me; but I do want those who feel
     any interest in me to understand that faithfulness to God in the
     discharge of duty and the maintenance of a good conscience have
     cost me as severe a struggle as they can cost any Salvation Soldier
     in London, Berlin, Paris, New York, or Tokio to-day.

     "One reason for the victory I daily gained from the moment of my
     conversion was, no doubt, my complete and immediate separation from
     the godless world. I turned my back on it. I gave it up, having
     made up my mind beforehand that if I did go in for God I would do
     so with all my might. Rather than yearning for the world's
     pleasures, books, gains, or recreations, I found my new nature
     leading me to come away from it all. It had lost all charm for me.
     What were all the novels, even those of Sir Walter Scott or
     Fenimore Cooper, compared with the story of my Saviour? What were
     the choicest orators compared with Paul? What was the hope of
     money-earning, even with all my desire to help my poor mother and
     sisters, in comparison with the imperishable wealth of ingathered
     souls? I soon began to despise everything the world had to offer
     me.

     "In those days I felt, as I believe many Converts do, that I could
     willingly and joyfully travel to the ends of the earth for Jesus
     Christ, and suffer anything imaginable to help the souls of other
     men. Jesus Christ had baptised me, according to His eternal
     promise, with His Spirit and with Fire.

     "Yet the surroundings of my early life were all in opposition to
     this whole-hearted devotion. No one at first took me by the hand
     and urged me forward, or gave me any instruction or hint likely to
     help me in the difficulties I had at once to encounter in my
     consecration to this service."

This clear experience and teaching of an absolutely new life, that
"eternal life" which Jesus Christ promises to all His true followers, is
indispensable to the right understanding of everything in connexion with
the career we are recording. Without such an experience nothing of what
follows could have been possible. With it the continual resistance to
every contrary teaching and influence, and the strenuous struggle by all
possible means to propagate it are inevitable.

One is amazed at this time of day, to find intelligent men writing as
though there were some mysticism, or something quite beyond ordinary
understanding, in this theory of conversion, or regeneration.

Precisely the process which The General thus describes in his own case
must of necessity follow any thoughtful and prayerful consideration of
the mission and Gospel of Christ. Either we must reject the whole Bible
story or we must admit that "all we like sheep have gone astray," taking
our own course, in contempt of God's wishes. To be convinced of that
must plunge any soul into just such a depth of sorrow and anxiety as
left this lad no rest until he had found peace in submission to his God.
No outside influences or appearances can either produce or be
substituted for the deep, inward resolve of the wandering soul, "I will
arise, and go to my Father." Whether that decision be come to in some
crowded Meeting, or in the loneliness of some midnight hour is quite
unimportant. But how can there be true repentance, or the beginning of
reconciliation with God, until that point is reached?

And whenever that returning to God takes place, there is the same
abundant pardon, the same change of heart, the same new birth, which has
here been described. What can be more simple and matter of fact? Take
away the need and possibility of such "conversion," and this whole life
becomes a delusion, and the proclamation of Jesus Christ as a Saviour of
men inexcusable. What has created any mystery around the question
amongst Christians, if not the sacramental theory, which more or less
contradicts it all? In almost all Christian Churches a theory is set up
that a baby by some ceremonial act becomes suddenly regenerated, "made a
child of God, and an heir of His Kingdom."

If that were the case, there could, of course, have been no need for the
later regeneration of that child; but I do not believe that an
ecclesiastic could be found, from the Vatican to the most remote
island-parish where children are "christened," who would profess to have
seen such a regenerated child alive. There is notoriously no such change
accomplished in any one, until the individual himself, convinced of his
own godless condition, cries to God for His Salvation, and receives that
great gift.

What a foundation for life was the certainty which that lad got as he
knelt in that little room in Nottingham! Into that same "full assurance"
he was later on to lead many millions--young and old--of many lands. The
simple Army verse:--

    I know thy sins are all forgiven,
      Glory to the Bleeding Lamb!
    And I am on my way to Heaven,
      Glory to the Bleeding Lamb!

embalms for ever that grand starting-point of the soul, from which our
people have been able, in ignorance of almost everything else of Divine
truth, to commence a career of holy living, and of loving effort for the
souls of others.

How much more weight those few words carry than the most eloquent
address bereft of that certainty of tone could ever have!

That certainty which rests not upon any study of books, even of the
Bible itself, but upon the soul's own believing vision of the Lamb of
God who has taken its sins away; that certainty which changes in a
moment the prison darkness of the sin-chained into the light and joy and
power of the liberated slave of Christ; that is the great conquest of
the Salvation Soldier everywhere.

And yet, perhaps, in the eyes of an unbelieving world, and a doubting
Church, that was General Booth's great offence all through life. To
think of having uneducated and formerly godless people "bawling" the
"mysteries of the faith" through the streets of "Christian" cities,
where it had hitherto been thought inconsistent with Christian humility
for any one to dare to say they really knew Him "whom to know is life
eternal"! Oh, that was the root objection to all The General's preaching
and action.

And it was one of the most valuable features of his whole career that
wherever he or his messengers went there came that same certainty which
from the days of Bethlehem onwards Jesus Christ came to bring to every
man.

"By faith we know!" If every outward manifestation of The General's
successes could be swept off the world to-morrow, this positive faith in
the one Saviour would be capable of reproducing all its blessed results
over again, wherever it was preserved, or renewed. Any so-called faith
which gives no certainty must needs be hustled out of the way of an
investigating, hurrying, wealth-seeking age. Only those who are certain
that they have found the Lord can be capable of inducing others to seek
and find Him.




Chapter III

Lay Ministry



Convictions such as we have just been reading of were bound to lead to
immediate action. But it is most interesting to find that William
Booth's first regular service for Christ was not called forth by any
church, but simply by the spontaneous efforts of one or two young
Converts like himself. No one could be more inclined towards the use of
organisation and system than he always was, and yet he always advocated
an organisation so open to all, and a system so elastic, that zeal might
never be repressed, but only made the most of. It is, perhaps, fortunate
that we have in one of his addresses to his own young Officers the
following description of the way he began to work for the Salvation of
his fellow-townsmen:--

     "Directly after my conversion I had a bad attack of fever, and was
     brought to the very edge of the grave. But God raised me up, and
     led me out to work for Him, after a fashion which, considering my
     youth and inexperience, must be pronounced remarkable. While
     recovering from this illness, which left me far from strong, I
     received a note from a companion, Will Sansom, asking me to make
     haste and get well again, and help him in a Mission he had started
     in a slum part of the town. No sooner was I able to get about than
     I gladly joined him.

     "The Meetings we held were very remarkable for those days. We used
     to take out a chair into the street, and one of us mounting it
     would give out a hymn, which we then sang with the help of, at the
     most, three or four people. Then I would talk to the people, and
     invite them to come with us to a Meeting in one of the houses.

     "How I worked in those days! Remember that I was only an apprentice
     lad of fifteen or sixteen. I used to leave business at 7 o'clock,
     or soon after, and go visiting the sick, then these street
     Meetings, and afterwards to some Meeting in a cottage, where we
     would often get some one saved. After the Meeting I would often go
     to see some dying person, arriving home about midnight to rest all
     I could before rising next morning in time to reach my place of
     business at 7 A.M. That was sharp exercise! How I can remember
     rushing along the streets during my forty minutes' dinner-time,
     reading the Bible or C. G. Finney's _Lectures on Revivals of
     Religion_ as I went, careful, too, not to be a minute late. And at
     this time I was far from strong physically; but full of
     difficulties as those days were, they were nevertheless wonderful
     seasons of blessing, and left pleasant memories that endure to this
     hour.

     "The leading men of the church to which I belonged were afraid I
     was going too fast, and gave me plenty of cautions, quaking and
     fearing at my every new departure; but none gave me a word of
     encouragement. And yet the Society of which for those six
     apprentice years I was a faithful member, was literally my heaven
     on earth. Truly, I thought then there was one God, that John Wesley
     was His prophet, and that the Methodists were His special people.
     The church was at the time, I believe, one thousand members strong.
     Much as I loved them, however, I mingled but little with them, and
     had time for but few of their great gatherings, having chosen the
     Meadow Platts as my parish, because my heart then as now went out
     after the poorest of the poor.

     "Thus my conversion made me, in a moment, a preacher of the Gospel.
     The idea never dawned on me that any line was to be drawn between
     one who had nothing else to do but preach and a saved apprentice
     lad who only wanted 'to spread through all the earth abroad,' as we
     used to sing, the fame of our Saviour. I have lived, thank God, to
     witness the separation between layman and cleric become more and
     more obscured, and to see Jesus Christ's idea of changing in a
     moment ignorant fishermen into fishers of men nearer and nearer
     realisation.

     "But I had to battle for ten of the best years of my youth against
     the barriers the Churches set up to prevent this natural following
     of the Lamb wherever He leads. At that time they all but compelled
     those who wished to minister to the souls of men to speak in
     unnatural language and tones, and adopt habits of mind and life
     which so completely separated them from the crowd as to make them
     into a sort of princely caste, whom the masses of every clime
     outwardly reverenced and inwardly despised.

     "Lad though I was, a group of new Converts and other earnest souls
     soon gathered around me, and greater things seemed to be ahead when
     a great trial overtook me. The bosom friend already referred to was
     taken from my side. We had been like David and Jonathan in the
     intensity of our union and fellowship in our work for God. He had a
     fine appearance, was a beautiful singer, and possessed a wonderful
     gift in prayer. After I had spoken in our Open-Air Meeting he would
     kneel down and wrestle with God until it seemed as though he would
     move the very stones on which he knelt, as well as the hearts of
     the people who heard him. Of how few of those men called ministers
     or priests can anything like this be said!

     "But the unexpected blow came. He fell into consumption. His
     relations carried him up and down the country for change of air and
     scene. All was done that could be done to save his life, but in
     vain. The last change was to the Isle of Wight. In that lovely spot
     the final hope fled. I remember their bringing him home to die. He
     bade farewell to earth, and went triumphantly to Heaven singing--

        And when to Jordan's flood I come,
          Jehovah rules the tide,
          And the waters He'll divide,
        And the heavenly host will shout--
              "Welcome Home!"

     "What a trial that loss was to my young heart! It was rendered all
     the greater from the fact that I had to go forward all alone in
     face of an opposition which suddenly sprang up from the leading
     functionaries of the church."

The consecration which William Booth made of himself to this work, with
all the zeal and novelty with which it was characterised, was due, no
doubt, to the teaching, influence, and example of James Caughey, a
remarkable American minister who visited the town. Largely free from
European opinions and customs in religious matters, and seeking only to
advance the cause of Jesus Christ with all possible speed, this man to a
very large extent liberated William Booth for life from any one set of
plans, and led him towards that perfect faith in God's guidance which
made him capable of new departures to any extent.

The old-fashioned representatives of officialdom grumbled in vain at
novelties which have now become accepted necessities of all mission
work.

     "But just about this time," The General has told us, "another
     difficulty started across my path in connexion with my business. I
     have told you how intense had been the action of my conscience
     before my conversion. But after my conversion it was naturally ever
     increasingly sensitive to every question of right and wrong, with a
     great preponderance as to the importance of what was right over
     what was wrong. Ever since that day it has led me to measure my own
     actions, and judge my own character by the standard of truth set up
     in my soul by the Bible and the Holy Ghost; and it has not
     permitted me to allow myself in the doing of things which I have
     felt were wrong without great inward torture. I have always had a
     great horror of hypocrisy--that is, of being unreal or false,
     however fashionable the cursed thing might be, or whatever worldly
     temptation might strive to lead me on to the track. In this I was
     tested again and again in those early days, and at last there came
     a crisis.

     "Our business was a large one and the assistants were none too
     many. On Saturdays there was always great pressure. Work often
     continued into the early hours of Sunday. Now I had strong notions
     in my youth and for long after--indeed, I entertain them now--about
     the great importance of keeping the Sunday, or Sabbath as we always
     called it, clear of unnecessary work.

     "For instance, I walked in my young days thousands of miles on the
     Sabbath, when I could for a trifling sum have ridden at ease,
     rather than use any compulsory labour of man or beast for the
     promotion of my comfort. I still think we ought to abstain from all
     unnecessary work ourselves, and, as far as possible, arrange for
     everybody about us to have one day's rest in seven. But, as I was
     saying, I objected to working at my business on the Sabbath, which
     I interpreted to mean after twelve o'clock on Saturday night. My
     relatives and many of my religious friends laughed at my scruples;
     but I paid no heed to them, and told my master I would not do it,
     though he replied that if that were so he would simply discharge
     me. I told him I was willing to begin on Monday morning as soon as
     the clock struck twelve, and work until the clock struck twelve on
     Saturday night, but that not one hour or one minute of Sunday would
     I work for him or all his money.

     "He kept his word, put me into the street, and I was laughed at by
     everybody as a sort of fool. But I held out, and within seven days
     he gave in, and, thinking my scrupulous conscience might serve his
     turn he told me to come back again. I did so, and before another
     fortnight had passed he went off with his young wife to Paris,
     leaving the responsibilities of a business involving the income and
     expenditure of hundreds of pounds weekly on my young shoulders.

     "So I did not lose by that transaction in any way. With no little
     suffering on four separate occasions, contrary to the judgments of
     all around me, I have thus left every friend I had in the world,
     and gone straight into what appeared positive ruin, so far as this
     world was concerned, to meet the demands of conscience. But I have
     trusted God, and done the right, and in every separate instance I
     can now see that I have gained both for this world and the next as
     the result.

     "During all the period of my lay preaching, both in Nottingham and
     London, I had to grapple with other difficulties. What with one
     thing and another I had a great struggle at times to keep my head
     above the waters, and my heart alive with peace and love. But I
     held on to God and His grace, and the never-failing joy that I
     experienced in leading souls to Christ carried me through."

How can anybody fail to see how much more the masses are likely to be
influenced by the preaching, no matter how defective oratorically, of
one who has thus lived in the midst of them--living, in fact, their very
life of anxiety, suffering, and toil--than by that of men, however
excellent, who come to them with the atmosphere of the study, the
college, or the seminary?

And yet, after having been trained for a year in the rough-and-ready
oratory of the streets, subject to interruptions and interjected sneers,
The General was called upon, in order to be recognised as fit for
registration as a lay preacher, to mount the pulpit and preach a "trial
sermon"! Accustomed as he had become to talk out his heart with such
words and illustrations as involuntarily presented themselves to the
simple-minded, though often wicked and always ignorant crowds, who
gathered around the chair on which he stood; able without difficulty to
hold their attention when he had won it, and drive the truth home to
their souls, in spite of the counter-attractions of a busy thoroughfare,
he took very hardly to the stiff, cold process of sermonising and
sermon-making such as was then in vogue, and it was some time before he
had much liberty or made much progress in the business.

Still, in due time he was passed, first as a lay "preacher on trial,"
and later called as fully qualified to preach at any chapel in the
district--this latter after a second year's activities and a "second
trial sermon."

When he once got on to this sermon-making line he took the best models
he could find--men like John Wesley, George Whitefield, and, above all,
C. G. Finney, who he could be certain had never sought in their
preaching for human applause, but for the glory of God and the good of
souls alone.

In the Psalms, as in the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, we have
the most unmistakable guidance upon this subject, showing it to have
been God's purpose so to pour out His Spirit upon all flesh that all His
people should be true prophets--not all, of course, of the same calibre
or style, but all capable of warning and teaching, in all wisdom, every
one whom they could reach.

The work of the ministry is another thing altogether. Let no one suppose
that The Salvation Army at all underrates the "separation" unto His work
of those whom God has chosen for entire devotion to some task, whatever
it be. As to those whom we take away from their secular calling to
become our Officers, I will only say here that we judge of their fitness
not alone by their ability to speak, but by their having proved
themselves to be so devoted to the poor that we can rely upon their
readiness to act as servants of the very neediest in any way that lies
within their power. Only two persons at each of our Stations, the
Officers actually in command, receive any payment whatever from The
Army. All the others associated with us, many of them wearing our
uniform and holding some particular office, give freely their
leisure-time and money to the work, and may be spoken of as "lay
preachers."

Our young "local preacher" generally spent his Sundays in some distant
village where he had been appointed to preach, just as is the case in
these days with thousands of our Soldiers.

     "My homeward walk, often alone through the dark, muddy fields and
     lanes," he tells us, "would be enlivened by snatches of the songs
     we had been singing in our Meetings, and late into the night people
     might have heard my solitary prayers and praises. 'Don't sit up
     singing till twelve o'clock after a hard day's work,' was one of
     the first needed pieces of practical advice I got from my best
     adviser of later years."

     "But we never felt we could have too much of God's service and
     praise, and scarcely regarded the grave itself as a terminus for
     our usefulness; for in the case of a girl who had attended our
     Cottage Meetings, and who had died of consumption, we lads
     organised something very like one of our present-day Salvation Army
     Funerals.

     "Having ministered to the poor girl's necessities during her
     sickness, comforted her in her last hours of pain, sung hymns of
     triumph round her bed as her spirit took its passage to the skies,
     we had the right, as her only friends, to order her funeral, and we
     resolved to make the most of it for the good of her neighbours.

     "Although it was in the depth of winter, and snow lay thick on the
     ground, we brought the coffin out into the street, sang and prayed
     around it, and urged the few neighbours who stood shivering by, or
     listening at their doors and windows, to prepare for their dying
     day. We then processioned to the Cholera Burial Ground, as the
     cemetery in which the poorest of Nottingham were buried was called,
     obtaining permission from the Chaplain to hold another little
     Meeting by the grave-side, after he had read the ordinary Service.
     I cannot but feel that the hand of God was upon me in those days,
     teaching me how much lay preachers could do."

How wonderful that the lad who did all that in the teeth of religious
convention and opinion should have lived to organise just such battles
and just such funerals all round the world, and to train hundreds of
thousands of Soldiers of Christ to do likewise! What a termination to
his own career he was preparing all the time, when the City of London
was to suspend the traffic of many of its busiest thoroughfares for
hours to let his coffin pass through with a procession of his uniformed
Soldiers a mile long!

With regard to the question of a "Call to the ministry," that bugbear of
so many souls, The General constantly expressed himself as follows:--

     "How can anybody with spiritual eyesight talk of having no call,
     when there are such multitudes around them who never hear a word
     about God, and never intend to; who can never hear, indeed, without
     the sort of preacher who will force himself upon them? Can a man
     keep right in his own soul, who can see all that, and yet stand
     waiting for a 'call' to preach? Would they wait so for a 'call' to
     help any one to escape from a burning building, or to snatch a
     sinking child from a watery grave?

     "Does not growth in grace, or even ordinary growth of intelligence,
     necessarily bring with it that deepened sense of eternal truths
     which must intensify the conviction of duty to the perishing world?

     "Does not an unselfish love, the love that goes out towards the
     unloving, demand of a truly loving soul immediate action for the
     Salvation of the unloved?"

     "And, are there not persons who know that they possess special
     gifts, such as robust health, natural eloquence or power of voice,
     which specially make them responsible for doing something for
     souls?

     "And yet I do not at all forget, that above and beyond all these
     things, there does come to some a special and direct call, which it
     is peculiarly fatal to disregard, and peculiarly strengthening to
     enjoy and act upon.

     "I believe that there have been many eminently holy and useful men
     who never had such a call; but that does not at all prevent any one
     from asking God for it, or blessing Him for His special kindness
     when He gives it."

There is, I think, no doubt that God did give to young William Booth
such a call, although he never spoke of it, perhaps lest he might
discourage any who, without enjoying any such manifestation, acted upon
the principles just referred to. At any rate, he battled through any
season of doubt he had with regard to it, and came out into a certainty
that left him no room for question or fear.




Chapter IV

Early Ministry



We cannot wonder that God Himself rarely seems to find it wise, even if
it be possible, to fit men for His most important enterprises in a few
years, or by means of one simple process of instruction. Consider the
diversity of men's minds and lives, and the varying currents of thought
and opinion which are found in the various parts of the world at
different periods of even one century, and it will at once be seen how
impossible we should all immediately pronounce it to fit one man by
means of one pathway of service to be the minister and leader of the
followers of Christ in every part of the world.

Christ Himself was kept in an obscurity we cannot penetrate for thirty
years before He was made known to the comparatively small people amongst
whom all His time on earth was to be spent. Moses was not called till he
was eighty years old, having spent forty years amidst the splendours of
one of the grandest courts of the ancient world, and forty more amidst
the sheep on a desert border!

How was the ardent English lad who came to serve in a London shop during
the week, and to do the work of a lay preacher on Sundays, to be fitted
to form and lead a great Christian Order of devotees out of every
nation, and to instruct and direct them in helping their fellow-men of
every race in every necessity that could arise? To prepare a man merely
to preach the Gospel a few years of service in that work might suffice;
but then we should probably have seen a man merely interested in the
numbers of his own audiences and the effect produced upon them by his
own preaching.

For William Booth a much more tedious and roundabout journey was needed.
He must first of all preach his way up from the counter to the pulpit,
and he must then have twenty years of varied experiences in ministerial
service amongst widely differing Churches, before he could be fit to
take up his appointed place, outside all the Churches, to raise from
amongst every class a new force for the exaltation of Christ amongst all
men.

For so great a work he must needs have a helpmeet, and he was to find
her when she was still physically as weak and unlikely for the great
task as he was, and as entirely severed from all existing organisations.
Catherine Mumford, like himself, innocent of any unkind feeling towards
her Church, had been excluded from it, simply because she would not
pledge herself to keep entirely away from the Reform party.

Unable really at the time to do more than teach a class in the Sunday
School, and occasionally visit a sick person, she nevertheless, by the
fervour of her action, made herself a power that was felt, and threw all
her influence on the side of any whole-hearted religious or temperance
effort. The anxiety of both these two young people not to allow any
thought for their own happiness to interfere with their duty to God and
to their fellows delayed their marriage for years; and when they did
marry it was with the perfect resolve on both sides to make everything
in their own life and home subordinate to the great work to which they
had given themselves.

[Illustration: CATHERINE BOOTH

Born January 17th, 1829. Died October 4th, 1890.]

Neither of them at the time dreamed of Mrs. Booth's speaking in public,
much less that they were together to become the liberators of woman from
the silence imposed on her by almost every organisation of Christ's
followers. Having known both of them intimately during the years in
which The Salvation Army was being formed, I can positively contradict
the absurdly exaggerated statement that The General would have had
little or no success in life but for the talents and attractive ministry
of Mrs. Booth. She was a helpmeet in the most perfect sense, never, even
when herself reduced to illness and helplessness, desiring to absorb
either time or attention that he could give to the great War in which
she always encouraged him as no other ever could. Remaining to her
latest hour a woman of the tenderest and most modest character, she
shrank from public duty, and merely submitted so far as she felt
"constrained," for Christ's sake, to association with anything that she
was convinced ought to be done to gain the ears of men for the Gospel,
however contrary it might be to her own tastes and wishes. Perhaps her
most valuable contribution to the construction of The General's life was
her ability to explain to him opinions and tastes differing widely from
his own, and to sustain and defend his general defiance of the usual
traditions and customs of "society."

His own feelings about it all he has described in these words:--

     "The sensations of a new-comer to London from the country, are
     always somewhat disagreeable, if he comes to work. The immensity of
     the city must especially strike him as he crosses it for the first
     time and passes through its different areas. The general turn-out
     into a few great thoroughfares, on Saturday nights especially,
     gives a sensation of enormous bulk. The manifest poverty of so many
     in the most populous streets must appeal to any heart. The language
     of the drinking crowds must needs give a rather worse than a true
     impression of all.

     "The crowding pressure and activity of so many must almost oppress
     one not accustomed to it. The number of public-houses, theatres,
     and music-halls must give a young enthusiast for Christ a sickening
     impression. The enormous number of hawkers must also have given a
     rather exaggerated idea of the poverty and cupidity which
     nevertheless prevailed. The Churches in those days gave the very
     uttermost idea of spiritual death and blindness to the existing
     condition of things; at that time very few of them were open more
     than one evening per week. There were no Young Men's or Young
     Women's Christian Associations, no P.S.A.'s, no Brotherhoods, no
     Central Missions, no extra effort to attract the attention of the
     godless crowds; for miles there was not an announcement of anything
     special in the religious line to be seen.

     "To any one who cared to enter the places of worship, their
     deathly contrast with the streets was even worse. The absence of
     week-night services must have made any stranger despair of finding
     even society or diversion. A Methodist sufficiently in earnest to
     get inside to the 'class' would find a handful of people reluctant
     to bear any witness to the power of God.

     "Despite the many novelties introduced since those days, the
     activities of the world being so much greater, the contrast must
     look even more striking in our own time."

Imagine a young man accustomed to daily labour for the poor, coming into
such a world as that!

Thought about what they sang and said in the private gatherings of the
Methodist Societies could only deepen and intensify the feeling of
monstrosity. They sang frequently:--

    He taught me how to watch and pray,
    And live rejoicing every day.

But where were the rejoicing people? Where was there indeed anybody who,
either in or out of a religious service, dared to express his joy in the
Lord--or wished to express anything. It was as if religious societies
had become wet blankets to suppress any approach to a hearty expression
of religious faith. Nevertheless, by God's grace, it all worked in this
case not to crush but to infuriate and stir the new-comer to action.

Preaching, under such circumstances, was a relief to such a soul, and
necessarily became more and more desperate.

One hearing of William Booth was enough for Mr. Rabbits, a practical,
go-ahead man, who had raised up out of the old-fashioned little business
of his forefathers one of the great "stores" of London, and who longed
to see the same sort of development take place in connexion with the
old-fashioned, perfectly correct, and yet all but lifeless institutions
that professed to represent Jesus Christ the Saviour of the world. His
sense of the contrast between this preacher and others whom he knew was
proportionately rapid and acute. The effects produced on hearers were
the same at every turn.

This living preaching was and is a perfect fit with all the rush of the
world outside, and the helplessness of the poor souls around.

William Booth was, as we have seen, only seventeen when he was fully
recognised as a preacher of the Gospel according to the custom of the
Methodist Churches, and at nineteen his minister urged him to give up
his life to the ministry. At that time, however, he felt himself too
weak physically for a ministerial career, and in this view his doctor
concurred. So determined was he to accomplish his purpose, however, that
he begged the doctor not to express his opinion to the minister, but to
allow the matter to stand over for a year. Unless a man with a nervous
system like his was "framed like a bullock," and had "a chest like a
prize-fighter," he would break down, said the physician, and seeing that
he was not so built, he would be "done for" in twelve months. The doctor
went to the grave very soon afterwards, whereas The General continued
preaching for over sixty years after that pronouncement.

At this period, some of the Wesleyans who were discontented with their
leaders in London broke into revolt, and there was so much bitter
feeling on both sides, that the main object of John Wesley--the
exaltation of Christ for the Salvation of men--was for the moment almost
lost sight of.

Mr. Booth joined with the most earnest people he could find; but though
they gave him opportunity to hold Meetings, he wrote to one of his old
associates:--

     "How are you going on? I wish I knew you were happy, living to God
     and working for Jesus.

     "I preached on Sabbath last to a respectable but dull and lifeless
     congregation. Notwithstanding this I had liberty in both prayer and
     preaching. I had not any one to say 'Amen' or 'Praise the Lord'
     during the whole of the service. I want some of you here with me in
     the Prayer Meetings, and then we should carry all before us."

Thus we see emerging from the obscurity of a poor home a conqueror,
fired with one ambition, out of harmony with every then existing
Christian organisation, because of that strange old feeling, so often
expressed in the Psalms of David, that the praises of God ought to be
heard from all men's lips alike, and that everything else ought to give
way to His will and His pleasure.

In speaking to his Officers later on he said:--

     "When the great separation from the Wesleyan Church took place, Mr.
     Rabbits said to me one day: 'You must leave business, and wholly
     devote yourself to preaching the Gospel.'

     "'Impossible,' I answered. 'There is no way for me. Nobody wants
     me.' 'Yes,' said he, 'the people with whom you have allied yourself
     want an evangelist.'

     "'They cannot support me,' I replied; 'and I cannot live on air.'

     "'That is true, no doubt,' was his answer. 'How much can you live
     on?'

     "I reckoned up carefully. I knew I should have to provide my own
     quarters and to pay for my cooking; and as to the living itself, I
     did not understand in those days how this could be managed in as
     cheap a fashion as I do now. After a careful calculation, I told
     him that I did not see how I could get along with less than twelve
     shillings a week.

     "'Nonsense,' he said; 'you cannot do with less than twenty
     shillings a week, I am sure.'

     "'All right,' I said, 'have it your own way, if you will; but where
     is the twenty shillings to come from?'

     "'I will supply it,' he said, 'for the first three months at
     least.'

     "'Very good,' I answered. And the bargain was struck there and
     then.

     "I at once gave notice to my master, who was very angry, and said,
     'If it is money you want, that need not part us.' I told him that
     money had nothing to do with the question, that all I wanted was
     the opportunity to spend my life and powers in publishing the
     Saviour to a lost world. And so I packed my portmanteau, and went
     out to begin a new life.

     "My first need was some place to lay my head. After a little time
     spent in the search, I found quarters in the Walworth district,
     where I expected to work, and took two rooms in the house of a
     widow at five shillings a week, with attendance. This I reckoned at
     the time was a pretty good bargain. I then went to a furniture
     shop, and bought some chairs and a bed, and a few other
     necessaries. I felt quite set up. It was my birthday, a Good
     Friday, and on the same day I fell in love with my future wife.

     "But the people would have nothing to do with me. They 'did not
     want a parson.' They reckoned they were all parsons, so that at the
     end of the three months' engagement the weekly income came to an
     end; and, indeed, I would not have renewed the engagement on any
     terms. There was nothing for me to do but to sell my furniture and
     live on the proceeds, which did not supply me for a very long time.
     I declare to you that at that time I was so fixed as not to know
     which way to turn.

     "In my emergency a remarkable way opened for me to enter college
     and become a Congregational minister. But after long waiting,
     several examinations, trial sermons and the like, I was informed
     that on the completion of my training I should be expected to
     believe and preach what is known as Calvinism. After reading a book
     which fully explained the doctrine, I threw it at the wall opposite
     me, and said I would sooner starve than preach such doctrine, one
     special feature of which was that only a select few could be
     saved.[A]

     "My little stock of money was exhausted. I remember that I gave the
     last sixpence I had in the world to a poor woman whose daughter lay
     dying; but within a week I received a letter inviting me to the
     charge of a Methodist Circuit in Lincolnshire, and from that
     moment my difficulties of that kind became much less serious.

     "The Spalding people welcomed me as though I had been an angel from
     Heaven, providing me with every earthly blessing within their
     ability, and proposing that I should stay with them for ever. They
     wanted me to marry right away, offered to furnish me a house,
     provide me with a horse to enable me more readily to get about the
     country, and proposed other things that they thought would please
     me.

     "With them I spent perhaps the happiest eighteen months of my life.
     Of course my horizon was much more limited in those days than it is
     now, and consequently required less to fill it.

     "Although I was only twenty-three years of age and Lincolnshire was
     one of the counties that had been most privileged with able
     Methodist preaching for half a century before, and I had to
     immediately follow in Spalding a somewhat renowned minister, God
     helped me very wonderfully to make myself at home, and become a
     power amongst the people.

     "I felt some nervousness when on my first November Sunday I was
     confronted by such a large congregation as greeted me. In the
     morning I had very little liberty; but good was done, as I
     afterwards learned. In the afternoon we had a Prayer, or
     After-Meeting, at which one young woman wept bitterly. I urged her
     to come to the communion rail at night. She did so, and the Lord
     saved her. She afterwards sent me a letter thanking me for urging
     her to come out. In the evening I had great liberty, and fourteen
     men and women came to the communion rail; many, if not all, finding
     the Saviour.

     "On the Monday I preached there again. Four came forward, three of
     whom professed to find Salvation. I exerted myself very much, felt
     very deeply, and prayed very earnestly over an old man who had been
     a backslider for seven years. He wept bitterly, and prayed to the
     Lord to save him, if He could wash a heart as black as Hell. By
     exerting myself so much I made myself very ill, and was confined to
     the house during the rest of the week. My host and hostess were
     very kind to me.

     "The next Sunday I started from home rather unwell. I had to go to
     Donnington, some miles away, in the morning and evening, and to
     Swineshead Bridge in the afternoon.

     "But at night God helped me to preach in such a way that many came
     out, and fourteen names were taken of those who really seemed
     satisfactory. It was, indeed, a melting, moving time.

     "I was kneeling, talking to a Penitent, when somebody touched me on
     the shoulder, and said, 'Here is a lady who has come to seek
     Salvation. Her son came to hear you at Spalding, and was induced to
     seek the Saviour, and now she has come to hear you, and she wants
     Salvation, too." The Lord had mercy upon her, and she went away
     rejoicing.

     "At Swineshead Bridge--the very name gives some idea of the utterly
     rural character of the population--I was to preach on three
     successive evenings, in the hope of promoting a Revival there. Many
     things seemed to be against the project; but the Lord was for us.
     Two people came out on the Monday evening, and God saved them both.
     This raised our faith and cheered our spirits, especially as we
     knew that several more souls were in distress.

     "On the Tuesday the congregation was better. The news had spread
     that the Lord was saving, and that seldom fails to bring a crowd
     wherever it may be. That evening the word was with power, and six
     souls cried for mercy. At the earnest solicitations of the people,
     I decided to stay the remainder of the week, and urged them to pray
     earnestly, with the result that many more sought and found
     Salvation, and the little Society was nearly doubled.

     "On the Saturday, just before I started home on the omnibus, a
     plain, unsophisticated Christian came and said, 'O sir, let me have
     hold of your hand.' When he had seized it between both his, with
     tears streaming down his face, he said, 'Glory be to God that ever
     you came here. My wife before her conversion was a cruel
     persecutor, and a sharp thorn in my side. She would go home from
     the Prayer Meeting before me, and as full of the Devil as possible;
     she would oppose and revile me; but now, sir, she is just the
     contrary, and my house, instead of being a little Hell has become a
     little Paradise.' This was only one of a number of cases in which
     husbands rejoiced over wives, and wives over husbands, for whom
     they had long prayed, being saved.

     "I shall always remember with pleasure the week I spent at
     Swineshead Bridge, because I prayed more and preached with more of
     the spirit of expectation and faith, and then saw more success
     than in any previous week of my life. I dwell upon it as, perhaps,
     the week which most effectually settled my conviction for ever that
     it was God's purpose by my using the simplest means to bring souls
     into liberty, and to break into the cold and formal state of things
     to which His people only too readily settle down."

For the sake of readers who have never seen Meetings such as The General
for so many years conducted, it seems at once necessary to explain what
is meant by the terms "seeking mercy" or "Salvation," the "cries for
mercy," and, above all, the "Mercy-Seat," or "Penitent-Form," which
appear so constantly in all reports of his work.

From the first beginnings of his Cottage Meetings as a lad in
Nottingham, he always aimed at leading every sinner to repentance, and
he always required that repentance should be openly manifested by the
Penitent coming out in the presence of others, to kneel before God, to
confess to Him, and to seek His pardon.

This is merely in accordance with the ancient customs practised by the
Jews in their Temple, to which practice Jesus Christ so strikingly calls
attention in His Parable of the Publican, who cried, "God be merciful to
me a sinner." The Psalms of David abound with just such cries for
deliverance, and with declarations that God heard and answered all those
who so cried to Him in the anguish of their guilt.

The General was never blind to the fact that open acts of contrition
like this may be feigned, or produced by a mere passing excitement; but
having seen so much of the indifference with which men generally
continue in sin, even when they admit their consciousness of guilt and
danger, he always thought the risk of undue excitement, or too hasty
action, comparatively small.

The "Penitent-Form" of The Salvation Army is simply a form or a row of
seats, immediately in front of the platform, at which all who wish to
seek Salvation are invited to kneel, as a public demonstration of their
resolution to abandon their sins, and to live henceforth to please God.
Those who kneel there are urged to pray for God's forgiveness, and when
they believe that He does forgive them to thank Him for doing so. Whilst
kneeling there they are spoken to by persons who, having passed through
the same experience, can point out to them the evils and dangers they
must henceforth avoid, and the first duties which a true repentance must
demand of them.

There are many cases, for example, in which the Penitent is urged to
give up at once some worldly habit or companionship, or to make
confession of, and restitution for, some wrong done to others. An
Officer or Soldier accompanies the Penitent to his home or to his
employer, should such a course appear likely to help him to effect any
reconciliation, or take any other step to which his conscience calls
him. The names and addresses of all Penitents are recorded, so that they
may be afterwards visited and helped to carry out the promises they have
made to God.

For convenience' sake, in very large Meetings, such as those The General
himself held, where hundreds at a time come to the Penitent-Form, a room
called the Registration Room is used for the making of the necessary
inquiries and records. In this room those who decide to join The Army
have a small piece of ribbon of The Army's colours at once attached to
their coats. But this Registration Room must in no way be confused with
an "Inquiry Room," where seeking souls can go aside unseen. The General
was always extremely opposed to the use of any plan other than that of
the Penitent-Form, lest there should be any distinction made between one
class and another, or an easier path contrived for those who wish to
avoid a bold avowal of Christ.

And he always refused to allow any such use of the Bible in connexion
with Penitents as has been usual in Inquiry Rooms, where the people have
been taught that if they only believed the words of some text, all would
be well with them. The faith to which The General desired all who came
to the Penitent-Form to be led is not the mere belief of some statement,
but that confidence in God's faithfulness to all His promises, which
brings peace to the soul.

Nothing could be more unjust than the representation that by the use of
the Penitent-Form an attempt is made to work up excitement, or emotion.
Experience has proved, everywhere, that nothing tends so rapidly to
allay the painful anxiety of a soul, hesitating before the great
decision, as the opportunity to take at once, and publicly, a decisive
step. We often sing:--

    Only a step, only a step,
    Why not take it now?
    Come, and thy sins confessing,
    Thou shalt receive a blessing;
    Do not reject the mercy
    So freely offered thee.

But the Penitent-Form is no modern invention, nor can it be claimed as
the speciality of any set of religionists. Even heathen people in past
ages have provided similar opportunities for those who felt a special
need either to thank their God for blessings received, or to seek His
help in any specific case, to come forward in an open way, and confess
their wants, their confidence, or their gratitude, at some altar or
shrine.

Shame upon us all that objection should ever be made to equally public
avowals of penitence, of submission, of faith, or of devotion to the
Saviour of the world. The General, at any rate, never wavered in
demanding the most speedy and decisive action of this kind, and he
probably led more souls to the Penitent-Form than any man who has ever
lived.

In Germany especially it has frequently been objected that the soul
which is "compelled" to take a certain course has in that very fact
manifested a debased and partly-destroyed condition, and that nothing
can excuse the organisation of methods of compulsion. With any such
theory one could not but have considerable sympathy, were it not for the
undeniable fact that almost all "civilised" people are perpetually under
the extreme pressure of society around them, which is opposed to
prayer, or to any movement of the soul in that direction.

To check and overcome that very palpable compulsion on the wrong side,
the most desperate action of God's servants in all ages has never been
found strong enough. Hence there has come about another sort of
compulsion, within the souls of all God's messengers. It could not but
be more agreeable to flesh and blood if the minds of men could more
easily be induced to turn from the things that are seen to those which
are invisible. But this has never yet been the case. Hence all who
really hear God's voice cannot but become alarmed as to the manifest
danger that His warnings may remain entirely unheeded. When once any
soul is truly enlightened, it cannot but put forth every devisable
effort to compel the attention of others.

The Army is only the complete organisation of such efforts for permanent
efficiency. We may have had to use more extreme methods than many before
us, because, unlike those who are the publicly recognised advocates of
Christ, we have, in the first instance, no regular hearers at all, and
have generally only the ear of the people so long as we can retain it,
against a hundred competitions. And yet, to those who live near enough
to notice it, the exercise of force by means of church steeples and
bells is far more violent, all the year round, than the utmost attack of
the average Corps upon some few occasions.

Who complains of the compulsion of railway servants, who by bell, flag,
and whistle, glaring announcements, or in any other way, urge desiring
passengers to get into their train, before it is too late? Wherever a
true faith in the Gospel exists, The General's organisation of
compulsory plans for the Salvation of souls will not only be approved,
but regarded as one of the great glories of his life.

The "Will you go?" of The Army, wherever its songs are heard, has ever
been more than a kindly invitation. It has been an urging to which
millions of undecided souls will for ever owe their deliverance from the
dilatory and hindering influences around them, into an earnest start
towards a heavenly life.

That is why The General taught so many millions to sing, in their varied
languages, his own song:--

    O boundless Salvation! deep ocean of love,
    O fulness of mercy Christ brought from above!
    The whole world redeeming, so rich and so free,
    Now flowing for all men--come, roll over me!

    My sins they are many, their stains are so deep,
    And bitter the tears of remorse that I weep;
    But useless is weeping, thou great crimson sea,
    Thy waters can cleanse me, come, roll over me!

    My tempers are fitful, my passions are strong.
    They bind my poor soul, and they force me to wrong;
    Beneath thy blest billows deliverance I see,
    Oh, come, mighty ocean, and roll over me!

    Now tossed with temptation, then haunted with fears,
    My life has been joyless and useless for years;
    I feel something better most surely would be,
    If once thy pure waters would roll over me.

    O ocean of mercy, oft longing I've stood
    On the brink of thy wonderful, life-giving flood!
    Once more I have reached this soul-cleansing sea,
    I will not go back till it rolls over me.

    The tide is now flowing, I'm touching the wave,
    I hear the loud call of "The Mighty to Save";
    My faith's growing bolder--delivered I'll be--
    I plunge 'neath the waters, they roll over me.

    And now, Hallelujah! the rest of my days
    Shall gladly be spent in promoting His praise
    Who opened His bosom to pour out this sea
    Of boundless Salvation for you and for me.




Chapter V

Fight Against Formality



The Army's invariable principle of avoiding even the appearance of
attacking any other association of religionists, or their ideas or
practices, renders it difficult to explain fully either why William
Booth became the regular minister of a church, or why he gave up that
position; and yet he has himself told us sufficient to demonstrate at
one stroke not only the entire absence of hostility in his mind, but the
absolute separateness of his way of thinking from that which so
generally prevails.

The enthusiastic welcome given to The General wherever he went, by the
clergy of almost every Church indicates that he had generally convinced
them that he had no thought of attacking them or their Churches, even
when he most heartily expressed his thankfulness to God for having been
able to escape from all those trammels of tradition and form which would
have made his great life-work, for all nations, impossible. And I think
there are few who would nowadays question that his life, teaching, and
example all tended greatly to modify many of the Church formalities of
the past.

     "Just before leaving Lincolnshire," he says, "I had been lifted up
     to a higher plane of the daily round of my beloved work than I had
     experienced before. Oh, the stagnation into which I had settled
     down, the contentment of my mind with the love offered me at every
     turn by the people! I still aimed at the Salvation of the
     unconverted and the spiritual advance of my people, and still
     fought for these results. Indeed, I never fell below that. And yet
     if the After-Meeting was well attended, and if one or two Penitents
     responded, I was content, and satisfied myself with that hackneyed
     excuse for so much unfruitful work, that I had 'sown the seed.'
     Having cast my bread on the waters, I persuaded myself that I must
     hope for its being found by and by.

     "But I heard of a Rev. Richard Poole who was moving about the
     country, and the stories told me of the results attending his
     services had aroused in me memories of the years gone by, when I
     thought little and cared less about the acceptability of my own
     performances, so long as I could drag the people from the jaws of
     Hell.

     "I resolved to go and hear him. I found him at the house of a
     friend before the Meeting, comparatively quiet. How I watched him!
     But when I had heard him preach from the text, 'Said I not unto
     thee, that if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldst see the salvation
     of God,' and had observed the blessed results, I went to my own
     chamber--I remember that it was over a baker's shop--and resolved
     that, regardless of man's opinions, and my own gain or position, I
     would ever seek the one thing.

     "Whilst kneeling in that room, there came into my soul a fresh
     realisation of the greatness of the opportunity before me of
     leading men and women out of their miseries and their sin, and of
     my responsibility to go in for that with all my might. In obedience
     to the heavenly vision, I made a consecration of the present and
     future, of all I had, and hoped to have, to the fulfilment of this
     mission, and I believe God accepted the offering.

     "I continued my public efforts in line with my new experience."

Happily and freely as William Booth had been allowed to lead his people,
however, he and his intended wife both saw that there could be no
permanent prospect of victory amongst these "Reformers." The very
popularity of a preacher was sure to lead to contention about the sphere
of his labours.

     "The people," he writes, "with whom I had come into union were
     sorely unorganised, and I could not approve of the ultra-radicalism
     that prevailed. Consequently, I looked about for a Church nearer my
     notions of system and order, and in the one I chose, the Methodist
     New Connexion, I found a people who were, in those days, all I
     could desire, and who received me with as much heartiness as my
     Lincolnshire friends had done.

     "Ignorance has different effects on different people. Some it puffs
     up with self-satisfaction. To others it is a source of mortifying
     regret. I belonged to the latter class. I was continually crying
     out, 'O God, how little I am, and how little I know! Give me a
     chance of acquiring information, and of learning how more
     successfully to conduct this all-important business of saving men
     to which Thou hast called me, and which lies so near my heart.'

     "To gratify this yearning for improvement, the Church with which I
     had come into union gave me, at my request, an opportunity of
     studying under a then rather celebrated theologian. But instead of
     better qualifying me for the work of saving men, by imparting to me
     the knowledge necessary for the task, and showing me in every-day
     practice how to put it to practical use, I was set to study Latin,
     Greek, various Sciences, and other subjects, which, as I saw at a
     glance, could little help me in the all-important work that lay
     before me. However, I set to work, and, with all the powers I had,
     commenced to wrestle with my studies.

     "My Professor was a man of beautiful disposition, and had an
     imposing presence. The books he wrote on abstract and difficult
     theological problems were highly prized in those days. Moreover, he
     belonged to a class of preachers, not altogether unknown to-day,
     who have a real love for that order of preaching which convicts and
     converts the soul, although unable to practise it themselves. _He
     knew a good thing when he saw it_.

     "The first time he heard me preach was on a Sunday evening. I saw
     him seated before me, at the end of the church. I knew he was going
     to judge me, and I realised that my future standing in his
     estimation, as well as my position in the Society I had now made my
     home, would probably very much depend on the judgment he formed of
     me on that occasion.

     "I am not ashamed to say that I wanted to stand well with him. I
     knew also that my simple, practical style was altogether different
     from his own, and from that of the overwhelming majority of the
     preachers he was accustomed to approve. But my mind was made up. I
     had no idea of altering my aim or style to please him, the world,
     or the Devil.

     "I saw dying souls before me, the gates of Heaven wide open on the
     one hand, and the gates of Hell open on the other, while I saw
     Jesus Christ with His arms open between the two, crying out to all
     to come and be saved. My whole soul was in favour of doing what it
     could to second the invitation of my Lord, and doing it that very
     night.

     "I cannot now remember much about the service, except the sight of
     my Professor, with his family around him, a proud, worldly daughter
     sitting at his side. I can remember, however, that in my desire to
     impress the people with the fact that they could have Salvation
     there and then, if they would seek it, and, to illustrate their
     condition, I described a wreck on the ocean, with the affrighted
     people clinging to the masts between life and death, waving a flag
     of distress to those on shore, and, in response, the life-boat
     going off to the rescue. And then I can remember how I reminded my
     hearers that they had suffered shipwreck on the ocean of time
     through their sins and rebellion; that they were sinking down to
     destruction, but that if they would only hoist the signal of
     distress Jesus Christ would send off the life-boat to their rescue.
     Then, jumping on the seat at the back of the pulpit, I waved my
     pocket-handkerchief round and round my head to represent the signal
     of distress I wanted them to hoist, and closed with an appeal to
     those who wanted to be rescued to come at once, and in the presence
     of the audience, to the front of the auditorium. That night
     twenty-four knelt at the Saviour's feet, and one of them was the
     proud daughter of my Professor.

     "The next morning was the time for examination and criticism of the
     previous day's work, and I had to appear before this Doctor of
     Divinity. I entered the room with a fellow-student. He was put
     through first. After listening to the Doctor's judgment on his
     performance my turn came. I was not a little curious as to what his
     opinion would be.

     "'Well, Doctor,' I said, 'what have you to say to me? You heard me
     last night. What is your judgment on my poor performance?'

     "'My dear Sir,' he answered, 'I have only one thing to say to you,
     and that is, go on in the way you have begun, and God will bless
     you.'

     "But other difficulties were not far away, for I had hardly settled
     down to my studies before I got into a red-hot Revival in a small
     London church where a remarkable work was done. In an account of
     this effort my name appeared in the church's Magazine, and I was
     invited to conduct special efforts in other parts of the country.
     This, I must confess, completely upset my plans once more, and I
     have not been able to find heart or time for either Greek or Latin
     from that day to this."

How sincerely this curious student longed for improvement is manifested
in the following entry in his Journal, written, I presume, on a Monday
morning when it was thought that some relaxation of his studies
following a Sunday's services would be advantageous:--

     "Monday.--Visited the British Museum. Walked up and down there
     praying that God would enable me to acquire knowledge to increase
     my power of usefulness."

Who will doubt that that Museum prayer was heard and answered?

The Church he had joined was governed by an annual assembly, called the
Conference, at which candidates for the ministry were accepted into it,
and were appointed to some sphere of labour called a Circuit. Just
before the Conference met he was astonished to hear that it was proposed
to appoint him as Superintendent of a London Circuit. He was able to
persuade the authorities concerned to alter this intention on the ground
of his comparative lack of experience, although he expressed his
willingness to take the post of assistant minister under whomsoever the
Conference might appoint as Superintendent.

In due course, the appointment was made, and he found himself assistant
to a Superintendent who, he tells us, was "stiff, hard, and cold, making
up, in part, for the want of heart and thought in his public
performances by what sounded like a sanctimonious wail."

This gentleman strongly objected when, as a result of the reports of Mr.
Booth's services appearing in the Press, he was urgently invited to
visit other places, as he had visited Guernsey. The Conference
authorities, however, prevailed, and insisted, in the general interest,
upon his place in London being taken by another preacher, and his
services being utilised wherever called for.

It was thus by no choice of his own, but by the arrangement of his
Church, that Mr. Booth, instead of remaining tied down to the ordinary
routine of pastoral life, was sent for some time from place to place to
conduct such evangelising Campaigns as his soul delighted in. Who can
doubt that God's hand was in this disposal of his time? He was allowed
to marry, though his young wife had to content herself with but
occasional brief spells of association with him.

His Campaigns were really wonderful in their success. He would go for a
fortnight, or even less, to some city where the congregation had
dwindled almost to nothing, and where one or two services a week,
conducted in a very quiet and formal way, were maintained with
difficulty, owing to the indifference or hopelessness of both minister
and people. For the period of his stay all the usual programme would be
laid aside, however, and he would be left free to carry out his own
plans of daily service.

How remarkable to find him so completely carrying with him all who had
been accustomed to the old forms, and introducing, with the evident
sanction of the president and authorities of his Church, such
re-arrangements, records, and reorganisation as he desired.

But the strange, the almost inexplicable thing is that, without his even
remarking upon it, all should go back to the old forms the moment his
Campaign ended!

What is not at all strange is that there should have grown up within the
Church a strong opposition to him, so that, at the end of two and a half
years, a majority of the Conference voted against his continuing these
Campaigns, and required him to resume the ordinary routine of the
ministry. Surely, any one might have foreseen that unless the old forms
could be altered in favour of the new regime, the leader of this warfare
must submit to the old routine. True, he might try to carry out in his
Circuit, to the utmost of his power, his ideas of free and daily
warfare; but, unless all who were under him in the various places which
constituted a Methodist Circuit would constantly agree and co-operate,
no one man could prevent the old forms from prevailing.

But William Booth was no revolutionist, and his willingness and
submission to carry on the old routine, with little alteration, for four
successive years surely proved that no desire for personal exaltation or
mastery, but only the conquest of souls, was his guiding influence.

In those four years, spent in Brighouse and Gateshead, he tried to
introduce into the churches as much as he could of the life of warfare
which he considered necessary. In one year he so far won over the
officialdom of Brighouse that they desired his reappointment; whilst in
Gateshead he so transformed the Circuit that before many weeks had
passed the Central Chapel, which had hitherto borne the dignified but
cool-sounding name of "Bethesda," was dubbed by the mechanics, who
formed the bulk of the surrounding population, "The Converting Shop."

To those iron workers, accustomed daily to see masses of metal suddenly
changed, whilst in a red-hot state, into any desired form by the action
of powerful machinery, set up for the purpose, such a name was both
intelligible and expressive.

It, moreover, accorded with the new pastor's idea of the proper
utilisation of any building devoted to the worship of Jesus Christ.
There ought to be felt there, he thought, that marvellous heat of Divine
Love which was implied in Christ's engagement to "baptise" all His
followers "with fire," and the services should above all else, be such
as would ensure the immediate conversion to God of all who came under
their influence.

But in Gateshead The General was to discover the most potent force that
could be brought to bear upon all these questions, in the liberation of
Mrs. Booth from the customary silence which Church system has almost
universally imposed upon woman. It might almost be said that the whole
problem of cold formality, as against loving warmth, can be solved by
woman's liberation. True, in the ordinary state of things, the most
excellent ladies of any church become its most conservative bulwarks;
and, fortified, as they imagine, by a few words in one of St. Paul's
Epistles, such ladies can oppose every new spiritual force as powerfully
as some of them opposed him in Antioch, nineteen hundred years ago. But
"daughters" of God who have been liberated by His Spirit generally make
short work of any continued opposition.

Mrs. Booth, herself trained and hitherto fettered by this old school of
silence, to the astonishment of every one prayed in the church on the
first Sunday evening in Gateshead. The opposition of an influential
pastor, in a neighbouring city, to the public ministrations of a Mrs.
Palmer, a visitor from the United States, very soon afterwards led Mrs.
Booth to defend her sister's action in the Press, and thus to see more
clearly than before what God could do through her, if she was willing.

The General had not yet seen the importance of this advance, and, in
view of his wife's delicate health, had not pressed her into any sort of
activity, much as he had valued her perfect fellowship with him in
private. But he rejoiced, of course, in her every forward step, and when
she not only visited a street of the most godless and drunken people in
the neighbourhood, but began to speak in the services, he gave her all
the weight of his official as well as his personal sanction, little
imagining at the time what a mighty force for the spread of the truth he
was thus enlisting.

After faithfully serving the Church in Gateshead for three years, he
found the Conference no more willing than before to release him for the
evangelistic work which now both he and his wife more and more longed
for.

The final scene, when, in a Conference at Liverpool, Mrs. Booth
confirmed The General's resolution to refuse to continue even for one
more year his submission to form, by calling out "Never!" marked a stage
in his career which was decisive in a startling way as to the whole of
his future.

     "It is true that I had a wonderful sphere of usefulness and
     happiness," says The General; "but I was not contented. I had many
     reasons for dissatisfaction. I was cribbed, cabined, and confined
     by a body of cold, hard usages, and still colder and harder people.
     I desired freedom! I felt I was called to a different sphere of
     labour. I wanted liberty to move forward in it. So when the
     Conference definitely declined my request to set me free for
     evangelistic work I bade them farewell.

     "It was a heart-breaking business. Here was a great crowd of people
     all over the land who loved me and my dear wife. I felt a deep
     regard for them, and to leave them was a sorrow beyond description.
     But I felt I must follow what appeared to be the beckoning finger
     of my Lord. So, with my wife and four little children, I left my
     quarters and went out into the world once more, trusting in God,
     literally not knowing who would give me a shilling, or what to do
     or where to go.

     "All my earthly friends thought I was mistaken in this action; some
     of them deemed me mad. I confess that it was one of the most
     perplexing steps of my life. When I took it every avenue seemed
     closed against me. There was one thing I could do, however, and
     that was to trust in God, and wait for His Salvation."

The difficulty of the Church was really insurmountable at that time.
Since those days most of the Protestant Churches have learnt that
evangelistic work is just as essential as the ordinary pastoral
ministrations.

The fact is, that neither the Booths nor the Church were then aware that
God, behind all their perplexities, was working out a plan of His own.
Who laments that separation to-day? As the evangelists of any Church
they could not possibly have become to so large an extent the
evangelists of all.




Chapter VI

Revivalism



Not many days passed after William Booth's retirement from the ministry
of the Methodist New Connexion before his faith was rewarded by a warm
invitation to a small place at the other end of the country. One of his
former Converts was a minister in the little seaport Hayle, in Cornwall,
and he sent the call, "Come over and help us."

The Church had got into the stagnant condition which is so commonly
experienced wherever contentment with routine long holds sway. Mr. and
Mrs. Booth were not only welcomed, but given a free hand to take any
course they pleased to fill the building with hearers, and to secure
their Salvation.

Fighting now together, as they had learnt to do at Gateshead, they saw
results more rapid and striking than they had ever known before,
although they found themselves face to face with a population more
disinclined for novelty, and especially for the novelties they
introduced, than any they had before had to deal with. The General thus
described at the time for the Connexional Magazine some of his first
battles in Cornwall:--

     "Hayle, Cornwall.

     "When in London, you requested me to send now and then a report of
     the Lord's working in connexion with my ministry, and thinking that
     the following account of the Revival now in progress here will be
     interesting to you, I forward it. We arrived here on the 10th
     inst., and commenced labour on the following Sabbath. The chapel
     was crowded. Gracious influences accompanied the word. Many
     appeared to be deeply convicted of sin, but no decided cases of
     conversion took place that day. On Monday afternoon we had a
     service for Christians, and spoke on the hindrances to Christian
     labour and Christian joy. Evening, chapel crowded. Very solemn
     season. Nearly all the congregation stayed to the Prayer Meeting
     that followed, and many appeared deeply affected, but refused to
     seek the mercy of God. A strong prejudice prevails here against the
     custom of inviting anxious inquirers to any particular part of the
     building. The friends told me that this plan never had succeeded in
     Cornwall; but I thought it the best, considering the crowded state
     of the chapel, and therefore determined to try it. I gave a short
     address, and again invited those who wished to decide for Christ to
     come forward. After waiting a minute or two, the solemn silence was
     broken by the cries of a woman who at once left her pew, and fell
     down at the Mercy-Seat, and became the first-fruits of what I trust
     will be a glorious harvest of immortal souls. She was quickly
     followed by others, when a scene ensued beyond description. The
     cries and groans were piercing in the extreme; and when the
     stricken spirits apprehended Jesus as their Saviour, the shouts of
     praise and thanksgiving were in proportion to the previous sorrow.

     "Tuesday Evening.--Congregation again large. Prayer Meeting similar
     to Monday night, and some very blessed cases of conversion.

     "Wednesday.--Chapel full. Mrs. Booth spoke with much influence and
     power. Glorious Prayer Meeting. An old woman who found the Saviour
     jumped on her feet, and shouted, with her face beaming with
     heavenly radiance, 'He's saved me! Glory to God! He's saved me, an
     old sinner, sixty-three. Glory to God!' Other cases of great
     interest transpired, and the people, with swimming eyes, and
     glowing hearts, sang--

     "'Praise God, from whom all blessings flow.'

     "Thursday.--Preached from 'Him that cometh to Me I will in nowise
     cast out.' Had a blessed Meeting. A woman who had herself found
     Jesus during the week, pointed me to her husband. Found him fully
     enlightened and deeply convicted. I urged him to immediate decision
     and the full surrender of himself to God. He came out, and fell
     down among the Penitents. He remained there about an hour. The
     Meeting could not be concluded until near eleven o'clock, and many
     were very reluctant to retire even then.

     "Friday.--The first thing this morning my host informed me that he
     had just heard of a mason who had been at the services every night,
     and who had resolved to stop work until he found the Lord. Soon
     after a young lady came in to tell us of a woman who had found
     peace during the night. At the family altar this morning, a woman
     in the employ of the gentleman with whom we are staying commenced
     to bemoan her sinful condition and to cry for mercy. I asked her to
     remain, and pointed her to Jesus, and she soon found rest through
     believing. In the afternoon, met several anxious persons for prayer
     and conversation. In the evening we had announced a public Prayer
     Meeting. Before we reached the chapel we could hear the cries and
     prayers of those already assembled. On entering, we found a strong
     man praising God at the top of his voice for hearing his prayer and
     pardoning his sins. It was the mason. He had been under deep
     concern for three days; had not slept at all the night before, but
     after a day's agony, he had found Jesus; and such tumultuous,
     rapturous joy I think I never witnessed. Again and again, during
     the evening, he broke out with a voice that drowned all others, and
     rose above our songs of praise ascribing glory to Jesus for what He
     had done for his soul. There were many other cases of almost equal
     interest. The Meeting was not closed until eleven.

     "About midnight, the Rev. J. Shone, the minister in charge of the
     church, was called out to visit a woman who was in great distress.
     He afterwards described her agony in seeking, and her joy in
     finding, the Lord, together with the sympathy and exultation of her
     friends with her, as one of the most thrilling scenes he ever
     witnessed."

In a later report The General wrote:--

     "Hayle, Cornwall.

     "The work of the Lord here goes on gloriously. The services have
     progressed with increasing power and success, and now the whole
     neighbourhood is moved. Conversion is the topic of conversation in
     all sorts of society. Every night, crowds are unable to gain
     admission to the sanctuary. The oldest man in the church cannot
     remember any religious movement of equal power. During the second
     week, the Wesleyans opened a large room for united Prayer Meetings
     at noon; since then, by their invitation, we have on several
     occasions spoken in their chapels to densely crowded audiences;
     services being simultaneously conducted in the chapel where the
     movement originally commenced. One remarkable and gratifying
     feature of the work is the large number of men who are found every
     night amongst those who are anxious. Never have I seen so many men
     at the same time smiting their breasts, and crying, 'God be
     merciful to me a sinner,' Strong men, old men, young men, weeping
     like children, broken-hearted on account of their sins. A number of
     these are sailors, and scarcely a ship has gone out of this port
     the last few days without taking among its crew one or more souls
     newly-born for Heaven."

Can it be believed that just such victories as these led to the closing
of almost all the Churches against him?

     "In these days," The General has more recently written, "it has
     become almost the fashion for the Churches to hold yearly 'revival'
     or 'special' services, but forty years ago they were as unanimously
     opposed to anything of the kind, and compelled me to gain outside
     every Church organisation the one liberty I desired--to seek and
     save the lost ones, who never enter any place of worship whatever.

     "Let nobody suppose that I cherish any resentment against any of
     the Churches on account of their former treatment of me, or that I
     have a desire to throw a stone at any of them. From any such
     feelings I believe that God has most mercifully preserved me all my
     life, and I rejoice in the kindness on this account with which they
     load me now in every land, as testimonies to that fact.

     "But I want to make it clear to readers in lands far away from
     Christendom why I was driven into the formation of an Organisation
     entirely outside every Christian Church in order to accomplish my
     object, and why my people everywhere, whilst having no more desire
     than myself to come into dispute, or even discussion, with any
     Church near them, must needs act as independently of them all as I
     have done, no matter how friendly they may now be to us.

     "Nothing could be more charming than the present attitude towards
     us of every religious community in the United States, from the
     Roman Catholics, whose Archbishop has publicly commended us, to the
     Mormons, who are generally regarded as enemies of all Christianity,
     and the Friends (commonly called Quakers) whose ideas of worship
     seem to be at the uttermost extreme from ours. All are satisfied
     that I and my people are not wishful to find fault with any
     religious body whatever, but to spend all our time and energy in
     combating the great evils of godlessness and selfishness which
     threaten to sweep away all the people everywhere from any thought
     above material things.

     "Yet we have had to forbid our people to accept too often the
     pressing invitations that pour upon them from all sides to hold
     Meetings in Church buildings, lest they should lose touch with the
     masses outside, and begin to be content with audiences of admirers.

     "The thirty-six years of my life whilst I was groping about in vain
     for a home and fellowship amongst Churches gave me to understand,
     as only experience can, what are the thoughts and feelings of the
     millions in Christian lands, who not only never enter a church, but
     who feel it to be inconceivable that they ever should do so.

     "If this experience has been invaluable to us in Christian lands,
     how much more so is it in the far vaster countries of Asia and
     Africa, where our work is only as yet in its beginnings. When I
     went to Japan, the entire missionary community everywhere united to
     uphold me as the exemplar of true Christlike action for the good of
     all men. But the leaders of all the five sects of Buddhism were no
     less unanimous in their welcome to me, or in their expressions of
     prayerful desire for the success of my work.

     "In India and Africa I have repeatedly seen supporting me in my
     indoor and outdoor demonstrations the leaders of the Hindu, Parsee,
     Sikh, Buddhist, Jewish, and Mohammedan communities, who had never
     met with the Christians in so friendly a way before. I cannot think
     this would have been the case had I ever become settled amongst any
     Christian body in this country.

     "Can any one wonder then that I see in all the unpleasant
     experiences of my early days the hand of God Himself, leading me by
     a way that I knew not--that I could scarcely believe indeed at the
     time to be His way. Why should it have been so difficult for a man,
     who only wished to lead the lost ones to the great Shepherd who
     seeks them all to get or to remain within any existing fold, if it
     was not that there lay before me and my Soldiers conquests
     infinitely greater and more important than had ever yet been made?

     "Oh, with what impatience I turn from the very thought of any of
     the squabbles of Christian sects when I see all around me the
     millions who want to avoid any thought of their great Friend and
     Father, and of the coming Judge before whom we must all, perhaps
     this very day, appear."

How easily excuses, which sound most plausible, are found for every sort
of negligence in the service of God--indeed, for not serving Him at all!

"It is not my way, you see," says some one, who does not like to make
any open profession of interest in Jesus Christ, as though our own
preferences or opinions were to be the governing consideration in all
that affects the interests of "our Lord"!

The General has proved that the old ideas connected with "the Master"
can not only be revived but acted up to in our day, and the sense of
shame for idle excuses drive out all the paltry pleas set up for
indifference to the general ruin.

"At this season, nothing can be done" is as coolly pleaded to-day as if
"in season, out of season" had never been written in our Divine
Order-Book.

How often our forces in the midst of fairs, and race-days, and "slack
times," have demonstrated that real soldiers of Christ can snatch
victory, just when all around seems to ensure their defeat!

When The General began to form his Army, it was ordinarily assumed as a
settled principle that Open-Air Work could only be done in fine weather,
and the theory is still existent in many quarters. As if the comfort and
convenience of "the workers," and not the danger and misery of the
people, were to fix the times of such effort!

"But the people will not come," is even now pleaded as an excuse for the
omission or abandonment of any imaginable attempt to do good. As if the
people's general disinclination for anything that has to do with God
were not the precise reason for His wish to "send out" His servants!

"Such a plan would never succeed here," is an almost invariable excuse
made for not undertaking anything new. The General was never blind to
differences between this and that locality and population. But he
insisted that no plan that could be devised by those on any given spot,
and especially no plan that has manifestly been blessed and used by God
elsewhere should be dismissed without proper, earnest trial.

"But that has never been done, or has never done well here," seemed to
him rather a reason for trying it with, perhaps, some little
modification than for leaving a plan untried. The inexorable law to
which he insisted that everything should bend was that nothing can
excuse inactivity and want of enterprise where souls are perishing. And
he was spared to see even Governments beginning to recognise that it is
inexcusable to let sin triumph in "a Christian country." He proved that
it was possible to raise up "Christian Soldiers," who would not only
sing, or hear singing, in beautiful melody about "Marching, onward as to
War"; but who would really do it, even when, it led to real battle.




Chapter VII

East London Beginning



What were Mr. and Mrs. Booth to do? They were excluded from most of the
Churches in which during the last twenty years they had led so many
souls to Christ. They found themselves out of harmony with most of the
undenominational evangelists of the day, and, moreover, they had
experienced throughout even the brightest of their past years a gnawing
dissatisfaction with much of their work, which The General thus
described in the preface to his book, _In Darkest England, and the Way
Out_:--

     "All the way through my career I have keenly felt the remedial
     measures usually enumerated in Christian programmes, and ordinarily
     employed by Christian philanthropy, to be lamentably inadequate for
     any effectual dealing with the despairing miseries of the outcast
     classes. The rescued are appallingly few, a ghastly minority
     compared with the multitudes who struggle and sink in the
     open-mouthed abyss. Alike, therefore, my humanity and my
     Christianity, if I may speak of them as in any way separate from
     each other, have cried out for some comprehensive method of
     reaching and saving the perishing crowds."

The Booths had settled in a London home, finding that they must needs
have some fixed resting-place for their children, and that abundant
opportunities of one kind or another could be found for them both in the
metropolis. But The General, who was "waiting upon God, and wondering
what would happen" to open his way to the unchurched masses, received an
invitation to undertake some services in a tent which had been erected
in an old burial-ground in Whitechapel, the expected missioner having
fallen ill! He consented, and he thus describes his experiences:--

     "When I saw those masses of poor people, so many of them evidently
     without God or hope in the world, and found that they so readily
     and eagerly listened to me, following from Open-Air Meeting to
     tent, and accepting, in many instances, my invitation to kneel at
     the Saviour's feet there and then, my whole heart went out to them.
     I walked back to our West-End home and said to my wife:--

     "'O Kate, I have found my destiny! These are the people for whose
     Salvation I have been longing all these years. As I passed by the
     doors of the flaming gin-palaces to-night I seemed to hear a voice
     sounding in my ears, "Where can you go and find such heathen as
     these, and where is there so great a need for your labours?" And
     there and then in my soul I offered myself and you and the children
     up to this great work. Those people shall be our people, and they
     shall have our God for their God.'"

Mrs. Booth herself wrote:--

     "I remember the emotion that this produced in my soul. I sat gazing
     into the fire, and the Devil whispered to me, 'This means another
     departure, another start in life!' The question of our support
     constituted a serious difficulty. Hitherto we had been able to meet
     our expenses out of the collections which we had made from our more
     respectable audiences. But it was impossible to suppose that we
     could do so among the poverty-stricken East-Enders--we were afraid
     even to ask for a collection in such a locality.

     "Nevertheless, I did not answer discouragingly. After a momentary
     pause for thought and prayer, I replied, 'Well, if you feel you
     ought to stay, stay. We have trusted the Lord _once_ for our
     support, and we can trust Him _again_!'"

"That night," says The General, "The Salvation Army was born."

Before long God moved the heart of one of the most benevolent men in
England, Mr. Samuel Morley, to promise them his influence and support
without any condition but the continuance of the work thus begun. But no
amount of monetary help could have placed The General in a position to
establish anything like the permanent work he desired. He writes:--

     "I had hardly got successfully started on this new path before my
     old experience of difficulty met me once more. On the third Sunday
     morning, I think it was, we found the old tent which formed our
     cathedral, blown down, and so damaged by the fall, as well as so
     rotten, that it could not be put up again. Another tent was
     impossible, as we had no money to buy one; so, as no suitable
     building could be obtained, there was nothing for it but for us to
     do our best out of doors.

     "After a time we secured an old dancing-room for Sunday Meetings.
     But, there being no seats in it, our Converts had to come at 4
     o'clock on Sunday morning to bring the benches in, and work till
     midnight, or later still, when the day's Meetings were over, to
     move them out again. For our week-night Meetings we had hired an
     old shed, formerly used to store rags in, and there we fought for
     months."

What a testimony to the character of the work already accomplished, and
the readiness of the little force already raised to toil like pioneer
soldiers for the love of Christ!

Most of the Converts of those days "had been forgiven much." The
following letter from one of them may give some idea both of the nature
of the work done, and the surrounding circumstances:--

     "Dear Sir,--I have reason to bless the hour that God put the
     thought into your head to open the Mission at the East-End of
     London, for it has been the means of making me and my family happy
     in the love of Christ; it has turned me from a drunkard,
     blasphemer, and liar, to a true believing Christian. At the age of
     thirteen, I went as a waiter-boy in a public-house, where I
     remained until I was sixteen. Here I learned to love the flavour of
     drink, and I never lost it until I was converted to God, through
     the blessed words spoken in the open air. When I look back, and
     think how I have beaten my poor wife--it was through the drink--it
     makes me ashamed of myself. It was the word and the blow, but
     sometimes the blow first. After I got sober, sometimes it would
     make me ashamed to look at her black eyes; but I do thank God there
     is no fear of black eyes now; for we are very happy together.

     "I am a stoker and engine-driver, and I wonder I have never had an
     explosion, for I have been drunk for a week at a time. On one
     occasion, I had been drunk overnight, and was not very sober in the
     morning. I went to work at half-past five, instead of five, and,
     without looking to see if there was any water in the boiler, I
     began stoking the fire up. The fright sobered me. It cost above
     L100 before it was fit for work again. But that did not alter me,
     only for the worse. I broke up my home. I got worse, after that,
     and cared for nothing. Half my wages went in drink, my wife was
     afraid to speak to me, and the poor children would get anywhere out
     of my way. Afterwards I was discharged; but although I soon got
     another job, I could not leave off the drink. I was reckoned a
     regular drunkard. I lost place after place, and was out of work
     several weeks at a time; for they did not care to employ a
     drunkard. Still, I would have beer somehow, I did not care how. I
     have given one and sixpence for the loan of a shilling, and though
     there was not a bit of bread at home, the shilling went in beer.

     "I have often had the police called in for ill-using my wife. On
     one occasion she ran down to her mother's, with her face bleeding;
     but I went to bed. When I woke, I saw she was not there, so I went
     out and got drunk. I came home and got a large carving-knife, put
     it up my sleeve, and went down to her mother's, with the intention
     of killing her; but they saw the knife. The police were called in,
     and I was taken to Spitalfields Station. But no one coming to press
     the charge, I got off.

     "Eight years ago God thought fit to lay me on a bed of sickness for
     thirteen weeks, and I was given up by all the doctors. When I got
     better, people thought I would alter my life, and become a steady
     man; but no, I was as bad as ever. While I was at work, another
     time, drunk, I lost one of my eyes by an accident; but even that
     did not make me a sober man, nor make me leave off swearing and
     cursing. I was generally drunk two or three times on Sundays. The
     Sunday that I was convinced I was a sinner I had been drunk twice.

     "I did not think there was so much happiness for me; but I do thank
     God for what He has done for me. He has changed my heart, He has
     filled me full of the love of Christ; and my greatest desire is to
     tell sinners what a dear Saviour I have found."

Best of all was the demonstration that, out of such material, God was
able and ready to raise up a fighting force.

One great difficulty of those days was the obtaining of suitable
buildings. For a time a theatre was hired for Sunday Meetings (the law
in England then not allowing theatres to give performances on Sundays).

The great buildings to which the people have been accustomed to go for
amusement have always proved admirably suited for the gathering of
congregations of that sort. A gentleman who had had long experience in
mission work thus describes what he saw when he went to spend a "Sunday
afternoon with William Booth":--

     "On the afternoon of Sunday, January 31st, I was able to see some
     of the results of William Booth's work in the East of London, by
     attending his Experience Meeting, held in the East London Theatre.
     About 2 o'clock some of his helpers and Converts went out from the
     Mission Hall, where they had been praying together, and held an
     Open-Air Meeting in front of a large brewery opposite the Hall. The
     ground was damp and the wind high, but they secured an audience,
     and then sang hymns along the road, till they came to the theatre,
     taking in any who chose to follow them. Probably about five hundred
     were present, though many came in late.

     "The Meeting commenced at three, and lasted one hour and a half.
     During this period fifty-three persons gave their experience, parts
     of eight hymns were sung, and prayer was offered by four persons.
     After singing Philip Philips' beautiful hymn, 'I will sing for
     Jesus,' prayer was offered up by Mr. Booth and two others.

     "A young man rose and told of his conversion a year ago, thanking
     God that he had been kept through the year.

     "A negro, of the name of Burton, interested the Meeting much by
     telling of his first Open-Air Service, which he had held during the
     past week in Ratcliff Highway, one of the worst places in London.
     He said, when the people saw him kneel in the gutter, engaged in
     prayer for them, they thought he was mad. The verse--

        Christ now sits on Zion's hill,
        He receives poor sinners still,

     Was then sung.

     "A young man under the right-hand gallery, having briefly spoken,
     one of Mr. Booth's helpers, a Yorkshireman, with a strong voice and
     hearty manner, told of the Open-Air Meetings, the opposition they
     encountered, and his determination to go on, in spite of all
     opposition from men and Devils.

     "A middle-aged man on the right, a sailor, told how he was brought
     to Christ during his passage home from Colombo. One of the Dublin
     tracts, entitled, 'John's Difficulty,' was the means of his
     conversion.

     "A young man to the right, having told how, as a backslider, he had
     recently been restored, a cabman said he used to be in the
     public-houses constantly; but he thanked God he ever heard William
     Booth, for it led to his conversion.

     "Three young men on the right then spoke. The first, who comes five
     miles to these Meetings, told how he was lost through the drink,
     and restored by the Gospel; the second said he was unspeakably
     happy; the third said he would go to the stake for Christ.

     "A middle-aged man in the centre spoke of his many trials. His
     sight was failing him, but the light of Christ shone brilliantly in
     his soul.

     "The chorus--

        Let us walk in the light,

     was then sung.

     "A young man described his feelings as he had recently passed the
     place where he was born; and a sister spoke of her husband's
     conversion, and how they were both now rejoicing in God.

     "After a young man on the left had told how his soul had recently
     revived, another on the right testified to the Lord having pardoned
     his sins in the theatre on the previous Sunday.

     "Two sailors followed. The first spoke of his conversion through
     reading a tract while on his way to the Indies four months ago. The
     other said he was going to sea next week, and was going to take
     some Bibles, hymns, and tracts with him, to see what could be done
     for Christ on board.

     "The verse--

        I believe I shall be there,
        And walk with Him in white,

     was then sung.

     "A young man of the name of John, sometimes called 'Young
     Hallelujah,' told of his trials while selling fish in the streets;
     but he comforted himself by saying, ''Tis better on before.' He had
     been drawn out in prayer at midnight on the previous night, and had
     dreamed all night that he was in a Prayer Meeting. He was followed
     by a converted thief, who told how he was 'picked up,' and of his
     persecutions daily while working with twenty unconverted men.

     "A man in the centre, who had been a great drunkard, said, 'What a
     miserable wretch I was till the Lord met with me! I used to think I
     could not do without my pint a day, but the Lord pulled me right
     bang out of a public-house into a place of worship.'

     "He was followed by a young man who was converted at one of the
     Breakfast Meetings last year, and who said he was exceedingly
     happy. Another young man on the left said his desire was to speak
     more and work more for Jesus.

     "Two sisters then spoke. The first uttered a brief, inaudible
     sentence, and the second told of being so happy every day, and
     wanting to be more faithful.

     "The verse--

        Shall we meet beyond the River,
        Where the surges cease to roll?

     was then sung.

     "A young woman said: 'I well remember the night I first heard Mr.
     Booth preach here. I had a heavy load of sin upon my shoulders. But
     I was invited to come on the stage. I did so, and was pointed to
     Jesus, and I obtained peace.'

     "Another told of his conversion by a tract, four years ago, on his
     passage to Sydney. 'To my sorrow,' he said, 'I became a backslider.
     But I thank God He ever brought me here. That blessed man, Mr.
     Booth, preached, and I gave my heart to God afresh. I now take
     tracts to sea regularly. I have only eighteen shillings a week, but
     I save my tobacco and beer money to buy tracts.'

     "The verse--

        I never shall forget the day
        When Jesus took my sins away,

     was then sung.

     "A stout man, a navvy, who said he had been one of the biggest
     drunkards in London, having briefly spoken, was followed by one
     known as 'Jemmy the butcher,' who keeps a stall in the Whitechapel
     Road. Some one had cruelly robbed him, but he found consolation by
     attending the Mission Hall Prayer Meeting.

     "Two young lads, recently converted, having given their experience,
     a dock labourer, converted seventeen months ago, asked the prayers
     of the Meeting for his wife, yet unconverted. Some of his comrades
     during the last week said, 'What a difference there is in you now
     to what there used to be!'

     "Three young women followed. The first spoke but a sentence or two.
     The desire of the second was to live more to Christ. The third had
     a singularly clear voice, and gave her experience very
     intelligently. It was a year and a half since she gave her heart to
     the Saviour; but her husband does not yet see with her. Her desire
     was to possess holiness of heart, and to know more of the language
     of Canaan.

     "The experience of an old man, who next spoke, was striking. Mr.
     Booth had announced his intention, some time back, of preaching a
     sermon on 'The Derby,' at the time of the race that goes by that
     name. This man was attracted by curiosity, and when listening
     compared himself to a broken-down horse. This sermon was the means
     of his conversion.

     "The verse then sung was:--

        Can you tell me what ship is going to sail?
        Oh, the old ship of Zion, Hallelujah!

     "Two sisters then spoke. The first had been very much cast down for
     seven or eight weeks; but she comforted herself by saying, ''Tis
     better on before.' The second said it was two years since she found
     peace, and she was very happy.

     "A young man told how his sins were taken away. He worked in the
     city, and some one took him to hear the Rev. E. P. Hammond. He did
     not find peace then, but afterwards, as a young man was talking to
     him in the street, he was able to see the way of Salvation, and
     rejoice in it. He used to fall asleep generally under the
     preaching. 'But here,' he said, 'under Mr. Booth, I can't sleep.'

     "A little boy, one of Mr. Booth's sons (the present General), gave
     a simple and good testimony. He was followed by a young man, and
     then an interesting blind girl, whom I had noticed singing heartily
     in the street, told of her conversion.

     "A girl told how she found peace seventeen months ago; and then Mr.
     Booth offered a few concluding observations and prayed. The Meeting
     closed by singing:--

        I will not be discouraged,
        For Jesus is my Friend.

     "Such is a brief outline of this most interesting Meeting, held
     Sunday after Sunday. Mr. Booth led the singing by commencing the
     hymns without even giving them out. But the moment he began, the
     bulk of the people joined heartily in them. Only one or two verses
     of each hymn were sung as a rule. Most of them are found in his own
     admirably compiled Song-Book.

     "I could not but wonder at the change which had come over the
     people. The majority of those present, probably nearly five
     hundred, owed their conversion to the preaching of Mr. Booth and
     his helpers. How would they have been spending Sunday afternoon, if
     this blessed agency had not been set on foot?

     "In the evening I preached in the Oriental Music Hall, High Street,
     Poplar, where five or six hundred persons were assembled. This is
     one of the more recent branches of Mr. Booth's work, and appears to
     be in a very prosperous condition. I found two groups of the
     helpers singing and preaching in the streets, who were only driven
     in by the rain just before the Meeting commenced inside. This is
     how the people are laid hold of.

     "Shall this good work be hindered for the want of a few hundred
     pounds?"

The supply of "pounds," alas! though called for in such religious
periodicals as at that time were willing to report the work, did not
come, and The General says: "After six years' hard work, we had nothing
better for our Sunday Night Meetings than a small covered alley attached
to a drinking-saloon, together with some old discarded chapels, and a
tumble-down penny theatre for week-nights."

At last a drinking-saloon, "The Eastern Star," having been burnt out,
was acquired, and rebuilt and fitted as a centre for the Work, to be
succeeded ere long by the large covered People's Market in Whitechapel
Road, which was for ten years to be The Army's Headquarters, and which
is now the Headquarters of its English Men's Social Work.

Throughout all these years of struggle, however, the Converts were
being drilled and fitted for the further extension of the Work.

The idea of forming them into a really permanent Organisation only came
to their Leader gradually. He says:--

     "My first thought was to constitute an evangelistic agency, the
     Converts going to the Churches. But to this there were three main
     obstacles:--

          i. They would not go where they were sent.
         ii. They were not wanted when they did go.
        iii. I soon found that I wanted them myself."

And the more time he spent amongst them the more the sense of
responsibility with regard to them grew upon him. He had discovered what
mines of unimagined power for good were to be found amidst the very
classes who seemed entirely severed from religious life. There they
were, and if only proper machinery could be provided and kept going they
could be raised from their present useless, if not pernicious, life to
that career of usefulness to others like themselves for which they were
so well qualified. They could thus become a treasure of priceless value
to their country and to the world.

On the other hand, neglected, or left with no other sort of worship than
as yet existed to appeal to them, they must needs become worse and
worse, more and more hostile to religion of any kind, more and more
unlikely ever to take an interest in anything eternal.

The General could not, therefore, but feel more and more satisfied that
he had begun a work that ought to be permanently maintained and
enlarged, as opportunity might arise, until it could cope with this
state of things wherever it was to be found.

And now that he had at length a centre to which he could invite all his
helpers from time to time, there was no hindrance to the carrying out of
such a purpose.

With the establishment of a Headquarters that cost L3,500, in one of the
main thoroughfares of Eastern London, we may look upon The General as
having at last got a footing in the world.




Chapter VIII

Army-making



What a place for a Christian Mission centre was Whitechapel Road!

"Just look here," said The General to his eldest son, then a boy of
thirteen, as he led him late one Sunday evening through the great
swing-doors of a public-house into the crowded bar. "These are the
people I want you to live and labour for."

The mere appearance of many a thousand in the neighbourhood, whether
inside or outside such houses, was enough to give some idea of the
misery of their lives. The language and the laughter with which those
ragged, dirty, unkempt men and women accompanied their drinking were
such as to leave no doubt that they were wallowing in the mire. At that
time, and, indeed, until the Children Act of 1909 came into force, it
was the custom of thousands of mothers to take their babies and little
children into the public-houses with them, so that the scenes of family
misery and ruin were complete.

In many of the side streets and back lanes, where there was little wheel
traffic, groups of men and women might have been seen bargaining; for
the most dilapidated and greasy articles of old clothing that could
still be worn, whilst lads and even children gambled with half-pence, or
even with marbles, as if they could not early enough learn how fully to
follow the evil courses of their elders. There were, and are still,
streets within ten minutes' walk of the Whitechapel Road where dogs and
birds were traded in, or betted on, competitions in running and singing
being often indispensable to the satisfaction of the buyers and sellers.

By the side of the road along which there was, and is, a continuous
stream of waggon and omnibus, as well as foot traffic, was a broad strip
of unpaved ground, part of it opposite that Sidney Street which a few
years ago became world-renowned as the scene of the battle of the London
Police with armed burglars. This was called the Mile End Waste, and was
utilised for all the ordinary purposes of a fair ground. The
merry-go-rounds, and shows of every description, which competed with the
unfailing Punch and Judy, and wooden swings, kept up a continuous din,
especially on Saturday nights and Sundays.

Amidst all this the vendors of the vilest songs and books, and of the
most astounding medicines, raised their voices so as to attract their
own little rings of interested listeners. There, too, men spoke upon
almost every imaginable evil theme, denouncing both God and Government
in words which one would have thought no decent workman would care to
hear. But all who have seen a fair will have some idea of the scene, if
they can only imagine all the deepest horrors of appearance and
demeanour that drunkenness and poverty, illness and rags, can crowd
together within a few hundred yards of space.

Once you can place all that fairly before your imagination you can form
some conception of the mind that could look upon it all and hunger to
find just there a battlefield for life, as well as of the faith that
could reckon upon the victory of the Gospel in such a place. We have all
read accounts of missionaries approaching some far-away island shore and
seeing the heathen dance round some cannibal feast. But such feasts
could not have been very frequent, amidst such limited populations,
whereas the ever-changing millions of London have furnished all these
years tragedies daily and nightly numerous enough to crowd our memories
with scenes no less appalling to the moral sense than anything witnessed
on those distant pagan shores. To those who take time to think it out,
the marvel of both the eagerness and the reluctance of Mr. and Mrs.
Booth to plunge into this human Niagara will appear ever greater. As we
look nowadays at the world-wide result of their resolve so to do,
despite all their consciousness of ignorance and unfitness for the
task, we cannot but see in the whole matter the hand of God Himself,
fulfilling His great promise: "Even the captives of the mighty shall be
taken away, the prey of the terrible shall be delivered, for I will
contend with them that contend with thee, and I will save thy children.
And all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, and thy
Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob."

As long as the God of that solitary, selfish tramp remains determined to
redeem and save even the most depraved and abandoned of mankind, its
Whitechapels and Spitalfields, and other moral jungles, can be turned
into gardens, blooming with every flower of moral innocence and
beauty--if only gardeners, capable of enough trust in God and toil for
man, can be found.

The Meetings held at noon daily in front of the new Headquarters set an
example of patient, persevering combat which was followed in the
Meetings, outdoors or in, held by what was then known as "The Christian
Mission." The first name used by "The General Superintendent," as our
Founder was then called, was "The East London Christian Revival
Society." This was changed to "The East London Christian Mission," and
the "East London" being dropped, when the work extended outside London,
"The Christian Mission" remained, much as the name was always disliked,
from its appearance of implying a slight on all other missions.

The steadily increasing success of the Whitechapel work was such that
when I first saw it, after it had only had that centre for two years,
the Hall, seating more than 1,200 persons, would be crowded on Sundays,
and, although the people had been got together from streets full of
drunkenness and hostility, the audiences would be kept under perfect
control, once the outer gates were closed, and would listen with the
intensest interest to all that was said and sung.

On Sunday nights I have known ten different bands of speakers take their
stand at various points along the Whitechapel Road, and when they all
marched to the Hall, they could usually make their songs heard above all
the din of traffic, and in spite of any attempts at interruption made
by the opposition.

The enemy constantly displayed his hostility at the Meetings held in the
street, whether in Whitechapel or any of the other poor parishes to
which the work had spread, and was not often content with mere cries of
derision either. Dirt and garbage would be thrown at us, blows and kicks
would come, especially on dark evenings, and the sight of a policeman
approaching, so far from being a comfort, was a still worse trial, as he
would very rarely show any inclination to protect us, but more generally
a wish to make us "move on" just when we had got a good crowd together,
on the plea that we were either "obstructing the thoroughfare" or
"creating a disturbance."

But what a blessed training for War it all was! The Converts learnt not
merely to raise their voices for God, and to persist in their efforts,
in spite of every possible discouragement, but to bridle their tongues
when abused, to "endure hardness," and manifest a prayerful, loving
spirit towards those who despite fully used them. The very fighting made
bold and happy Soldiers out of many of the tenderest and most timid
Converts.

And yet I am not sure whether a still more important part of The
Army-making was not accomplished in the Prayer Meetings, and Holiness
Meetings, which came to be more and more popular, until under the name
of "Days with God" and "Nights of Prayer" they attracted, in many of the
great cities of England, crowds, even of those who did not belong to us,
but who wished to find out the secret of our strength, for it was by the
light and help got in such Meetings that Converts became "steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord," so that instead of
merely carrying on a "Mission" for so many weeks, months, or years, many
of them became reliable warriors for life.

How few of The General's critics, who sneered at his Meetings as though
they were mere scenes of "passing excitement" had any idea of the
profound teaching he gave his people! The then editor of "The
Christian," who took the trouble to visit them, as well as to converse
with The General at length, with remarkable prescience wrote, as early
as 1871, in his preface to The General's first important publication,
"How to Reach the Masses with the Gospel":--

     "The following pages tell a fragment of the story of as wonderful a
     work, of its kind, as this generation has seen. No doubt it is open
     to the same kind of criticism as the sculptor's chisel might award
     to the excavator's pick; but I do not hesitate to believe that for
     every essential Christian virtue--faith, zeal, self-denial, love,
     prayer, and the like--numbers of the Converts of this Mission will
     bear not unfavourable comparison with the choicest members of the
     most cultivated Churches.

     "There is not in this kingdom an agency which more demands the
     hearty and liberal support of the Church of Christ. In the East of
     London are crowded and condensed a large proportion of the poorer
     labouring population of London. The ruined, the unfortunate, the
     depraved, the feeble ones, outrun in the race of life, gravitate
     thither and jostle one another in the daily struggle for bread;
     thousands remain on the edge of starvation from day to day, and the
     bulk of these teeming multitudes are as careless of eternity as the
     heathen, and far more uncared for by the great majority of the
     professed people of God. Mr. Booth's operations are unparalleled in
     extent, unsectarian in character, a standing rebuke to the apathy
     of Christians, and a witness of the willingness of God to show His
     work unto His servants and to establish the work of their hands
     upon them."

From the beginning, The General had taught his people to come together
for an hour's prayer early each Sunday morning, and to delight in prayer
at all times, looking ever to God to deliver them personally from "all
evil" and to "make and keep them pure within." These phrases were
familiar to all English people; but that their real meaning might not
only be taken in but kept ever before his people The General had
established two weekly Holiness Meetings in the Mission Halls, one on
Sunday morning and the other on Friday evening. These practices, kept up
wherever The Army has gone all these forty-five years, have resulted in
the cultivation of ideals far above those usual even in the most refined
Christian circles.

Nothing has more astonished me, amongst all the torrents of eulogy
passed upon The General and his Army since his death, than the almost
invariable silence amongst Christian as well as secular papers about
these Holiness Meetings, and that teaching of Holiness which were the
root and secret of all the success of The Army.

Any capable schoolmaster might compile volumes of rules; but how to get
them obeyed is the question. How could it be possible to settle every
question of who shall be the greatest in an Army formed largely of the
most independent and unruly elements, if there were no superhuman power
that could destroy the foundations of envy and ill-feeling, and fill
hearts, once wide apart, with the humble love that can prefer others'
honour before one's own?

The organisation of The Army has been, and is, in all countries a
steady, careful development. But it has only been made possible by the
continual maintenance of a complete confidence in God for the needed
supplies of wisdom and grace to enable each to submit to others for
Christ's sake, to bear and forbear for the good of the whole Army,
seeking ever to learn to do better, and yet being willing to be
forgotten, and even to be undervalued, misunderstood, and ill-treated by
a hasty or unjust superior, for Christ's sake.

General Booth, himself, did not always appear the most patient and
kindly of leaders. He would have been the first to admit how he wounded
tender hearts, and, perhaps, even repulsed some who could have been of
greater helpfulness to him had he been able to endure more patiently
their slowness and timidity.

But, conscious as he was of his own defects, he especially rejoiced when
his son and successor began to shine as a Holiness teacher, whose weekly
Meetings at Whitechapel became a power that was felt all over the world.

The teaching and enjoyment of this great blessing, with all the
deliverance from self-seeking and pride which it brings, has made it
possible to go on imposing more and more of regulation and discipline
on all sorts of men and women without either souring their spirit or
transforming The Army's system into mere machinery. The Army will go on
to carry out its Founder's purpose better and better the more it learns
how to sit constantly at the feet of the one great Master.




Chapter IX

Army Leading



We have seen Mr. Booth beginning on the spot, now marked with a stone,
near the site of "The Vine" public-house (since happily pulled down, the
site being turned into a public garden) on July 5, 1865, scrambling
through the first six years' difficulties until he marched the
beginnings of an Army of saved drunkards, infidels, and sinners into a
People's Market, transformed into a public Hall and Headquarters.

He called all that "The Christian Mission," with only a slowly dawning
consciousness that it was an Army, for six years more.

But he was leading it on, in humble dependence upon God, with increasing
speed and force. He was really hindered by many things, amongst them his
own ministerial habits of thought and plan. That nothing lasting could
be achieved without system and organisation he had always seen. But he
had never yet known a formation equal to that of some of the Churches
around him which depended upon more or less skilled preachers, and a
complete network of elected assemblies. For all purposes of conquest he
had got preachers enough out of the public-houses; but he could not
imagine their holding regular congregations, or developing the work,
without having years for study and just such plans as the Churches had
established. Hence, when he wanted leaders for the enlargement of the
work he advertised for them in Methodist or other publications. He
secured some excellent, well-meaning men, too; but, in almost every
instance, they proved to be slower than the troops they were supposed to
lead, and a kind of ecclesiastical organisation wrapped them all around
with a sort of Saul's armour, in which fighting the heathen was
unthinkable. He had got--by the testimony, as we have seen, of
impartial observers--such a force as was "unparalleled in extent,
unsectarian in character, and a standing rebuke to the apathy of
Christians."

But how was he to go further afield with it? He had not a leader ready
for its extension outside London. In 1873, Mrs. Booth, however, could
not be content without doing something, at least for a season, in
England's great naval base, Portsmouth, and, after that, in the sister
arsenal city of Chatham. The force of new Converts she gathered in each
town must needs be led by somebody, and in each case The General sent
men of proved ability to manufacture preachers of their own _fighting_
type. After having led Missions in those towns, they went and did
likewise in two of the great manufacturing cities of the north. But
their first achievements had led The General to venture upon sending out
others, of much less ability, to smaller communities, where they were
not less successful than the first two.

Already another great difficulty had been solved, for it had been found
that congregations of workmen gathered in the provincial towns would
give collections generally large enough to defray the local expenses.
Thus were cleared away not only two of the main blocks in the path of
progress, but all need or desire for the officialdom that had already
begun to grow threateningly stiff.

     "After awhile," writes The General, "the work began to spread and
     show wonderful promise, and then, when everything was looking like
     progress a new trouble arose. It came about in this wise. Some of
     the evangelists whom I had engaged to assist me rose up and wanted
     to convert our Mission into a regular Church, with a Committee of
     Management and all that sort of thing. They wanted to settle down
     in quietness. I wanted to go forward at all costs. But I was not to
     be defeated or turned from the object on which my heart was set in
     this fashion, so I called them together, and addressing them said,
     'My comrades, the formation of another Church is not my aim. There
     are plenty of Churches. I want to make an Army. Those among you who
     are willing to help me to realise my purpose can stay with me.
     Those who do not must separate from me, and I will help them to
     find situations elsewhere.'"

They one and all chose to stand by The General, for those who were
really set upon the formation of deliberative assemblies had already
left us.

This was in February, 1877, and in the following July the last Christian
Mission Conference met to celebrate the abandonment of the entire system
that Conference represented, and to assure The General that he had got a
real fighting Army to lead.

It was only at the end of 1878, during which year the "Stations," which
we now call Corps, had increased from thirty to eighty, that in a brief
description of the work we called the Mission a "Salvation Army." But
the very name helped us to increase the speed of our advance.

The rapidity with which The General selected and sent out his Officers
reminds one constantly of the stories of the Gospel. One who became one
of his foremost helpers, had formerly been a notorious sinner, and had
indeed only been converted a fortnight, when because he already showed
such splendid qualities he was sent by a girl Officer to The General
with the strongest recommendation for acceptance.

It was arranged for him to speak with The General on the platform, after
a Meeting. The General, who had, no doubt, observed him during the
evening, looked at him for a moment and then said, "You ought to do
something for God with those eyes! Good-night!"

"I had never had such a shock," says the Commissioner, as he now is. "If
that's being accepted for the Work, I said to myself--what next, I
wonder."

But, sure enough, in another three weeks' time he was called out from
his place of employment by a Staff Officer, who asked him, "Can you be
ready to go to M---- next Monday?" And he went.

This young man had been a devotee of billiards; but had become
interested in The Army by seeing two of our "Special" speakers--one a
very short Officer, the other a giant doctor from Whitechapel, who
weighed some 334 lbs., wheeled up a steep hill in a pig cart, to a great
Open-Air Meeting. After listening many times without yielding, he was
startled out of his coolness by a large Hall in which he attended a
Night of Prayer being burned to the ground the next day. The next
evening, with one of his companions, he went to the Penitent-Form and
found the mercy of God.

When The General was at all in doubt about a Candidate for Officership,
he would often draw such a one out by means of the most discouraging
remarks. To one who had gone expecting a hearty welcome, he said, "Well,
what good do you think you'll be?" The General's eldest son being
present, desiring to help her, remarked upon the high commendation her
Officers gave her. He wished to send her off directly to a Corps; but
The General, still uncertain, said, "No, send her to Emma," which opened
the way for her immediately to leave her business and go to the
newly-opened Training Home for women under his daughter's direction.

A similar Home for young men, under the present Chief of the Staff,
Commissioner Howard, provided means to take those about whose fitness
for the Work there was any doubt, and give them a training prior to
sending them on to the Field.

In 1880, The General addressed the Wesleyan Methodist Conference of the
United Kingdom. That Conference is one of the most powerful Church
assemblies in the world, directing as it does the entire forces of its
Church within the British Empire, and consequently influencing very
largely all Methodists in the world. It was a remarkable testimony to
The General's work that, so early as 1880, its most influential leaders
should have been able to arrange, despite considerable opposition, for
him to address the Conference which that year sat in London. The
President, in welcoming him, warned him that they could only give him a
limited time in which to speak.

What an expression of his sense of liberty and power "from on high,"
that The General should at once have begun by saying, "Mr. President,
in our Meetings we are accustomed to bring any speech that seems likely
to go on too long to a close by beginning to sing. I shall not take it
amiss if you do so in my case." The general laughter with which this
suggestion was greeted banished at once any appearance of stiffness from
the solemn and exclusive assembly, whose members alone were present. He
then proceeded to explain the origin and work of The Army, as follows:--

     "I was told that ninety-five in every hundred of the population of
     our larger towns and cities never crossed the threshold of any
     place of worship, and I thought, 'Cannot something be done to reach
     these people with the Gospel?' Fifteen years ago I thus fell in
     love with the great crowds of people who seemed to be out of the
     pale of all Christian Churches. It seemed to me that if we could
     get them to think about Hell they would be certain to want to turn
     from it. If we could get them to think about Heaven they would want
     to go there. If we could get them to think about Christ they would
     want to rush to His open arms.

     "I resolved to try, and 'The Salvation Army' is the outcome of that
     resolution. In August, 1877, we had 26 Stations. We have now, in
     1880, 162. In 1877, we had 35 Evangelists. We have now 285
     Evangelists, or, as we now call them, Officers, and in many
     instances they have the largest audiences in the towns where they
     are at work.

     "We have got all those Officers without any promise or guarantee of
     salary, and without any assurance that when they reach the railway
     station to which they book they will find anybody in the town to
     sympathise with them. The bulk would cheerfully and gladly go
     anywhere.

     "We have got, I think, an improvement upon John Wesley's penny a
     week and shilling a quarter, by way of financial support from our
     Converts. We say to them, 'You used to give three or four shillings
     a week for beer and tobacco before you were converted, and we shall
     not be content with a penny a week and a shilling a quarter. Give
     as the Lord has prospered you, and down with the money.'" (Loud
     laughter.) "When I asked one of my Officers the other day at a
     Meeting held after a tea, for which the people had paid a shilling
     each, to announce the collection, the woman-Captain, to my
     astonishment, simply said, 'Now, friends, go into the collection.
     Whack it into the baskets.' The whole audience was evidently fond
     of her, and they very heartily responded.

     "If asked to explain our methods, I would say: _Firstly, we do not
     fish in other people's waters, or try to set up a rival sect._ Out
     of the gutters we pick up our Converts, and if there be one man
     worse than another our Officers rejoice the most over the case of
     that man.

     "When a man gets saved, no matter how low he is, he rises
     immediately. His wife gets his coat from the pawn-shop, and if she
     cannot get him a shirt she buys him a paper front, and he gets his
     head up, and is soon unable to see the hole of the pit from which
     he has been digged, and would like to convert our rough concern
     into a chapel, and make things respectable. That is not our plan.
     We are moral scavengers, netting the very sewers. We want all we
     can get, but we want the lowest of the low.

     "My heart has gone out much after Ireland of late, and ten weeks
     ago I sent out there a little woman who had been much blessed, and
     four of her Converts. They landed at Belfast at two o'clock in the
     morning. They did not know a soul. Our pioneer (contrary to our
     usual customs) had taken them a lodging. We had said to her, 'Rest
     yourselves till Sunday morning'; but she was not content with this.
     After a wash, a cup of tea, and a little sleep, they turned out,
     found a Christian gentleman who lent them a little hall, had it
     crowded at once, and now, though only ten weeks have passed away,
     we have Stations in four other towns, two in Belfast, and two
     others are getting ready for opening. Blessed results have
     followed. The people, we are told, come in crowds--they are very
     poor--they sit and listen and weep, rush out to the Penitent-Form,
     and many are saved.

     "Now, Mr. President, I think I may say that it is a matter for
     great thankfulness to God that there is a way--a simple, ready
     way--a cheap way, to get at the masses of the people.

     "_Secondly. We get at these people by adapting our measures._ There
     is a most bitter prejudice, amongst the lower classes, against
     churches and chapels. I am sorry for this; I did not create it, but
     it is the fact. They will not go into a church or chapel; but they
     will go into a theatre or warehouse, and therefore we use these
     places. In one of our villages we use the pawnshop, and they gave
     it the name of 'The Salvation Pawnshop,' and many souls were saved
     there. Let me say that I am not the inventor of all the strange
     terms that are used in The Army. I did not invent the term
     '_Hallelujah Lassies_.' When I first heard of it I was somewhat
     shocked; but telegram after telegram brought me word that no
     buildings would contain the people who came to hear the Hallelujah
     Lassies. Rough, uncouth fellows liked the term. One had a lassie at
     home, another went to hear them because he used to call his wife
     'Lassie' before he was married. My end was gained, and I was
     satisfied.

     "_Thirdly. We set the Converts to work._" (Hear, hear.) "As soon as
     a man gets saved we put him up to say so, and in this testimony
     lies much of the power of our work. One of our lassies was holding
     a Meeting in a large town the other day when a conceited fellow
     came up to her saying, 'What does an ignorant girl like you know
     about religion? I know more than you do. I can say the Lord's
     Prayer in Latin.' 'Oh, but,' she replied, 'I can say more than
     that. I can say the Lord has saved my soul in English.' (Laughter
     and cheers.)

     "_Lastly. We succeed by dint of hard work._ I tell my people that
     hard work and Holiness will succeed anywhere."

Of course, every day's march forward brought with it lessons that were
learned and utilised. Not long could The General continue to interview
Candidates himself, and then forms of application were evolved. The
Candidate must have every opportunity to understand what would be
required of him, and to express his agreement or otherwise with the
teachings and principles of The Army. It was made clear to him or her
that, whilst called upon to offer up a life-long service to this work
for Christ's sake, he must expect no guarantee of salary whatever, and
no engagement even to continue to employ him, should he at any time
cease to act up to his promises, or show himself to be inefficient in
the work.

As for the Soldiers, it was soon required of them that they should sign
"Articles of War" before they could be enrolled. These Articles formed
so simple and clear an expression of The Army's teachings and system,
that the most illiterate in every land could at once take in their
practical effect.

The Articles simply required every one to give up the use of
intoxicants; to keep from any resorts, habits, company, or language that
would be harmful; and to devote all the leisure time, spare energy and
money to the War.

As time went on The General published _Orders and Regulations for
Soldiers_, a booklet of 164 pages, and perhaps as complete a handbook
for the direction of every department of life, public and private, as
was ever written; _Orders and Regulations for Field Officers_,
containing 626 pages of the minutest directions for every branch of the
Work; and _Orders and Regulation's for Staff Officers, _ the most
extraordinary directory for the management of missionaries and
missionary affairs that could well be packed in 357 pages. At later
dates he issued _Orders and Regulations for Territorial Commissioners
and Chief Secretaries_, containing 176 pages, and _Orders and
Regulation's for Social Officers_, the latter a complete explanation of
his thoughts and wishes for the conduct of every form of effort for the
elevation of the homeless and workless and fallen; and _Orders and
Regulations for Local Officers_, containing precise details as to the
duties of all the various non-commissioned or lay Officers, whether
engaged in work for old or young. Smaller handbooks of _Orders and
Regulations for Bands and Songster Brigades_, and for almost every other
class of agents were also issued from time to time.

Thus, step by step, The General not merely led those who gave themselves
up to follow him in the ever-extending War; but furnished them with such
simple and clear directions in print as would enable them at any
distance from him to study his thoughts, principles, and practices, and
sock God's help to do for the people around them all that had been shown
to be possible elsewhere.

With such a complete code of instructions there naturally arose a system
of reporting and inspection which enabled The General to ascertain, with
remarkable accuracy, how far his wishes were being carried out, or
neglected, by any of his followers. He sometimes said, "I would like,
if I could, to get a return from every man and every woman in The Army
as to what they do for God and their fellow-men every day." It soon
became impossible, of course, for any one person to examine the returns
which were furnished by the Corps; but records were kept, and, as the
work increased, Divisional and Provincial Officers were appointed, with
particular responsibility for the Work in their areas; so that in even
the most distant corners of the world, wherever there is a registered
Salvationist, there is some Staff Officer to whom he must report what he
is doing, and who is expected periodically to visit each Corps, see that
the reports made are accurate, and that the work is not merely being
done "somehow," but done as it ought to be, in the Master's Spirit of
Love and Hope for the vilest. And all this without the absolute promise
of a penny reward to any one! In fact, from the first, The General
taught his Officers that they must try to raise all expenses of the work
in their Commands within the borders of the districts in which they were
operating. He has always regarded it as a proper test of the value of
work done that those who see it are willing to pay as much as they can
towards its continuance. And, to this day, The Army's resources consist
not so much in large gifts from outsiders as of the pence of those who
take part in or attend its services.

Regulations are made, from time to time, as to the amount any Officer
may draw for himself, according to the cost of living where he is at
work, though a considerable number do not regularly receive the full
amount. So utterly, indeed, above any such consideration have our
Officers, everywhere, proved themselves to be that, to guard against
needless sacrifice of health and life, it has been necessary to fix,
also, in each country, a minimum allowance, which the Staff Officers
must see that the Field Officers receive. Knowing, as I do, that many
devoted Officers have, for months together, been down at the minimum
level of six shillings per week, in little places where we have no
wealthy friends to help a Corps into greater prosperity, I feel it safe
to say that never was there a religious society raised and led to
victory with so much reliance upon Divine Grace to keep its workers in a
perfectly unselfish and happy condition.

Space forbids any description of the heroic labours by which The General
and Mrs. Booth, travelling, holding Meetings, and corresponding, managed
to extend The Army's work throughout Great Britain; so that before its
name had been adopted ten years, it had made itself loved or dreaded in
many parts.

At the earliest possible date in The Army's history, The General took
steps to get its constitution and rights so legally established that it
should be impossible for any one, after his death, to wrest from it or
turn to other purposes any of the property which had been acquired for
its use by a Deed Poll enrolled in the High Court of Chancery of
England, August 7, 1878. The construction, aims and practices of The
Army are so defined that its identity can never be disputed. Another
Deed Poll, enrolled January 30, 1891, similarly safeguarded The Army's
Social Work, so that persons or corporations desiring to contribute only
to the Social funds could make sure that they were doing so. Similar
Deeds or other provisions are made in every other country where we are
at work, containing such references to the British Deeds, that the
absolute unity of The Army, and the entire subjection of every part of
it to its one General is, in conformity with the laws of each country,
secured for all time.

And again a deed dated July 26th, 1904, has provided for the case of a
General's death without having first named his successor, or for any
other circumstance which might arise rendering a special appointment
necessary.

Subsequent chapters will show how wondrously God helped The General to
carry on this work in other countries as well as in his own, and we
cannot believe that any one will read this book through without being
constrained to admit that there has not merely been the accomplishment,
under The General's own eye, of an enormous amount of good; but the
formation and maintenance of a force for the continual multiplication
of it all, in every clime, such as no other leader ever before
attempted, or even planned. And then most will be constrained surely to
say with us: "It is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes."




Chapter X

Desperate Fighting



One might have supposed that a man who thus raised a force of working
people to do good to others, would in a Christian country have been
honoured and encouraged by all the better elements, and defended with
vigour by the press, the pulpit, and the police against any of the lower
sort who might oppose him or his followers.

To the shame of his fellow-countrymen, alas! it must be told that, so
far from this being the case, The General was generally treated for the
first few years of The Army's work as being unworthy to be received in
any decent society, and his followers, as "blasphemers of religion" and
"disturbers of the peace," who ought by all possible means to be
suppressed.

Those who fattened on the vices of the poor and the opponents of
religion generally were undoubtedly the leaders of opposition to his
work. There were only too many ignorant ruffians ready to delight in any
excuse for disturbance, and very many truly religious people who put
down every disturbance so created to The Army's account, and who,
without taking the trouble to make any inquiry, denounced it
mercilessly.

Condemned almost whenever mentioned, either by press or pulpit, The
General and The Army were naturally treated by many authorities and
largely by respectable citizens, not only as unworthy of any defence,
but as deserving of punishment and imprisonment. In one year alone,
1882, no fewer than 699 of our Officers and Soldiers, 251 of them women
and 23 children under fifteen, were brutally assaulted generally whilst
marching through the streets singing hymns, though often when attending
Meetings in our own hired buildings, and 86, of whom 15 were women,
were imprisoned. True, these persecutions almost always gained for us
sympathy and friends, as many as 30,000 people coming out in one case to
the railway station to welcome an Officer upon his release from prison.
Yet, year after year, such attacks were repeated, and, even during the
last year, imprisonment was suffered by several Officers for leading
Meetings where they had regularly been tolerated for some thirty years;
but where some newly-appointed dignitary would rather not see them.

When we ask in wonder how so bitter an opposition to such a leader, or
his work, could arise, we always find the sort of explanation which that
famous man John Bright once wrote to Mrs. Booth:--

     "The people who mob you would doubtless have mobbed the Apostles.
     Your faith and patience will prevail. The 'craftsmen' who find
     'their craft in danger,' 'the high priests and elders of the
     people,' whose old-fashioned counsels are disregarded by
     newly-arrived stirrers-up of men, always complain, and then the
     governors and magistrates, who may 'care for none of these things,'
     but who always act 'in the interests of the public peace,' think it
     best to 'straightly charge these men to speak no more' of Christ."

The General's attitude in face of all these storms was ever the same;
"Go straight on" was the pith of all his replies to inquiries, and his
own conduct and bearing amidst the most trying hours were always in
accord with that counsel. As in the case of many popular leaders of
thought in England, the custom was established of meeting him at railway
stations, and escorting him with bands and banners, music and song from
train to theatre, Town Hall, or whatever the meeting-place might be for
the day. When he was received, however, not as in later years with
universal acclamations, but with derisive shouts and groans and
sometimes with showers of stones and mud, he smiled to see the
commotion, and took every opportunity to show his enemies how much he
loved them. Already more than fifty years old, and looking decidedly
older, when the worst of these storms burst upon him, this bearing often
subdued crowds, the moment they really caught sight of his grey beard.

"At Ipswich," says one of our Commissioners, "I remember how he won over
the booing crowd by laughingly imitating them, and saying, 'I can boo as
well as you.' Riding with Mrs. Booth through one of the worst riots that
he experienced, and in full sight of all the violence which nearly cost
one of our Officers his life, The General was seen, even when his
carriage was all splattered with mud and stones, standing as usual to
encourage his Soldiers and to salute the people. Arrived at the great
hall he was fitter than most of his people to conduct the Meeting
there."

How much his own calm and loving spirit was communicated to many of his
followers may best be represented by the remarks of a wounded Lieutenant
on that occasion to a local newspaper whilst he was in hospital.

The fact that this Lieutenant had been the champion wrestler of his
county, and would never, before his conversion, have allowed any one to
take any liberty with him, will explain the way in which from time to
time The General acquired Officers capable of overcoming such crowds.

The Lieutenant, riding in the very dress he had once worn as an athlete,
but with our Salvation Army band around his helmet, was a perfect target
for the enemy.

"When I came to S----, I never thought for one moment that I should have
to suffer and to be taken to a hospital for my blessed Master; but I
have had a happy time there. I can truly say that the Spirit of God has
revealed wondrous things to me since I have been in. Though I have
suffered terrible pains, the Great Physician has been close by my side."

(Whilst being removed into the hospital he was heard to whisper "I hope
they'll all get saved.") But he goes on, "When I became conscious I
found myself in the hospital with a painful head and body; but it was
well with my soul. The grace of God constituted my soul's happiness, so
much so, that when I thought about Paul and Silas being taken to prison,
and how they praised God and sung His praises, my heart sang within me.
I could not sing aloud for the pain I was suffering. Could I have done
so, I would have made the place ring for the victory the Lord had given
me in the battle. Glory to His Name! I remember I had no sleep until
twelve o'clock the second night I was in. The first night was an
all-night of pain. At the same time it was an all-night with Jesus. He
was indeed very precious to my soul. I thought of the sufferings of
Christ for me--even then--the chief of all sinners until saved by His
grace. Hallelujah for His love to me. My suffering was nothing (though I
suffered thirteen weeks) compared to Christ's. Should my blessed Saviour
want me to do the work over again, I should do it to-morrow."

"The General," says one of his chosen associates of those times, "always
reminded me so of the captain of a vessel in a stormy sea. Perfectly
calm himself in a way, yet going resolutely ahead with unerring aim,
quickly deciding whenever a decision was needed, and always ready to
take all the risks; he trained his folks how to go through everything
that came, to victory."

One of the weakest of the many women whom in those days he taught how to
rise up out of their ease and go to battle and victory, says of her
first sight of him, more than forty years ago, "He gave me the
impression in that Meeting of a man of God, whose only aim was the
Salvation of souls. I got saved at one of Mrs. Booth's Meetings, when I
was still a girl only twelve years old. They used to call me 'Praying
Polly.' But, never having had a day's schooling, when he wanted me to
become an Officer, I feared my own incompetence. Mrs. Booth said 'You
will see God will punish you.' She had seen something of my work in
Meetings where I had to take up collections and turn out roughs, and so
had no doubt told The General what she thought I could do.

"Sure enough I was laid up completely, lost the use of one limb, and had
to use crutches. But just as I came weak out of hospital and penniless,
I saw a shilling lying on the ground, picked it up, and with it paid my
way across London to The General's house. I thought, 'Oh, if I can only
see Mrs. Booth, I'll get her to pray for me, and get help from God.'
When I arrived at the door, she was just coming out to go off to the
North of England; but she sent her cab away and stayed for a later
train, to attend to me. She helped me up the steps and said:--

"'Now then, are you willing to follow God?'

"I didn't feel fit for anything; but I said, 'Yes, if God will only help
me, I'll go to the uttermost parts of the earth for Him.'

"Accordingly, after having some care and nursing I recovered strength,
and, soon after returning to my Corps, I, in a Meeting when my name was
called, forgot my crutches and hobbled to the front without them. How
the Soldiers all shouted! The Captain carried them after me on his
shoulder home that night.

"After I had been in the War for some months I was ordered to bid
farewell to Lancaster, and, whilst resting at a little place near, I
received order to go to Scotland. When I was at the station, however, on
the Saturday, I got a wire from The General, 'Orders cancelled. Go
King's Lynn.' Nobody at the station knew, at first, where it was, and
even the stationmaster said, 'You cannot get there to-day.' 'But I
must,' I said, 'I have to commence my work there to-morrow.' And he
found out there was just a chance, by taking an express part of the way.
When I got there, at a quarter to ten at night, I knew of no friend, and
found there had been no announcement made in the town. But, on going to
a Temperance Hotel to put up, I learned that a gentleman near had the
letting of a large hall. I at once went to him.

"'But,' said he, 'we don't let like that, out of business hours. And we
are accustomed to get payment in advance of the L2 10_s._ it costs.'

"As I had only sixpence left, I could pay nothing; but I said to him,
'The Rev. William Booth is responsible. You draw up an agreement. I'll
sign, and you shall have the money Monday morning.' Somehow he felt he
could not refuse me, and so I had got my hall for Sunday afternoon and
evening.

"After a good night's rest, I went out on the Sunday morning and spoke
during the forenoon in twelve streets, making, of course, my
announcement of the afternoon and evening Meetings. A poor woman who
thought I was out singing to get bread came and gave me 11/2_d._
saying, 'That's all I have; but you shall have it.' I had to do
everything myself in the afternoon Meeting, for I could not get anybody
who came even to pray. But they gave me twelve shillings. I wanted them
to help me hold a Meeting outdoors at 4:30. At 5:30 we had to open the
doors, as so many were waiting to get in, and at six the building was
packed. We kept up the Meeting till after ten o'clock, by which time
seventeen people had come out to seek Salvation.

"The police sent me a message one Sunday evening, during the Meeting,
that they wanted me at the police station. I replied that I was engaged
that evening; but that I was at their service any time after six the
next morning. So they had me up the Monday morning, and sentenced me to
a month's imprisonment. But they never enforced it, till I left the
town.

"In another place we had no Hall, and I have seen my Soldiers in the
early morning trample snow down till it was hard enough for us to kneel
upon for our Prayer Meeting.

"In Tipton one of the Converts was called the 'Tipton Devil.' He once
sold his dead child's coffin for drink. When we got him, a week later,
to the Penitent-Form, and I said to him, 'Now you must pray,' he said,
'I can't pray.' 'But you must,' I said. After waiting a moment, he just
clapped his great rough hands together and said, 'O God, jump down my
throat and squeeze the Devil out.' And then he said the old child's
prayer:--

    Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
    Look upon a little child;
    Pity my simplicity,
    Suffer me to come to Thee.

If ever a big rough fellow came 'like a little child' to Jesus he did,
for his life from that day was absolutely new.

"Another of those men's wives sent for me, and said she feared he was
going mad, for he had hung up his old ragged clothes on the wall. But we
soon heard him come singing up the street, and he said, 'I've hung them
up to remind us all what I was like when Jesus set me free. A lot of our
blokes have turned respectable, and gone and joined the chapel, and I
thought if ever the Devil comes to tempt me that way I'll show him those
clothes, and say, "The hand that was good enough to pick me up will be
good enough to lead me on to the finish."'

"So I said to his wife, 'He might do a worse thing: let them hang there,
if it helps him any.'"

How The Army won so many of its worst opponents to be its Soldiers comes
out beautifully in a more recent story.

"When I was a drunkard," says a poor woman, "I used just to hate The
Army. But one day, as I was drinking in the 'King George' public-house,
I heard them singing to an old tune of my childhood, and that brought me
out. I stood and listened, and the Sergeant of the Cadets, who was
leading, came over to me and said:--

"'Isn't it very cold? Hadn't you better go home? Don't go back to them,'
she said, nodding towards the public-house. And she started to walk with
me, and put her jacket round my shoulders. In that moment I felt that
The Salvation Army was something for me."

Not only did this woman get saved, but her husband and children, too, as
a result of that loving act.

There came times in many cities, both in England and elsewhere, when our
opposers were formally organised against us, under such names as
"Opposition and Skeleton Armies," etc. These were organisations, in some
instances so formidable, especially on Sunday afternoons, that at one
time, in 1882, there would be 1,500 police on extra duty to protect us
from their attack. This, of course, we much disliked, and we gave up our
marches entirely for a few weeks, so that when we began again the police
might get proper control. They never allowed the formation of these
bands again, for they had learned their lesson by that time. But how
marvellously God helped The General by means of those very oppositions!
They brought us into close touch with bodies of young fellows, many of
whom have since become leaders amongst us.

Strange and sad that throughout all the years of our most desperate
fighting we scarcely ever found men from the "better classes" daring to
march with us. One noble exception, Colonel Pepper, of Salisbury, with
his wife, never hesitated, in the roughest times, to take their stand
with their humblest comrades, glad to go through whatever came. To Mrs.
Pepper The General wrote in 1880:--

     "The Colonel will have sent you some information of our Meetings.
     But any real description is impossible. Manchester has, in many
     respects, surpassed everything. The Colonel, himself, has pleased
     me immensely--so humble and willing. When I look at him in the
     processions, evidently enjoying them, I cannot help wondering at
     what God hath wrought, and praising Him. London seems your place,
     and it has been borne in on my mind that the time has come for us
     to make an attack on the West End, and to raise a Corps there,
     principally out of the proper and decent people. I don't mean out
     of the Plymouth Brethren, or the 'evangelical party,' so-called;
     but out of the wicked and wretched class who have money and
     position and education, and who are floating to Hell with it all.

     "I shrink from suggesting further sacrifices to you. God give you
     wisdom. We have much success and much trial, and much bitter
     opposition. We must have more and more success and more trial, and
     more bitter opposition. We must have more intelligent Officers, and
     you must help us get them."

That West-End attempt, made later by Mrs. Booth, produced for us,
indeed, some Officers who have done much for The Army's advancement;
although, perhaps, not another Colonel Pepper. The very attacks made
upon us, however, helped to attract the attention of thoughtful people,
and to lead to our Meetings persons possessing all the gifts needed for
The Army's world-wide extension.

Amongst these were Colonel Mildred Duff, Editress of our papers for the
young, and authoress of a number of books; Commissioner W. Elwin
Oliphant, then an Anglican Clergyman; Miss Reid, daughter of a former
Governor of Madras and now the wife of Commissioner Booth-Tucker, of
India; Lieut.-Colonel Mary Bennett, as well as Mrs. de Noe Walker, Dr.
and Mrs. Heywood-Smith, and a number of other friends in England and
many other lands who, though never becoming Officers, have in various
ways been our steadfast and useful friends and supporters.

Surely it can only be a question of time! It is true what our great
Master said: "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called."

But, if in the days of our weakness and contempt, it was given us to win
such a force of honourable women and a man now and then, are we to
despair, now that all the world is awakened to the value of our work, of
winning for it more of the excellent of the earth?

The prosecutions of our people by the police also helped us not only to
attain notoriety locally, but to gain a much higher standing generally.
As soon as The General could find legal ground for appealing against the
magistrates' decisions he did so, and this not only obtained for us
judgments that made our pathway clear in the future, but caused the then
Lord Chancellor, the late Earl Cairns, Lord Chief Justice Cockburn,
Archbishop Tait of Canterbury, Bishop Lightfoot of Durham, and other men
of wide influence to speak out in the House of Lords or elsewhere for
us.

And yet, throughout his entire career, right down to his last days, The
General was at times personally assailed with a malevolence and
bitterness that could hardly have been exceeded. It has constantly been
suggested, if not openly stated, that he was simply "making a pile" of
money for himself; and yet, as will be seen in our chapter on Finance he
made the most comprehensive arrangements to render suspicion on this
score inexcusable.

But try, if you can, at every turn throughout all this life, whenever
you hear of General Booth, to realise what it means for such a man,
struggling to carry on and extend such a work, to know every minute, day
and night, that he is being accused and suspected of seeking only his
own, all the time. Remember that his nature was perhaps abnormally
sensitive about any mistrust or suspicion, and about the confidence of
those nearest to him. And then you may have some conception of the cross
he had always to bear, and of the wounded heart that went about, for
years, inside that bold and smiling figure.

And yet there is, thank God! much of the humorous to relieve our
tensions in The Army. A brother Commissioner of mine remembers seeing
The General sail for the United States for the first time. As the
steamer swung off, a bystander remarked, "So he's off?" "Yes." "And when
do you go?" "Go? What do you mean?" "Well, you will never see him again
now, will you?" And then my comrade fairly took in that the man was
alluding to the continual prophecy of those days that The General, once
he had got enough, would disappear with all the money he had raised. So
that man went down to his house laughing, and has been laughing over it
now for twenty-six years!

Perhaps The General gained more than can ever be calculated from having
to begin and to carry on his warfare, for a long time, in the very teeth
of public opinion.

    We're marching on to war, we are, we are, we are!
    We care not what the people think, nor what they say we are,

was one of the favourite choruses which, in his greatest public
demonstrations in this country, as well as in his ordinary Meetings, he
taught us to sing.

Only in this spirit of utter disregard for public opinion have God's
prophets, in all ages, been able to do their work, and only whilst they
remain indifferent to men's scorn and opposition, can the Soldiers of
The Salvation Army properly discharge their task of "warning and
teaching every man," in all wisdom.

How indispensable this state of mind is to the individual Convert only
those who have lived for Christ amongst the hostile surroundings of a
great city can really know. That we have now so many resolute comrades,
even amongst the young people, who meet with no encouragement, but
rather with every sort of contempt and rebuff in their homes, their
workshops, and the neighbourhoods in which they live, is alike a
remarkable demonstration of the extent to which this great victory has
been won, and, at the same time, of the far wider and grander conquests
that are yet to come.

The gigantic enterprises that lie before us, if Christ is really to
become the First and Last with the millions of Africa, India, Japan, and
China, as with those of America and Europe, would be hopeless were we
not prepared to raise up Soldiers to this great military height of
contempt for civilian opinion.

But it may be that our very attitude in this respect has whetted the
enemy's resolution to do all that could be done to prejudice public
opinion against us. The very large measure of popularity or, at any
rate, respect, so far as The Army generally is concerned, in which we
rejoice to-day, must be attributed to the impression created by the calm
persistence of The General, and those who have truly followed him, in
doing what they believed to be right, and turning from all they believed
to be doubtful and wrong, in spite of the general condemnation and
opposition of those around them.

The very people who to-day applaud our efforts to assist the poorest and
worst to a self-supporting and honourable career, are often blind to the
fact that we have only succeeded by doing the very things which they
once said we ought not to do, and by turning away from all the old
customs to which they would fain have chained us.




Chapter XI

Reproducing The Army in America



So far we have traced the beginnings of The Army in the United Kingdom.
But would The General desire or be able to extend it to other countries?
With regard to the need for it there is now, at any rate, no dispute in
any "Christian country," for almost all intelligent persons, whatever
may be their own creed, or want of creed, admit the presence in their
great cities, if not elsewhere, of only too many of the sort of persons
to whom The Army has proved useful.

But there has been no country in which the need for, or possible value
of, The Army has not been at first hotly disputed. We have seen how
desperately it was at first opposed in the country of its birth. And
that could not have been possible had not so many really religious
people looked upon it as an "un-English" sort of thing, "American" in
its ideas and in its style of action. When it was beginning in Scotland,
many said that it might be tolerated amidst the godless masses across
the border, but that its free style of worship especially "on the Lord's
Day" could not but be "a scandal" in the land of Sabbath stillness;
whilst as to Ireland, we were assured that our outdoor proceedings must
needs lead to bloodshed.

When, however, The General resolved to send Officers to America, there
was hardly a voice in either Church or Press which did not ridicule the
idea of our being of use there. And in the case of almost every other
country the same prejudice against English people having "the
presumption to think" that they can give lessons in true religion to any
other nation has made itself more or less felt, even to this day.

But, happily, The General never took counsel with flesh and blood upon
such questions. He knew that, whatever differences might exist between
one race and another, there was everywhere the one sad similarity when
it came to neglect of God and the soul. That The Army must adapt itself
to each new population he had always taught; but that it would
ultimately succeed wherever there were masses of godless people, he
never doubted.

Really the first extension to the United States came about, however, by
no planning of his. A family belonging to one of the home Corps
emigrated, in 1879, to Philadelphia, where they commenced to hold
Meetings there, meeting with such rapid success that two Corps were
raised before the Officers for whom they pleaded could be sent to them.

When The General paid his first visit to America, in 1886, we had
already 238 Corps in the Union, under the leadership of 569 Officers,
mostly Americans. Ten years later there came that terrible blow to him
and to the Work, when his second son, who had been entrusted with its
direction for a term, left The Army, and founded a separate
organisation. Notwithstanding the misunderstanding which followed, and
the check to our progress that was necessarily involved, The Army went
steadily forward, and The General visited the country from time to time,
receiving on each occasion a very remarkable welcome.

The appreciation of his leadership was always of the more value in the
United States, because the disinclination of the American people to
accept anything like direction, let alone command, from this side the
Atlantic was always so marked. It is this fact which gives such special
value to the sort of experiences we are about to record from one of the
later tours of The General, that of 1902-3.

Summing up the journey and its general impressions to an old friend, he
writes:--

     "Well, I have been busy and no mistake. Day after day, hour after
     hour, you might say minute after minute, I have had duties calling
     for immediate attention. Oh, it has been a whirl! But what a
     wonderful rush of success the nine weeks have been since I landed
     at New York.

     "The people, the Press, the dignitaries of all classes have
     combined in the heartiest of welcomes ever given in this country, I
     suppose, to 'a foreigner' of any nationality. It has been
     remarkable, and, indeed, surprising, for it was so largely
     _unexpected_.

     "I have just come into this city of Kansas. The two largest hotels
     have competed to have the privilege of giving me their best rooms,
     with free entertainment. A monster brewery that illumines the whole
     city every night with a search-light has been running alternate
     slides, one saying, 'Buy our Lager Beer,' and the other, 'General
     Booth at the Convention Hall Monday night.' The building for my
     Meeting to-night will hold 8,000 people, and on Saturday 4,000
     tickets were already sold.

     "You will be a little interested in this because you will know
     something of the difficulties that seemed to lie ahead of me when I
     started. God has been very good, and I hope my Campaign will do
     something towards the forwarding of His wishes in the country."

The reception at New York was one of the most enthusiastic The General
ever had. At four o'clock on the Saturday morning, enough of his
followers and friends to fill fifteen small steamers had assembled, so
as to be sure to be in time to meet his liner. By way of salute, when
the great steamer appeared, they discharged seventy-three bombs--one for
each year of his life, as yet completed.

The _New York Herald_ said of his Sunday there:--

     "Eight thousand people heard General William Booth speaking
     yesterday at the Academy of Music. The rain had no effect in
     keeping either Salvation Army people or the general public from the
     Meetings. About one-third of those present wore Salvation Regalia.

     "General Booth displayed wonderful energy throughout his fatiguing
     day's work. His voice has great carrying power, and the speaker was
     distinctly heard throughout the auditorium. Despite the fact that
     they could not gain admission to the building, at the evening
     service, people remained standing in the drenching rain from 7:30
     till after 9 o'clock to see The General leave."

     "At the close of his last address," says _The Times_, "167 men and
     women had been persuaded to his point of view, and went to the
     Mercy-Seat."

How generally the whole country, and not merely the central areas, was
stirred by the mere arrival of The General, may be guessed from the
following words taken from the _Omaha Daily News_ article of the Monday
for its readers through far-away Nebraska:--

     "One of the arrivals on the steamship _Philadelphia_ is General
     William Booth of The Salvation Army. That vessel never carried
     before so great a man as this tall, white-haired, white-bearded
     organiser, enthusiast, and man-lover.

     "Wherever men and women suffer and sorrow and despair, wherever
     little children moan and hunger, there are disciples of William
     Booth. The man's heart is big enough to take in the world. He has
     made the strongest distinct impact upon human hearts of any man
     living. This is a man of the Lincoln type. Like Lincoln he has the
     saving grace of humour, and sense of proportion. There is something
     of the mother-heart in these brooding lovers of their kind. There
     is the constraining love that yearns over darkness and cold and
     empty hearts. Big hearts are scarce.

     "In an age of materialism and greed William Booth has stirred the
     world with a passion for the welfare of men. His trumpet-call has
     been like the silvery voice of bugles. His spirit will live, not
     only in lives made better by his presence, but in the temper of all
     the laws of the future."

We shall see from the welcomes given to him by great official
personages, that these remarks do not in the least exaggerate the
feeling created all over the country by the activities of The Army. Had
The General merely made great proposals he would only have been looked
upon in the generally favourable way in which men naturally regard every
prospector of benevolent schemes. But the country recognised in him the
man who, in spite of the extreme poverty of most of his followers, had
raised up, and was then leading on, a force of obedient and efficient
servants of all men.

The journey was arranged, for economy of time, so as to include a visit
to Canada, and its general course was as follows: From New York he
travelled to St. John's, New Brunswick, where the Premier, in welcoming
him, said the work of The Salvation Army had "placed General Booth in a
position perhaps filled by no other religious reformer." From New
Brunswick he passed on to Halifax, Nova Scotia, to Montreal (where he
was the guest of Earl Grey, the Governor-General), Ottawla, Kingston,
Hamilton, London, and Toronto. Thence he returned to the States, and
held Meetings in Buffalo, Chicago, Minneapolis, and St. Paul, Des
Moines, Kansas City, Denver, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Oakland,
Omaha, St. Joseph, St. Louis, Birmingham, Cincinnati, Cleveland,
Pittsburg, Washington, Baltimore, Philadelphia, Worcester, in three of
which cities he conducted Councils of Officers, in addition to public
Meetings.

The impression invariably made wherever he went, was thus ably summed up
by the _Chicago Interocean_:--

     "No other man _is_ General of an Army of people that circles the
     globe. No emperor commands soldiers serving openly under him in
     almost every nation of the earth. No other man is called
     'commander' by men and women of a hundred nationalities.

     "Aside from his power over the great Organisation of which he is
     the head, General Booth is one of the world's most remarkable
     figures. His eloquence stirs and stings, soothes and wins; and this
     eloquence alone would make him famous, even if he had never
     undertaken the great work he has done with The Salvation Army.

     "As he speaks, his face is radiant with the fervour that carries
     conviction. His tall figure and long arms, used energetically in
     gestures that add force to what is said, his white hair and beard,
     and his speaking eyes, make him an orator whose speeches remain
     long in the minds of those who hear them. The feeling of the
     members of The Army towards their Commander has in it both the love
     and reverence of a large flock of their pastor, and, added to this,
     the enthusiasm, loyalty, and energetic spirit of an Army."

[Illustration: General Bramwell Booth]

Where so wonderful a journey is so filled up with Meetings so
described, and where, from the very highest to the lowest all speak so
warmly of him, it is really difficult within the limited space at our
disposal to give, without danger of monotony, or repetition, any
adequate idea of what took place. Americans are such habitual organisers
of huge demonstrations, and are so generally accustomed to say,
publicly, without reserve, what they think, that the expression of what
to them may appear perfectly natural runs the risk of creating elsewhere
an air of exaggeration and unreality. But if we consider that great
American States like Minnesota, Ohio, and Michigan contain more
inhabitants than some of the kingdoms of Europe, and that their
Governors are men likely to occupy the very highest positions in the
government of America, we can realise how effective amongst the masses
of the people The General's work must have been before such Governors
could be expected to preside at his Meetings, and to speak of him, as
they did.

Said Governor Nash, of Ohio:--

     "I never had the privilege of meeting you in person, until I
     grasped your hand upon this platform. You have not been unknown,
     however, to me or to the people of Ohio. You recognise the fact
     that you could not perform this work well without the help of God.
     That your work has been well performed is well known to us all from
     the fact that the Organisation you have made known as The Salvation
     Army has spread throughout the world, turning the feet of
     multitudes into the paths of righteousness and peace. It has done
     good. It has done a great work wherever it has gone. It is for
     these reasons that the people of Ohio welcome you most cordially
     to-night, and they and I wish you an abundant harvest in your
     life's work, and that at the end you may have the peace and rest
     and the joy that God gives to all His own good people."

Similar specially religious references to those used by Governor Nash
came constantly into the speeches of other leaders who expressed their
people's welcomes to The General, showing how faithfully every
opportunity was being utilised to exalt Christ, amongst even the most
unusual crowds assembled on these occasions.

Governor Cummins, of Iowa, said:--

     "I have long wanted an opportunity to express publicly my
     appreciation of the grand, noble, and untiring work that every day
     is being performed by those noble and unselfish men and women, who
     have gathered under the Flag of The Salvation Army, loved and
     esteemed throughout the whole world.

     "In every army there is a leader. The Salvation Army has a Leader
     whose commanding figure towers above the Salvationists of the
     world, and has drawn to himself more love, more respect, and more
     confidence than at this moment centres in any other human being. Of
     him it will be said, after he has passed to the beautiful shores of
     the hereafter, the best that can be said of any man, that the world
     is better because he lived in it."

Lest The General should have been too much puffed up by all his
successes and the praises showered upon him, God almost at the end of
the tour allowed an accident which might easily have ended his career;
but which only gave him an opportunity to show more conspicuously than
ever his resolution to persevere in his ceaseless labours.

It was whilst passing along a dark passage in New York that The General
stumbled, and, but for God's great goodness, would have fallen into a
cellar. As it was, one leg was very much bruised and hurt. He thus
described, in writing, to a friend what followed:--

     "March 13, 1903.--The accident came at a very unfortunate moment,
     and at the onset it looked like spoiling the closing chapters of
     the Campaign.

     "But God is good. I was favoured with the services of one of the
     most skilful and experienced surgeons in New York. He put my leg
     into starch, and then into a plaster of Paris jacket. And by dint
     of resolution, and the supporting Spirit of my Heavenly Father, I
     went through the last Meeting with apparent satisfaction to
     everybody about me, and some little comfort to myself.

     "It was a great effort. The Hall is one of the finest and most
     imposing I ever spoke in. Three tiers of boxes all round full with
     the swell class of people in whom you are so much interested, with
     two galleries beyond.

     "It called for some little courage to rise up with my walking-stick
     to steady me; but God helped me through. I hung my stick on the
     rail, and balanced myself on my feet, and talked the straightest
     truth I could command for an hour and twenty minutes.

     "A little spectacular function followed in the shape of trooping
     the Colours of the different nationalities amongst whom we are at
     work in the States, and a midnight torchlight procession, with a
     massed farewell from the balcony of the Headquarters, closed the
     Campaign.

     "I am doing the voyage fairly well. Of course, it is very
     wearisome, this lying all the time. The ship is rolling and tossing
     and pitching considerably, and it looks like doing so, until we get
     under shelter of the land."

The probable after-effect of these distant Campaigns of The General
could not be better described than in the words of one of our American
Officers, himself known throughout The Army as one of our most
spiritually-minded and intelligent observers:--

     "Seventeen years ago," he says, "the writer first heard The
     General, and it has been his privilege to hear him many times
     since. Each succeeding effort and series of Meetings seems to
     eclipse all the rest. It was so in Pittsburg, which, being one of
     the greatest business centres and home of some of the most virile
     men of the world, deeply appreciates him.

     "He was very weary from his heavy Campaign in Cleveland, but, in
     spite of this, to me he seemed at his best. He spent no time in
     angling to get into sympathetic touch with them, but with the
     precision of a bullet he made direct for the conscience of every
     man and woman there. Talk about 'naked truth,' 'judgment,'
     'daylight,' 'straight preaching.' We had it that night, as I never
     heard it before. There was no escape. Every honest person there had
     to pass judgment on himself.

     "It was difficult to close that Meeting. The truth was setting men
     free. Many wept and prayed and submitted to God, and some fairly
     howled at the revelation God gave them of their character and
     conduct. It has been my privilege to hear such preachers as
     Beecher, Matthew, Simpson, and Phillips Brooks, and such orators as
     Wendell Phillips and Gough; but The General is the greatest master
     of assemblies I ever met. He played on those vast audiences of
     judges, lawyers, ministers, business and working men as Ole Bull
     played on the violin. They laughed, they wept, they hung their
     heads with conviction, their bosoms heaved with emotions, they were
     convinced, convicted, and a multitude were converted. I think at
     one time there could not have been less than 3,000 eyes brimming
     with tears. He uncovered sin and made it appear as it is, utterly
     without excuse, and utterly loathsome; and then he revealed the
     love and sympathy and helpfulness of Christ, till many could not
     resist, but had to yield.

     "A lawyer said to me the next day that the sermons and lecture were
     the most wonderful he had ever heard. Another lawyer who had been
     to each Meeting stayed in his place till the very close on Sunday
     night, saying that he could not tear himself away.

     "The common people heard him gladly, and the uncommon people were
     overwhelmed with admiration, and conviction. A young lady,
     belonging to one of the best families in the city, just home from
     Paris, where she had been studying art, heard him and could not
     refrain from leaving the box in which she sat and going to the
     Penitent-Form. She went home truly converted.

     "The wave of power and conviction did not cease when The General
     left; and during the next four days we saw fifty-eight persons at
     the Penitent-Form."

The special value of all these American testimonies to the effect of The
General's brief visits, lies in the fact that they show the triumph of
the War plan of God, just in the circumstances where weaklings are
tempted to yield to public opinion, substitute orations for real
righting for souls, and to press nobody to an immediate decision, or
change of heart and life.

There can be no doubt that The Army's invariable fight against the drink
has helped to make its General so highly honoured amongst American
statesmen. But in that, as in everything else, the important fact to
note is that it was by establishing an absolute authority that he
secured the faithful carrying on of the campaign against drink and every
other evil at every spot where our Flag flies.

The eyes of the whole world have, in our day, been more or less opened
to the ruinous character of the drink traffic, and The General and his
forces, whilst keeping out of the political arena, have mightily helped
the agitations that have ended in the exclusion of the drink traffic
altogether from many states and cities, and its limitation, in many
ways.

But much less notice has been taken of other evils, which have no less
absorbed the attention, and spoiled the means, the minds, and the souls
of the masses. The sight daily in every great English-reading city when
the sporting editions of the newspapers appear, ought indeed to arouse
every follower of Christ. But the habit of irresponsibility that has
grown up in most "Christian" circles has still to be fought against
everywhere, and The General's persistent testimony against it, indeed
the whole theory of a Divine Army and of War, must remain for ever one
of the strongest features of his life's work. The old song:--

    Arm me with jealous care,
      As in Thy sight to live;
    And, Oh, Thy servant, Lord, prepare
      A strict account to give,

has expressed the thought behind all the arrangements of our Army. And
it is remarkable how, in the midst of the general indifference, so large
a measure of this "jealous care" for God and souls has been awakened and
maintained.

Nowhere, alas! does the theory of irresponsibility find a more congenial
soil than in the very places and services where God is most feared,
honoured, and obeyed. His doors are indeed opened to the world; but
whether anybody enters them or no is the care of but sadly too few.
Hymns are so announced as to make it easy for all to join in singing
them, if they choose. But whether the words are sung by many, or only by
a proficient few, and above all, whether hearts as well as voices are
raised in prayer and praise to God, is too often a matter of absolute
indifference to almost every one.

How The General altered all that, wherever his influence was felt! He
made all his people understand that not merely are they responsible for
understanding and heeding God's commands themselves, but for enforcing
attention to them, as those who must give account of their success or
failure.

The sister leader of some little Meeting in the far-away Outpost of a
Corps, thousands of miles from the centre, when she insists upon having
a verse sung for the third time because "I'm sure some of you lads were
not half singing," has little idea of the religious revolution she
represents. That the dislike of so many for any "such innovations"
continues, may help to convince any one who thinks of the urgent need
there was, and is still, for the substitution of responsible for
irresponsible leadership in "Divine Service."

During his visit to the United States in 1907 The General had a severe
illness which seriously threatened to cut short his career. His death
was indeed cabled as an item of news from Chicago. But the report was,
as Mark Twain would have said, "grossly exaggerated." Nobody will
wonder, however, at his having been ill when they read Commissioner
Lawley's report. He writes:--

     "We have calculated that in the thirteen meetings of his New York
     Campaign the General was on his feet speaking about twenty-six and
     three-quarters hours.

     "He spent less than six weeks in the Country, travelled about 3,700
     miles by train, spoke about eighty-five hours to fifty audiences,
     before conferring many hours with leading Officers, and talking to
     the Newspaper Reporters in each town he visited."

An Officer describing his illness wrote:--

     "I never shall forget his effort to ascend the staircase of the
     Commissioner's house on Friday morning after his victory at
     Milwaukee the night before. The veteran Warrior had to rest his
     head and hands on the rail and pray 'My Lord.' It was clear to me
     that the chill he had sustained days before, and which he fought in
     vain against would make him a prisoner for days."

What that meant to him when he was already announced for a number of
other cities can be imagined.

His symptoms the following day were very serious, and one cannot but be
glad that he had at his side at the time his daughter--Commander Eva
Booth. Under her loving care, and with all the help of Doctors and
Masters that could be got in Chicago, The General recovered so as to be
able to go on after a few days with his interrupted tour, after which he
wrote in his farewell letter to his American Troops:--

     "I have been impressed with the great improvement in the devotion,
     spirituality and Blood and Fire character of the forces already in
     existence. I have also most pleasantly gratified by a conviction of
     the possibility of raising a force in the United States that shall
     not only be equal to the demand made upon it by the conditions of
     the country but of supplying me with powerful reinforcements of men
     and money for the mighty task of bringing the whole world to the
     feet of Jesus."

During this visit, The General and the Commander were received by
President Roosevelt at the White House. The General was presented with
the freedom of the City of Philadelphia, and after going through the
gigantic final week described alone in New York was able to sail direct
to Germany for his usual great Repentance Day in Berlin, and he was
already seventy-eight years old.

Need it be said that whilst in this book little mention is made of any
one but The General himself, it not having been his habit in his
journals to refer to those with whom he was for the time associating, we
are not to suppose that at any rate in recent years he was anywhere
fighting alone. In Heaven no doubt the victory won in many a crowded
building was put down to the credit of someone whom few if any of those
occupying the front of the platform would have mentioned; but as a
result of whose prayers, faith and effort the audience was gathered or
the results attained.

It would have been very unfair to the great majority of his Officers to
have called frequent or special attention to the small English Staff who
usually accompanied him, for not only the Commissioners and Chief
Secretaries but the Officers of every nationality laboured
systematically to make the most of his visits to any particular place
and to render to the largest possible extent the results of each visit
permanent.

This may possibly seem specially and curiously unfair in the United
States and Denmark, yet it will only make[1] the principle of this
omission from The General's own records and ours the more clear.

It will doubtless be expected that I make some comment upon the painful
separation from him of three of his own children which were amongst the
saddest events of The General's life, and, yet, I feel it best to say
nothing.

It is not within the scope of this book to tell "all about it," and
telling part could only cause misunderstanding. So I leave it, and hope
everyone else will do the same.




Chapter XII

In Australasia



The entire programme of every tour The General made emphasises so
strongly his advocacy of hard work that one really hesitates to pick out
any one Campaign as more remarkable than another. What is, however,
extraordinary in connexion with one of his far-away Australian journeys
is our having letters which so much more than any others give
particulars of his doings.

     "I am resting to-night, and well I think my poor body has earned
     some kind of respite. Such a ten days' work I never did before of
     sheer hard work. How I have come through it, and come through so
     well, I cannot understand, except that God has indeed been my
     Helper."

Here is another side-light on The General's own inner life which we get
by the way. We conceal, of course, the identity of the lady in question,
except to say that it was a very distinguished hostess with whom he had
occasion to spend some hours when travelling.

     "It was perhaps the loveliest journey I ever had. I talked nearly
     all the time, and, in fact, had no alternative. But I think I ought
     to have made a more desperate and definite attack on her soul than
     I did. She is a very intelligent and amiable lady, and I have no
     doubt I made an impression.

     "Good-bye. Go on praying and believing for me. I want to be a flame
     of fire wherever I go. I thank God for the measure of love and
     power I have. _But I must have more._ I am pushing everybody around
     me up to this--the inward burning love and zeal and purity. I wish
     our _best_ men were _more spiritual_. Give my tenderest love to
     all."

In each of The General's visits to Australia there was much of the same
character; but from the letters to his children which he wrote on one of
them, we can extract enough to give some idea of what he saw and felt in
passing through those vast regions:--

     "What the reception (at Melbourne) would have been had it not been
     for the torrents of rain I cannot imagine. Although it was known
     that I could not get in before six or seven o'clock, there was a
     great mass of several thousand people waiting at three o'clock. As
     it was we did not get into the Exhibition Building till ten, and a
     vast crowd had been sitting inside from five, and stayed to hear me
     talk till 10:45.

     "I had an immense Meeting--they say 5,000 were present on the
     Sunday morning, 7,000 in the afternoon, with as many more turned
     away.

     "The opportunity here is immense beyond conception. The people are
     delightful, and the Officers also. If they were my own sons and
     daughters, I don't see how either Officers or Soldiers could have
     been much more affectionate."

How great was the strain of the Meetings may be guessed from the
following remarks as to the final one:--

     "I trembled as I rose. You must understand that the Hall down which
     I spoke is about 400 to 450 feet long, and that on this occasion a
     partition about ten feet high was drawn across it, some 300 feet
     from the spot on which I stood, so that my voice had to travel all
     through the entire length of the building before it met with any
     obstruction, whilst behind me there was at least another seventy
     feet. The Press estimate the crowds at 10,000; but, that is an
     exaggeration. There would be 7,000, at least. I had taken the
     precaution to send an Officer to the far end to see how far he
     could or could not hear me, and he brought back word 'excellently.'
     So I drove ahead, speaking over an hour and a half, and not losing
     the attention of my audience for a moment. Indeed, I felt I had the
     whole house from the moment I opened my lips. Of course, it was the
     greatest physical effort a long way that I ever made, and,
     considering that it was my seventh address in that 'dreadful'
     building, and that I commenced with a bad throat, exhausted with
     the fatigues and miseries of the voyage, and that I had
     ceaselessly worked at smaller Meetings, etc., all the four days, I
     do think it very wonderful how I went through it, and I must
     attribute it to the direct holding up and strengthening of the dear
     Lord Himself.

     "On all hands I think a deep impression was made. To God be the
     glory, and to my poor constituents, for whom I live and plead, be
     the benefit.

     "I am tired this morning, but shall get a little rest to-day and a
     little extra sleep in the train. We leave for Bendigo at twelve
     o'clock, arriving at four for Meeting to-morrow. We go to Geelong
     next day, coming back here on Friday morning, and leaving at five
     for Sydney, travelling all night, and arriving there about noon on
     Saturday.

     "You will get tired of hearing of this round of Meetings, and of
     the very echo of this enthusiasm; but you will, I am sure, rejoice,
     not merely that the people of this new world have welcomed your
     father and General with such heartiness, but that there is for The
     Army such an open door in these parts."

That is indeed what lends such endless importance to the recital which
we cannot help reporting ever and anon of The General's Meetings in each
country to which he went. It was not the mere coming together of crowds
to listen to a speaker, but the enthusiastic acceptance and endorsement
of a system, and of demands made by a perfect stranger in which he so
delighted. The General never went anywhere merely to preach or lecture.
All that he did in that way was always so combined with Salvation
Campaigns that at every step he was really recruiting for The Army.
Hence his every movement, the reports of his journeys, the conversations
he held with all whom he met, everything told in the one great War and
helped to create, more and more all over the world, this force of men,
women, and children, pledged to devote themselves to the service of
Christ and of mankind.

There is a very interesting account of a visit to a State School,
especially as it shows The General's keenness to learn, for The Army,
anything possible:--

     "At ten o'clock I went by the request of Mrs. McLean, the lady
     with whom I am staying, to visit one of her State Schools. I was
     met at the door by the managers and members of the board, who
     conducted me through the building.

     "There were over 1,000 children in ten different classrooms. I was
     much interested in them, and spoke in each room, so that I began
     the day with at least ten little sermons.

     "I was very much struck with the singing of the children, rendered
     very effective with some corresponding action with the arms and
     feet, which gave life and vigour to the thing. I am satisfied that
     we might follow this plan out with very good effect in our Army
     singing. The little that is done is always appreciated."

And so whilst the Secular Australian Schools got some little gleam of
the heavenly light, the aged General saw and passed on to all his world,
a valuable suggestion that has since been taken up and acted upon
everywhere in our Children's Meetings and demonstrations.

And then he passes at once to quite another department of his
activities. He always exercised the same care in every country, which we
have already described as to England to ensure the careful settlement of
all property acquired for The Army, so that it may be, as nearly as
possible, made certain that nothing given to the one Army should ever be
removed out of the control of its central authority. How much of time
and care this has demanded will be readily understood by those who have
any experience in property matters, and who know how widely laws and
legal usages differ in different countries:--

     "I had an interview with Mr. Maddocks, our solicitor out here--a
     very nice fellow indeed, and I should think capable withal. He
     seems to grasp the idea of The Army government, and to be anxious
     to co-operate with us in such a settlement of our property as will
     be in harmony with it."

Only by means of many such interviews, and all the care they represent,
was it possible, under the laws of such thoroughly democratic States, to
leave the local holders of authority under The General's complete
freedom of aggressive action, and yet to secure that everything they
acquired with The Army's funds should remain for all time at the
disposal, for The Army only, of a General with his office at the other
side of the world.

And then we go on to the journey during which he was hoping "to get some
extra sleep"!

     "At twelve, left for Bendigo, arriving about four o'clock. Was very
     weary on the journey, and had to turn out two or three times to
     address the crowds waiting to listen to me on station platforms.

     "Bendigo is a town of some 30,000 people, entirely made and
     sustained by the gold-digging industry. An immense amount of the
     precious metal has been taken here, and sufficient is being secured
     still to make it a paying concern, although the miners have to go
     to a considerable depth in order to secure the quartz.

     "We had a public reception, and they had made a general holiday of
     it in the place. People must have come in from miles around to help
     make up such a crowd. They pulled up at a splendid fountain in the
     centre of the town, intending to separate with three cheers for The
     General; but I could not withstand the temptation, and made quite a
     little sermon about saving their souls, and serving God."

It is this interest both in the everyday occupations and resources of
the people, and of the tours they made which, joined with all his
intense concern about the soul, constituted The General and all who
truly follow him, the true brethren of all mankind. It must ever be
remembered, to the credit of Australia, that its leading men were the
first to recognise this characteristic of our Officers, and to lend them
all the influence of their public as well as private countenance and
sympathy. It is this fact which makes it a permanent pleasure to record
their kindnesses to The General.

     "Came on to Melbourne, on my way to Sydney. Met a body of
     representative men to lunch, amongst them Sir James McBain,
     President of the Upper Chamber, Mr. Deakin, an ex-Cabinet
     Minister, a very nice fellow indeed, a man who appears to me to
     have more capacity than any one I have yet met in the Colonies. He
     made a speech, and at the close drew me on one side, and said he
     wanted to do something for us, and if I could only tell him what it
     should be on my return to Melbourne, he would be very glad to do
     it.

     "I am sure he is prepared to be a good friend. He is a coming Prime
     Minister, I should think."

(The General had no idea then that all Australasia would, so soon, be
united into one Commonwealth, much less that Mr. Deakin would, for so
many of the next ten years, be Premier of the whole.)

But a remark he once made respecting the reported scepticism of some
highly-placed Colonials might be made with regard, alas! to many
"statesmen" of Christian lands nowadays, and we cannot but see in that
fact, and in the friendliness of so many such persons with us, a token
of the meaning both of the scepticism, and The Army's position. In how
many instances have men, moving in influential circles, met with a
Christianity manifestly formal and carrying with it no impress of
reality! How natural for them to sink into scepticism! But the moment
they encounter men who convince them instantly that they believe the
Bible they carry, scepticism retires in favour of joyous surprise, and
without any desire to discuss doctrines, they become our lifelong
friends.

The General's ability in securing the assistance of all sorts of men,
including those whose religious opinions widely differed from his own,
or who had got none at all, was remarkable. When reproached, as he was
sometimes, for taking the money even of sporting men, he would always
say that he only regretted that he had not got a larger amount, and that
he reckoned the tears of the poor creatures that would be relieved would
wash the money clean enough in the sight of God for it to be acceptable
in His sight.

     "Met Mr.----. He is interested in our Maternity work, and promised
     some time back to assist us with the Hospital we are proposing to
     erect. He is a multi-millionaire. He promised L2,500 right
     away--L1,500 when the sum of L23,500 had been raised, making
     thereby a total of L25,000 with which building operations could be
     commenced.

     "He is a young man; sprightly and generous, I should think. I
     wanted him to make his promise L5,000 in round figures. But he
     simply said, 'I cannot promise.' We shall see!"

The following description of one Australian night ride may give some
idea both of the eagerness of the people to hear him, and of the amount
of fatigue The General was able to endure:--

     "We left at 5 P.M. The journey was certainly unique in my history.
     Six or seven times in that night, or early morning, was I fetched
     out of my carriage to deliver addresses. The Mayors of two of the
     towns were there to receive me, with crowds all placed in orderly
     fashion, with torches burning, everything quiet as death while I
     spoke, and finishing up only with the ringing of the departing bell
     of the train and the hurrahs of the people.

     "At two in the morning, at Wagga-Wagga, of Tichborne fame, they
     fairly bombarded my carriage shouting, 'General Booth, won't you
     speak to us? Won't you come out?' But I thought you could really
     have too much of a good thing.

     "At another station, after speaking for the twenty minutes allowed
     for breakfast, a lady put through the window a really superb
     English breakfast, as good as ever I had in my life, with
     everything necessary for eating it, and as we went off she added,
     'Mind, I am a Roman Catholic.'

     "The reception at Sydney was enormous, they say never surpassed,
     and only equalled once at the burial of some celebrated oarsman who
     died on the way from England. They had arranged a great reception
     for him, and they gave it to his corpse. The enthusiasm of the
     Meetings is Melbourne over again."

The General's almost invariable escape from illness during so many years
of travelling, in so many varying climates and seasons, can only be
attributed to God's special guidance and care. In Melbourne, influenza
raged in the home where he was billetted, and seized upon one of the
Officers travelling with him. And yet he escaped, and could resume his
journey undelayed. In South Africa, when he was seventy-nine, another of
his companions in travel was separated from him for days by severe
illness; but The General, in spite of a milder attack of the same sort,
was able to fulfil every appointment made for him.

Best of all, however, was the peculiarly blessed inward experience which
he enjoyed amidst all the outward rush of the Australian tour. It has
been so often suggested by truly excellent men that the soul cannot
enjoy all the fulness of fellowship with God without a great deal of
retirement from men, that we should like to have The General's inner
life fairly exhibited, if it were only in order for ever to bury this
monstrous and, we might also say blasphemous, superstition, which has so
often been supported by one or two quotations from the Gospel, though in
defiance of the whole story of Christ, and of every promise He ever
made.

Of what value could a Saviour be who drew back from helping His own
messengers upon the ridiculous pretence that they were too busy doing
His bidding, and did not spend enough time "seeking Him for themselves"?

     "Just a P.S. to say that God is wonderfully with me. I don't think
     that I ever in the midst of a great Revival had a more powerful
     time than last night. It was nothing short of a miracle. I had no
     definite line ready, and had no time to get one. I preached an old
     sermon at Melbourne, just because I must have something straight
     before me that I could shout out to that immense crowd, and I had a
     wonderful time; but last night God helped me in every way. The
     power upon the people was really wonderful at times."

Little did most of his own Soldiers guess the extreme strain of inward
weight and struggle under which The General was often labouring just
when in some great assembly he appeared to every one to be overflowing
with youthful gaiety and self-confidence.

The following letter to his youngest daughter, and some entries in his
diary, will give some idea of the inner victory he really gained on many
such occasions.

Commissioner Lawley, mentioned in this letter, was The General's almost
constant companion and helper in many years' travel in many lands,
leading the singing, soloing, managing the Prayer Meetings, and
generally aiding in every arrangement, a true armour-bearer and comrade
at every turn:--

     "Fair night; might have been better. Plenty of weakness; still,
     better than it often is.

     "Lawley just been in; he is not over well; says we have got the
     biggest theatre (The Empire). He is not quite sure whether its
     suitability for talking is beyond the Coliseum at Glasgow, but he
     thinks the Meetings are rather heavy for a sick man, whom four
     doctors have been conjuring during the week to 'settle down' and
     take things quietly, under pain and penalties of the sufferings
     described.

     "However, I am going on with faith that God won't forsake me. It is
     very probable that Mr. MacDougal said something of the same kind
     when he retired to rest on his last sleep, and failing to appear in
     the morning was found by his son with life extinct, gone to live by
     sight; anyway, to have some further assistance to sight through his
     faith in the Better Land.

     "This has been one of the most remarkable of the many remarkable
     days of my history.

     "I passed a weary night, and felt altogether unfit for the task
     before me. The natural force seemed to have passed out of me, both
     mentally and physically. In fact, my heart failed me, and there
     seemed nothing before me but the prospect of slackening down. I was
     only kept going by the memory of so many deliverances brought out
     for me in the past.

     "We had one of the largest audiences, and the biggest crowd I ever
     addressed in a single day. In the morning it appeared that Satan
     sat at my door, suggesting all sorts of discouraging things. He
     tried to make me believe that my public work was done, and
     especially suggesting that I should renounce the subject on which I
     was talking, and wait for better days before I attempted to talk
     again. The Prayer Meeting that followed was certainly encouraging.
     We had twenty-seven out. Still, I came away with very much the same
     feeling that had been aroused while I was talking. I took a little
     refreshment, and tried to get a little sleep, but my mind was too
     much agitated to allow of it. I woke up and called for the notes
     of my lecture. My mind could not put two and two together hardly,
     and so I gave up in despair and left myself to my fate. On my way
     to the Meeting, however, a strange feeling came over me. It was
     like the sun through a rift in the black clouds, and all at once a
     spirit of tenderness, hope, and faith came over me. A voice in my
     soul seemed to say, 'Go and do the Lord's work, and the people will
     gather; go for their souls, and all will be well.' I accepted the
     command, my fears vanished, a spirit of confidence took possession
     of me, I rose, I addressed the crowd for an hour and twenty minutes
     with all the physical vigour and mental liberty I could desire.

     "Night. A terrific crowd. I talked for an hour and ten minutes with
     the same force and fervour as in my most successful efforts; 147
     came on to the stage in the After Meeting."

It was thus in the smaller matters of personal strength and health, as
in the greatest affairs, that The General struggled, believed, and
triumphed all through his career.

Australasia has gone farther than most countries towards State
socialism. But it was well remarked by some statesman many years ago,
"We are all socialists now."

No man within his times was more intensely devoted to the cause of the
poor than William Booth. He was indifferent to no practical scheme or
effort for the improvement of the people's condition in any land. But
for that very reason he loathed, with uncommon vigour, such socialism as
would spurn and crush out of the world the man who is no longer in
first-class physical condition or desirous of earning an honest living
by hard work, instead of going about to create hatred between man and
man, and would prevent those who will not submit to any man's dictation
from leaving their families to starve when work is to be obtained.

The General's indignation was specially aroused when "socialist"
spouters tried to block all his plans of beneficence with their foul
misrepresentations. He fought every such attempt with the utmost
determination, and by the help of God and the more intelligent of his
fellow-countrymen, crushed every such attack more completely than the
public sometimes knew, for he resolutely kept out of any political or
social agitation and went calmly on his way, even when his quietude led
the enemy to imagine that he was yielding. In later years, when all the
pressmen of a city came together to meet him, the Social Democratic
paper representative would, of course, come with the rest. On the
occasion of such an interview once in Denmark, he writes:--

     "The Social Democrat usually contents himself by compassionating
     the inadequacy of my efforts for dealing with the miseries which
     they contemplate, with the remark that I don't go deep enough, that
     mine is a superficial operation, whereas they destroy poverty by
     dragging it up by the roots!

     "My notion is that the principles upon which my efforts are founded
     carry me to the lowest roots of all, namely, the selfishness of
     human nature. Their notion is that capital is the root of the
     misery. Destroy the capital, or rather I expect they mean divide it
     up, or let everybody have the benefits that flow out of its
     possession. My notion is that the roots of the selfishness are to
     be found in human nature itself."




Chapter XIII

Women And Scandinavia



For a number of years it was The General's custom to conduct the annual
review of our Swedish troops at Sodertelge, a beautiful seaside spot,
near enough to Stockholm to make it easily accessible, and yet far
enough down the Fjord to make the journey thither a very delightful
excursion.

The sight of from fifteen to twenty steamers crowded with Salvationists
making their way, with streaming banners, music and song, to the camp
ground, was almost like a glimpse of the coming glory when the whole
earth should rejoice before the Lord. But, of course, there came always
to that great gathering a sufficient number of the unconverted to
furnish abundant opportunity for conquests to be made, and the great
Meetings, lasting throughout the day, never broke up without the
ingathering of many souls.

The Councils for Officers which followed during the next few days in
Stockholm and elsewhere, gave The General great opportunities to confirm
and extend the influence of his teachings throughout the whole of these
Northern countries.

Some of The General's earlier visits to Sweden were, however, still more
interesting, and perhaps even more permanently effective, because, as we
shall see, they helped the newly-rising force, enlisted under their
first leader--a devoted woman--to gain some liberty for demonstrations
and other work outside their own buildings such as they had not had
before, and strengthened them in their resolution to fight, whilst
almost all their fellow-countrymen still looked down upon them with
disdain if not with hatred. It is difficult to realise now what a
dreadful thing The Army in those days must have appeared. Huge crowds
gathered from the very first to the Meetings, convened in theatres and
other public buildings by Major, now Commissioner Ouchterlony, a Swedish
lady who had been appointed by The General to inaugurate the Work in her
own land; but the bulk of the population seemed to regard her as though
she was a suffragette, advocating window-breaking or something worse.
This will explain some of the facts The General records in his diary of
his visit seven years later. The journey began with a great Meeting at
Hull, after which the traveller went on board his steamer for a
miserable two days' voyage to Gothenburg. After Meetings there he
proceeded to Sundsvall, a city from which point his Journal reads:--

     "At the conclusion of the evening Meeting the dear Soldiers flocked
     to the station, crowding the platform and expressing, as far as
     opportunity served them, their love for me, and their desire that
     God should bless me. I spoke to them for a few minutes; then came
     the signal and the start, and then as we slowly moved off
     handkerchiefs were waved, volleys of 'Amens' were fired, the Band
     played, and away we were borne out into the darkness. All this was
     like a dream to my comrades, as neither the railway officials nor
     the police had hitherto allowed a word to be spoken or a note of
     music to be played outside our Halls.

     "All that night and all the following day we travelled to
     Stockholm, which we reached at 6 p.m. Crowds awaited our arrival.
     The Soldiers had come down in force, wearing sashes on which the
     words, 'God bless The General,' 'Welcome,' and other devices had
     been worked. The police had come too. There were 200 of them--some
     mounted and some on foot. Our people had been formed into an avenue
     down which I passed to an open space. Every face wore a smile, but
     there was comparative silence. The Police Master had insisted that
     there should be no volley firing or shouting. But hands and
     handkerchiefs were waved, and every one appeared delighted. We were
     soon in a carriage, galloping off to the Headquarters where we were
     to stay."

If all that The General has done for the attainment of a larger liberty
by the peoples of every land were recorded, one might easily make him
appear as a great political reformer. But whilst consistently aiming at
the one great purpose of all his journeys and Meetings, the Salvation of
souls, he has, incidentally, done more to stir the humblest and least
capable to great nation-rousing efforts than any mere political reformer
can hope to do.

During this first visit of twelve days to Sweden, he travelled by rail
over 3,000 kilometres (say 2,000 miles), held twenty-eight public
Meetings, besides a number of private ones with press interviews, and
wayside gatherings at railway stations. Five nights were spent in the
trains, mostly in crowded compartments, for the days of comfortable
"sleepers" on all lines had not yet come. He had, besides his
interpreter, a young English companion, who paid his own expenses, and
he could seldom be persuaded to take any refreshment whilst travelling
that could not be got in the carriage. It must not be forgotten that in
winning and retaining the enthusiastic affection of such multitudes of
persons, The General has had to face the difficulty of only being able
to speak through an interpreter, and that he has had to endure campaigns
of opposition and slander, of which we can say very little, but which,
founded so largely as they have been upon his being "a foreigner," have
had so good a chance to build up walls of difficulty before him.

After this tremendous journey and reception, The General continues:--

     "In the night Meeting I felt a little nervous. The Riding School
     was nearly full, another 100 persons would have filled every seat,
     although a charge had been made for admission, in order to help
     with the heavy expenses.

     "Many had stayed away for fear of the crush. The audience, which
     was most respectable, included the Police Master. I was very tired,
     and no particular topic had been announced. However, I spoke an
     hour and a half, and all seemed intensely interested.

     "Sunday.--The Riding School was full for the morning Holiness
     Meeting. Much power. About 100 stood up to make a full surrender of
     themselves to God.

     "In the afternoon the Hall was again full. The police, of whom
     there were twenty present, would only allow persons to stand in the
     end aisles. Spoke an hour or more.

     "Night. Full an hour before the time. Many convicted. About twelve
     pressed forward.

     "Monday.--Inspected new Hall and Training Home--building to cost
     L5,000. Also visited present Training Home and attended to
     correspondence.

     "At night the Riding School was full long before we arrived. Spoke
     two hours. Immense impression seemed to be produced.

     "Tuesday.--Morning, addressed Officers and Cadets. One o'clock,
     Meeting of Clergy and Evangelistic workers, at which 300 were
     present. Spoke an hour, and answered questions for an hour. Was
     enabled, I think, to answer all objections, putting every one to
     silence.

     "Dined with Lieutenant Lagercrantz of the King's army. He is a dear
     fellow, and he has a dear wife. They are in deep sympathy with us.
     She put on a bonnet and riband that night.

     "I was determined to have a free Meeting for the poorest, a charge
     for admission having been made for all the Meetings yet held in
     Stockholm. So called one at 6 p.m. in our own Hall in the south of
     the city. At six we were quite full. I spoke an hour or more, and
     some twenty or more came out for a clean heart. Closed at 8.15 p.m.

     "At 8.30 p.m. Soldiers' Meeting. Some 500 were present. Spoke for
     nearly two hours. At the close cleared the front as a Mercy Seat,
     and nearly all in the place--Officers, Cadets, and Soldiers--went
     down in company after company. The wonderful Meeting closed about
     midnight.

     "Wednesday.--Rose at 6 a.m., not having had much sleep. Away in
     Norrkoeping at 7.30 a.m. Arrived at 2.30 p.m. Meeting at 3.30 p.m.
     in a great church, where 800 were present. Good time. Very tired.

     "Night. I,500 present. Talked two hours. Afterwards, at 10.30 p.m.,
     had a Meeting for Soldiers. Got home about 11.45 p.m.

     "Thursday.--Meeting at 10 a.m. to say 'Farewell.' Spoke about an
     hour, and left at one o'clock for Lynkoeping, arriving at 2.30 p.m.
     Meeting in our beautiful Theatre at 2.30 p.m. Fine audience."

Mere lack of space forbids further quotation. But surely enough has
been said to show with what marvellous exertion The General managed in
one brief journey to do so much for all classes, and so much not merely
in the way of Meetings but of organisation and administration in every
way.

And the diary tells us nothing of his talks with Officers between
Meetings, which have formed so important a part of all his travels. By
means of such conversations, especially in the case of Officers who are
not English, The General has gained a close knowledge of them and their
difficulties as they have of his thoughts and wishes.

Between his arrival at Gothenburg and his Sundsvall Meetings came a
rough journey to Norway, where we had as yet no Officers, yet where,
nevertheless, a great Meeting had been arranged for by friends, who
later helped in the establishment of our work in their country! The
General passed on to Denmark, where our work was in its first year.

On the afternoon of his arrival he tells us he rested, wrote up
correspondence and journal, and had some little thought about the coming
Meetings.

     "Night. Welcome Meeting in the Methodist Church. Packed. There must
     have been nearly 1,300 people present. The admission was free, and
     there were many Philistines, some socialists, and some lads bent on
     mischief. To add to our difficulties, my interpreter did his work
     so miserably that we had some confusion and restlessness. After an
     hour's talk, I paused for the collection to be taken, and changed
     interpreters. The second one did very much better. His voice,
     however, was feeble and his manner very quiet, so that things were
     not very much better for a time. Then we had a little quiet, and a
     decent finish. It was a considerable disappointment, however, and
     next door to a defeat. I retired to rest very sad, and with awkward
     forebodings about the coming Meetings.

     "The great funereal vault of a church, the interpreting, the
     mocking young fellows void of any sense of honour or conscience to
     appeal to, or any respect for a stranger, the intense anxiety of
     the Officer in command to have good Meetings, and above all my
     longings to meet the needs of the hungry crowd, only wanting to
     hear, and many of them equally willing to obey: these and other
     troubling thoughts haunted my mind and spoiled my night's sleep.
     But I fell back on my old remedy, and, comforting myself in the
     Lord, resolved to do what could be done and left myself in His
     hands.

     "Sunday.--11 a.m. Had a local minister to translate; he did well.
     Some fifty or sixty stood up at the close as seekers for a clean
     heart.

     "Afternoon. The great church packed. Interpretation went fairly
     well. Began at 3 p.m. and went on till 5.20 p.m.

     "Night. Police sent up word soon after six that the street was
     filling up, and the doors must be opened. When this was done the
     young fellows who had made so much trouble on Saturday night--or at
     least some hundreds of this class--forced their way in through all
     else, leaving hundreds more outside. They talked and laughed, and
     although now and then a policeman marched a row of them out,
     their game went on, spoiling everything.

     "The voice of the interpreter was weak, and the confusion flustered
     him. So my dreams of a smash and of a hundred seekers were not
     realised, and we terminated with some six or seven gathered out of
     the crowd immediately near to the platform.

     "It was a great disappointment. I felt beaten, and went home
     confessing it. And yet what could be done? My tongue was all but
     tied. I was helpless without an interpreter capable of conveying my
     meaning to the people. Such a man was wanting. Commending the whole
     matter and the anxious crowds of people so eager to hear to my
     Master, I retired at midnight.

     "Monday.--Breakfast, 8.30 a.m. 9 a.m., spoke with a gentleman from
     Kiel, who is anxious to see The Army open there, and is building us
     a Hall. Saw his plans and arranged terms.

     "9.30 a.m., saw the Officer from Stuttgart. He has a heavy
     struggle. 12 noon, drove round the city. In summer time it must be
     a very pleasant place.

     "3.30 p.m., Meeting. Fine audience, very nearly filling the church.
     Commenced with a new interpreter, a student--execrable! I soon had
     to fall back on one of the others.

     "7 p.m., as full as the police would allow. Continued till 10 p.m.
     And then had a Soldiers' Meeting till 11.30 p.m.

     "Left Copenhagen the next morning at 8.30 a.m."

We who have since seen some of The General's greatest triumphs in that
city, and have watched the steady growth of The Army in Denmark till it
has won the sympathy of the Royal Family and of every other decent
family in the country, must rejoice in this record of his first
desperate battles there, and can guess how much of all the subsequent
victory is due to what his people learned in those days.

But the record has a far wider interest, for it lets us see, as we have
little opportunity ordinarily, the inward conflicts through which The
General passed in so many places where, out of his weakness, or the
weakness of his forces, he, or they, were "made strong."

Few achievements of The General's lifetime will, I fancy, impress future
generations more than his establishment of The Army in Finland at the
very time when all the former liberties of that country were gradually
being taken away.

Formerly recognised by treaties as a Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire,
with its own Parliament and laws, which were supposed to be permanently
guaranteed, Finland found itself looked upon with a growing jealousy
just when a new constitution was slowly changing the governmental
arrangements of Russia. It is, as yet, too early for outsiders to
understand how it came to pass that the country was regarded as a centre
of disaffection, or why, ever and anon some new step was taken to
nullify its Parliament, and to place it more and more under military
control. What we are concerned with is the simple fact that these things
interfered but little with the steady progress of The Army, and that
this proved at every step the soundness of The General's principles, the
completeness with which he succeeded in planting them in the hearts of
his most distant followers, and the marvellous way in which God guided,
protected, and blessed his work, just where he could do the least for
its development.

The very beginning of the Work was due entirely to one of his most
daring decisions, for it may well be doubted whether any attempt, under
the leadership of a foreigner, would have been tolerated at that time.
But when a young lady, who had become acquainted with The Army in
Stockholm, devoted herself to its service, and after passing some time
in Training in London, was sent back with two or three subordinates to
begin work in Helsingfors, who could look upon her with suspicion?

The moment she succeeded, however, in inducing a few of her first
Converts to put on our uniform or insignia, the police came down upon
them, took away all their badges, and declared that the formation of a
Corps there must be regarded as for ever prohibited. Even when the
Converts were provided with a second supply of badges, they were called
to the police-station, and again deprived of them. But the leader had
learnt from The General too well the lessons of patient endurance and
continuance to give way. And when the police saw her followers supplied
a third time with the signs of union with us, having in the meantime
had so many opportunities to learn more both of the leader and of her
people, they concluded that it would be, after all, the best for the
public interest to let them alone.

Two newspapers in the two languages of the country were issued and sold
in all the public-houses. Congregations were gathered in all the cities,
and even small towns, and everywhere the authorities could see that no
spirit of discontent with anything but sin and evil habits was being
created, but that the police would find their tasks lightened, and the
life of the poorest of the people brightened and bettered, if they let
the work go on.




Chapter XIV.

Children Conquerors in Holland and Elsewhere



The General's own personal experience, as well as numberless instances
that came under his observation in his own and other families, gave him
the same assurance as to the need and possibility of the Salvation of
children as he had with regard to adults.

If human beings cannot hope to please God until they are born again of
His Spirit, what folly it would be to give up the best years of life to
mere outside instruction, instead of aiming first of all at this first
and greatest need. This law he always laid down as the guiding line with
regard to all work amongst children, instead of the ordinary Sunday
School idea "first teach, and then try to lead the children to Christ."

In his first publication, _How to Reach the Masses with the Gospel_, he
wrote in 1871:--

     "Great pains are taken, we know, to make the children acquainted
     with the history and theory of Christianity; but their conversion,
     which is the main thing, seems to us to be sadly and sorely
     overlooked. That the immediate gathering of the children to Christ
     is the teacher's work, is recognised, we fear, in very few schools.
     It is not the aim of the present moment; and, consequently, little
     effort is made to bring it about. Feeling all this, we resolved
     that, if ever opportunity offered, we would try services as much
     adapted for the conversion and instruction of children as our other
     services are for adults.

     "On the first Sunday afternoon in April, 1869, we held our first
     'Children's Salvation Service,' in our late Hall in the old Bethnal
     Green Road, and five children professed to find the Saviour."

But of all The General's revolutionary tasks this has, perhaps, proved
to be the toughest. His eldest son--now General Bramwell Booth--made the
children's work his earliest care, and in later years held annually
Councils for all Officers engaged in it in England.

But, although God has wrought wonders amongst the children in every
land, so that we have now thousands of Officers who have been won in
their early years by that Junior work, the spectre of the Sunday School
ever and anon rises to threaten with a peaceful death, this Divine
undertaking. Only the most persistent watchfulness can prevent the
narrow idea of instruction, and unbelief as to children's Salvation
which is its foundation, from gaining the upper hand. It is so easy to
get a thousand children drilled into pretty attention, pretty
performances, pretty recitations and singing, and even into some degree
of knowledge of the killing letter, but so hard to get any one child
really to submit to the one great Teacher of mankind, and be saved!

Therefore we take special pleasure in dwelling upon the fact that The
General's theory has been proved, on trial, to result in producing
heroes and heroines, capable, almost in infancy, of daring battle for
God, and becoming, before they reach their majority, thoroughly
experienced and intelligent conquerors.

In that earliest record we read:--

     "Although the services are strictly for children, it is not an
     unusual thing to see adults sitting by the side of the little ones,
     and sometimes to see parent and child kneeling together seeking 'to
     know Him whom to know is life eternal.' One Sunday evening a woman
     brought her young son, who a short time previously had been
     detected in an act of dishonesty. During the service God's Spirit
     strove with both. The mother saw that she would have to give an
     account of her doings, as well as the boy, and so, side by side,
     they knelt, sought and professed to find pardon.

     "A young lad who had been a source of great annoyance at our
     Meetings, and a dreadful swearer, a short time ago died triumphant
     in the faith. When lying in the London Hospital, evidently dying,
     he sent a request that I would tell the children that he was
     'going Home'; 'but tell them I'm not afraid; and, Oh, tell them not
     to swear.'"

Many of our leading Officers of to-day were truly converted before they
were ten years old, so that, at thirty, they were already veterans in
the Fight. Two Colonels, who were later most frequently seen closely
associated with The General's Campaigns, like him were converted at
fifteen--one of them being at that time almost overlooked by the
Sergeant, who was counting the Penitents. "Captain," said he, "there are
seventy-one; or seventy-two, if you count this lad."

The General has not only counted his young lads and lasses whenever they
were true Penitents, but has dared to set them at once to work to bring
others to Christ and that with such effect that whole countries have
felt the result.

Our first Dutch Officer was a young teacher, dismissed from his
employment because he would persist in seeking the Salvation, as well as
the instruction, of his young pupils. After spending a few months in
England in order to be able to translate for us, he became the
Lieutenant and general helper of our pioneer Officer there. The way had
been prepared before us by a retired Major of the Dutch Army, who had
for some time been carrying on mission work in the city of Amsterdam,
and who, having seen something of The Army in England, turned over his
Mission Hall to us and gave us all possible help. He was rewarded by
seeing all his own children converted.

Holland has suffered, perhaps, more than any country in the world, from
the substitution of head knowledge for real heart acquaintance with God.
The refuge of true believers in days of terrible persecution, it has
seen its Churches either paralysed with the narrowest and coldest
orthodoxy, proclaiming the impossibility of Salvation for any but the
few elect, or the natural reaction, a wild "liberalism," which doubts
everything. How far the two million Catholics of the country hold fast
their old faith is doubtful; but it is admitted that very few of the
other four millions profess to be "born again."

But The General never sought to trim his sails to catch any "modern"
breeze. Upon his every visit to the country he spoke out with the same
simple liberty as in England. Of the fisherman leader he sent to
represent him in Holland, knowing "only a handful" of Dutch words, a
lady said, "He prays just like a man who is drowning." Such praying, and
corresponding effort, for "the perishing" soon brought thousands to
kneel in penitence before God.

The General has visited the country repeatedly, presiding over the
Annual Reviews, which have generally been held on some great land
proprietor's estate, or holding "Days with God" in its largest theatres.
Of one such visit, in 1906, he writes:--

     "I have just had a wonderful campaign in Holland--Meetings,
     enthusiasm, collections, and souls far beyond anything that has
     preceded it in my experience. Praise the dear Lord."

The simple old Gospel that any child can understand, has indeed made The
Army triumphant all over Holland, and the following extracts from The
General's diary, during his visit of 1908, will show how childlike a
faith and devotion our people there have:--

     "Rotterdam, Saturday, _March 14th_.--Soldiers' and ex-Soldiers'
     Meeting fine--three-fourths men. A great improvement on anything I
     have seen in the way of Soldiers' Meetings in this place. I got the
     truth out, and thirty-seven of them fell at the Penitent-Form to
     seek power to walk in its light.

     "Sunday.--The Doelen Hall (one of the largest auditoriums in the
     city) full in the morning, and crowds shut out afternoon and night.
     People hard at first; but twenty-two came to the Penitent-Form in
     the morning, and fifty-eight at night. Never saw men weep more
     freely. L212 given during the day.

     "Monday.--Came on to Amsterdam and commenced Officers' Councils.

     "Tuesday.--A tired, restless night for some reason or other. Sleep
     flew. Occupied with many matters, but not very anxious. Still, did
     not get much refreshment or invigoration for the day's work, and
     felt accordingly. On the whole, the three Meetings were
     interesting, and, I think, useful to the Officers present, although
     nothing remarkable.

     "Wednesday.--What I said of the Councils yesterday may be repeated
     to-day. I had a great deal more material than I could possibly
     introduce into two days, and on leaving out some topics, on the
     spur of the moment, some were left out that might have been of
     great benefit. However, everybody was pleased, and, I think,
     profited. The only question in my mind, similar to the one that
     haunts me in every Officers' Council, is whether I am making the
     most of the opportunity.

     "There is no doubt that we have here a powerful body of men and
     women, good, devoted, and loyal to the principles of The Army,
     proud to be connected with it, and ready to receive instructions,
     and to carry them out. The great lack appears to be a want of
     energy, enterprise, and daring, the being content with a little
     success instead of reaching out to all that is possible and
     promising. However, they are wonderfully improved, and I hope the
     present Commissioner's health will allow of his carrying them a
     long way farther in the direction of enthusiasm than they have
     reached before.

     "Lieut.-Colonel Schoch (our original friend before referred to) was
     with us at all the Meetings. He is very cordial, and in making the
     closing speech, described his oneness with The Army in every
     direction.

     "My correspondence with London is somewhat heavy.

     "Thursday.--Fair night's sleep, but feeling rather tired, which
     must be expected. We are away to Den Helder at 9.42 a.m., so must
     be stirring. Den Helder is a naval port, the headquarters of the
     Dutch navy. We were billetted with Rear-Admiral van den Bosch, who
     is in command of the port, fleet, dockyards, and many other things.
     We were received at the station in a formal but hearty manner by
     the leading people of the town, in the large waiting-room
     (decorated for the occasion), by the minister of the State Church,
     who made a really eloquent address. The great point of his speech
     was the work of the Holy Spirit--God working through us to the
     benefit of mankind. As he stood there talking in that circle of
     sixty or seventy of the leading inhabitants of the place, including
     naval officers of rank, professionals of various classes, and
     prominent people, I could not help feeling, as I often feel now,
     what a change has come over the people, not only with respect to
     The Army, but towards myself.

     "I answered in a few words that I trust were useful and beneficial
     to all present. The whole thing, from the moment of my being
     received at the door of my railway carriage, until I left next
     morning, had been prearranged through the instrumentality of one of
     our Local Officers, to his great credit, to the credit of his town,
     and to the satisfaction of his General.

     "The mail brought me a request to take over a certain county
     council's lodging-house for poor men, on which they are losing a
     large sum, also another to take over an inebriates' home, which
     cost L40,000 and is an utter failure. In such exploits people will
     not have The Salvation Army at the onset, otherwise they might save
     a good deal of expense, etc.

     "Friday.--Arriving at Amsterdam, the mail brought confirmation of
     my agreement of yesterday to postpone my South African visit to
     September, and to begin my Motor Tour at Dundee, and finish at the
     Crystal Palace. In all these things the maxim is ever present to my
     mind, 'Man proposes, but God disposes.' Closed the night at the
     desk, which is becoming more and more a difficult task from the
     failure of my eyes.

     "Saturday.--Good night's sleep. That is for me, anyway, a great
     improvement on recent nights. So now for a good day's work, of
     which there is plenty lying before me.

     "7.30 p.m., Soldiers' Meeting. We have always been crowded out
     before, so this time the Palace Theatre was taken, as an
     experiment, and it justified my reckonings for several years gone
     by, namely, that we could fill any reasonable place on Saturday
     night here, and yet keep the Meeting select; that is, confine it to
     Soldiers and ex-Soldiers, adherents, and those concerned about
     religion. We were more than full, and the place holds 1,500. I had
     much liberty in speaking, the After Meeting went with a swing
     seldom known on the Continent or elsewhere, and we had eighty-four
     at the Penitent-Form, some of them remarkable cases."

No wonder this octogenarian Leader finds his young Dutchmen wanting in
enterprise!

     "Sunday.--The theatre again in the morning at ten. An excellent
     plan. Oh, that it could be adopted the world over! The senseless
     system of beginning at eleven makes you feel it is time to close
     almost before you have had time to get well started. We were
     crowded, large numbers outside clamouring for admission, so much so
     that the police called out their reserves, and fifty men guarded
     the entrance. We had an excellent service inside, and forty at the
     Mercy-Seat. It was a beautiful Meeting, and made a mark for ever on
     my heart, and on the hearts of many more.

     "Afternoon. The large Hall of the People's Palace had been arranged
     for this as well as the Night Meeting. We were full, and many were
     turned away. I lectured on 'The Duty of the Community.' Great
     satisfaction among my own people, and a good impression made upon
     the minds of a good many of the leading people of the city.

     "Night, 7.30. Again full. It is a building erected for an
     Exhibition, and made suitable for a Meeting only by putting up a
     great screen across the centre. I suppose we could have filled the
     entire space; but whether my interpreter could then have been
     heard, I am not sure. I preached with point and power--more
     breathless attention I never had in my life. I reckoned on an easy
     conquest, but we had one of the hardest fights I ever remember
     before we got a soul out. I left at 10.30, completely played out. A
     wall of policemen on either side kept the people back while I got
     into the carriage, the crowd having waited a long time to catch a
     glimpse of me. Had long, restless, and sleepless spells during the
     night; but still I have not done amiss on the whole. I must now
     prepare myself for the coming Berlin Staff Congress."

So much for the general effect upon a largely unbelieving people of
simple, childlike faith!

But The General was, of course, always just as earnest about instructing
all who came to him, old or young, in the way of life, as about getting
them into it. In the midst of these tremendous Campaigns, he repeatedly
prepared Lesson-books for both children and adults. To a lady who had
tried to help him by sending him a number of catechisms for children, on
such an occasion, he wrote:--

     "Thanks for your letter, and your catechisms sent here.

     "The particular catechisms you send I already had--not that the
     church affair could be of any advantage to me, and I should
     imagine it would not be of much use to any one else, especially to
     children.

     "I am trying to produce something that will be a boon to The Army
     by being blessed to hundreds of thousands of children for years to
     come. You do not seem to think it is a very important task. I count
     it the most important work I have had my hands on for years.

     "I had a proper day at----. I got at the peasantry for once,
     although I have often had that privilege before, and we had a
     mighty day. Oh, the joy of leading those simple souls into the
     light and power and freedom of the Kingdom! I am keeping better.
     Praise the Lord!"

Whether The General's hopes for the use of his writings to the good of
children will be fully realised, remains to be seen; but it is a great
thing to have established even the purpose of making the way to Heaven
plain enough for the youngest feet to find.

The other day I heard a Captain explaining how he was "conscripted" into
The Army at ten years of age. He was standing outside the door of one of
our Halls on an evening when children were not admitted. He had tried,
in vain, boylike, to dodge through the doorkeeper's legs--but a drunken
woman came up and not only insisted on getting in, but on dragging him
in "to keep her company." Once inside, she went right up to the
Penitent-Form with her prisoner, and made him kneel with her there. He
had never seen so many grown-up people kneeling before, and, as they
prayed, he felt what a naughty boy he had been, and began both to weep
and pray. However little any older people might think of him that night,
God heard and saved him, and he is now fighting under our Flag in the
West Indies.

And others, who in their early years came to Christ, are now occupying
leading positions all over the world. One of them remembers, when a lad
of fifteen, hearing The General, whilst giving out the verse, "Sure, I
must fight, if I would reign; Increase my courage, Lord," say, "I would
like to alter it, to--'Sure, I will fight, and I shall reign.'" The lad
shouted, "Hallelujah!" and, as he was on the front seat in the theatre,
The General both heard and noticed him, and remarked: "I hope you will
make as good a fighter as you are a shouter." Thirty-three years of
faithful warfare have replied to The General's encouraging challenge.

And we have no means as yet of calculating how many such youthful
disciples have been equally helped by The General into a conquering
life. May this record help to multiply the number, for it is the will of
God to make all His children "strong in the power of His might."

It is, indeed, this bringing all, whether old or young, forward, in the
development of all their powers for God, which constitutes everywhere a
great part of The Army's work.

The enlarging influence of a close contact with Christ has hardly yet
been fully realised even by ourselves. The peasant, whose whole circle
of thought was so limited and stereotyped that his life only rose by few
degrees above that of the animals he drove before him, is taught by The
Army to pray and sing to the Maker and Saviour of the world:--

    Give me a heart like Thine;
      By Thy wonderful power,
      By Thy grace every hour,
    Give me a heart like Thine.

In a few years' time you will find that man capable of directing the War
over a wide stretch of country--dealing not merely with as many Meetings
in a week as some men would be content to hold in a year, and with the
diversified needs of thousands of souls; but taking his share in any
business transactions, or councils with civic authorities, as ably as
any city-born man.

What has so enlarged his capacity, broadened his sympathies, and turned
him into the polite and valued associate of any one, high or low, with
whom he comes in contact? His library, if, indeed he has any, beyond the
few Army publications he needs for his work, is still scanty enough to
make his removal at a few hours' notice remarkably easy, and he will
not be found much in public reading-rooms either. He has very little
time for fellowship with any of the intelligent friends who, for The
Army's sake, might now be willing to help him on.

He has simply had that oft-repeated prayer answered, and with the heart
of a saviour of all men comes an interest in men's thoughts and ways
which leads the man ever onward, overcoming all his own ignorance and
incapacities, for the sake of helping on the War.

Thus The General's declaration at an early moment, that he would get his
preachers out of the public-houses, has not merely been justified with
regard to the first elementary lines of recruiting; but the grace of God
has proved capable of developing, out of the most limited and despoiled
human material, the most able and large-hearted of organisers and
leaders, without building up any artificial or educational barriers
between them and their former associates.

How, indeed, could it be otherwise? Those who are ignorant of God may
well doubt the possibility of any mental improvement by means of prayer.
But those who believe that it is possible for the poorest to dwell on
earth with their Saviour, and to hold continual intercourse with Him,
will perfectly understand how enlightening, how elevating, how inspiring
such fellowship must ever be. Alas! how few there are yet in the world
who can truly say, "Our fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son,
Jesus Christ".




Chapter XV

India and Devotees



Nowhere has The Army shown its marvellous power to unite men of all
races and classes so rapidly and completely as in India. With its
Headquarters in Simla, and its leader, formerly a magistrate under the
Indian Government, looked upon almost as a felon, and imprisoned when he
first began leading Open-Air Meetings in Bombay, but now honoured by the
highest both of British and Indian rulers and by the lowest of its
outcasts equally, The Army has become the fully-recognised friend of
Governors and governed alike.

When The General decided upon issuing a weekly paper called _The War
Cry_, it was to be as nearly as possible The Salvation Army in print,
and Mr. Booth-Tucker, then an Indian official, at once got the idea,
from the copy he read, that such a force as it described was exactly
what was wanted in that country--a set of Christians determined to fight
for the establishment of Christ's Kingdom by every method love could
devise; but loving especially the poorest and weakest, and proving their
love by working continually amongst them. After visiting England, to see
The Army and its leaders for himself, he had no hesitation in abandoning
his Government appointment, and giving himself up for life to this War.

Such was the devotion of our Officers, and especially of the first
Indians they won, that The General, far from having to urge them
forward, had rather to check the tendency needlessly to sacrifice health
and life. He gladly gave, at later dates, two of his own daughters to
the Work; and, perfectly informed by his own repeated visits to the
country, and by what he learnt from the actualities of the War, he was
the better able to correct mistakes, and so to utilise to the uttermost
the forces that were raised in various parts of the vast peninsula.
Nobody would hesitate to acknowledge how much his counsels helped to
prevent an excessive zeal from sacrificing precious lives.

He divided the country into six Territories, each under a separate
Commander, realising that India could not be treated as one country, but
that its diverse people must be dealt with according to their several
needs, and that unless those using different languages were trained to
act independently enough of each other they could never form strong
enough forces to cope with the vast enterprises required. But the
following account, written to his children, of his first visit to the
country gives a photographic view, both of his own activities and
successes, and of the attitude of the high and mighty generally towards
him at that remote date. He writes from Benares, January 13, 1892, just
ten years after our beginning in India:--

     "Benares, _January_ 13, 1892.

     "My Dear Children,--

     "Wednesday and Thursday, 6th and 7th, were consumed in travelling
     to Calcutta, and, all things considered, I got through the journey
     very well. Nevertheless, I was exceedingly weary on being roused at
     five o'clock to prepare for the arrival.

     "It was early, 5.35 a.m., and Colonel Ajeet Singh did not expect
     any reception beyond that of our own Officers.

     "To our surprise, however, we found the platform crowded with our
     own enthusiastic little party (who raised some music from a scratch
     Band), some native Christians, and a very large number of Hindu
     gentlemen.

     "I was taken by surprise, and, unaware of the extent of the
     demonstration, allowed them to leave by only shaking hands.

     "Interview upon interview followed during the morning, but in the
     afternoon I was down for the Town Hall Meeting. I scarcely ever
     remember in my life feeling more thoroughly weary than on that day.
     Three times I laid down to try to sleep, and each time failed to
     get a wink, and my brain was benumbed and bewildered when I entered
     that immense building and was called upon by General Merrill, the
     American Consul, who presided, to address that crowd.

     "I don't know whether Commissioner Booth-Tucker ever had a Meeting
     at the Town Hall. It is a long building, 120 feet long, with the
     most clumsy pillars down the sides shutting out almost the side
     seats from view.

     "There was quite as large an audience as I expected, although it
     was not what it might have been. There were a few Europeans present
     and a few native Christians, and the remainder were composed of the
     non-Christian element.

     "Amongst others who interviewed me during the day, or were
     introduced to me before the Meeting, was the successor to Chunder
     Singh and the two most prominent teachers of the Brahmo Samaj, and
     a number of other leading people. On the platform was the Judge of
     the Supreme Court and Vice-Chancellor of the University, and one of
     the few Hindus who are strict observers of every principle and
     usage of their sect. Near to me was the Nawal Abdool Luteef
     (Mohammedan), and just behind me was a boy of about fourteen, a son
     and heir of a Maharajah whose father had intended to have been at
     the Meeting, but was prevented, and so sent his son, a bright-eyed
     youth who paid every attention to what was said.

     "General Merrill had consented to preside at the last moment, being
     induced to do so very largely from the fact that every one of the
     English of any note had refused.


     "Bombay, _January 16th_.

     "I broke off at the beginning of my Calcutta Campaign as above, not
     having had a moment's space to resume. Never had I such a crush of
     engagements before, and it was really all I could possibly do to
     keep pace with them, and that I only did to some extent in a
     poorish way.

     "The detail of them I must leave to another day.

     "I may say, however, that Calcutta in interest exceeded anything I
     have seen since I left England. From the rush of welcome at the
     railway station at six in the morning, to the pack who came to say
     farewell (in which the papers say there were 3,000 people), it was
     one series of surprises. Although the Town Hall Meeting was stiff,
     and the Europeans were conspicuous by their absence, still there
     was sufficient indication of the high esteem in which The Army was
     held in general, and myself in particular, to make it a matter of
     great interest and encouragement.

     "Of the welcomes that followed from individuals of note, such as
     Mr. Bannerjee and Mr. Bhose (representing the Brahmo Samaj); and
     the Successor of Chunderssing, Mr. Chuckervetty, the lay reader of
     the Yogal Samaj, His Highness the Maharajah Sir Joteendro Mohun, of
     Tanjore, one of the most princely men of the city; the Nawab
     Abdool Luteef, the most distinguished leader of the Mohammedans,
     etc.; and of the several missionaries who came up, all was really
     complimentary and respectful--nay affectionate.

     "Then there were the crowds, perhaps the greatest in the Emerald
     Theatre, in which there must have been nearly 3,000 people, inside
     and out, listening through the doorways. It was certainly the most
     remarkable audience I ever addressed. Exclusively native. I only
     saw one white face in the crowd beyond our own people. Nothing more
     hearty could have been conceived. Then came Meeting upon Meeting;
     but the Circus on Sunday night outdid almost anything in some
     respects, that I have ever witnessed in my life. It came upon me
     quite by surprise. The hour fixed was the same as the churches, and
     it had been predicted that we should not get an audience. It was
     right away outside the city, in a park in the swellest part of the
     suburbs. Consequently, it was not at all attractive to the native,
     who doesn't like to get outside his own quarter.

     "The Emerald Theatre had been a great success because it was in the
     midst of his quarter; the Europeans would not come there, and now
     it was fair to assume that the native would not come to the
     European centre.

     "As to any attendance of English people, that was hardly to be
     expected. They had cold-shouldered me at the Town Hall, the
     Lieutenant-Governor had even refused to see one of our Officers
     when she called, although he had the reputation of being a
     Christian man. The Viceroy had been civil to me--he could not have
     been otherwise; in fact, he verged on friendliness before we
     parted--but that was all. His Military Secretary had been as stiff
     as military etiquette could possibly make him. There seemed to be,
     therefore, nothing much to expect as to audience from them.

     "Then I was tired out--a more wearying morning and afternoon I had
     seldom experienced--and I bargained in my own mind, and even
     mentioned it to Ajeet Singh, that if there was not much of an
     audience I should leave them to bear the brunt of the burden.

     "As we drove up the appearance of things seemed to confirm my
     anticipations. Everything was silent. They had been afraid of the
     roaring of the wild beasts disturbing the Meetings, but there was
     not a growl to be heard, nor a carriage to be seen, nor even a
     pedestrian. It is true we were at the back part of the Circus.

     "Hoe came to meet us, however, at the gates, and when asked about
     the audience very coolly announced, to our amazement, that they
     were _full_. Without any delay, therefore, I mounted the platform,
     and the sight that met me certainly was sufficiently surprising to
     be actually bewildering. They say the place seated 3,500; it
     appeared to be full. It was a simple circle, with a ring set in the
     centre. At one end was a little platform seating myself and my
     Staff, opposite me was the entrance for the horses, which was
     packed by the crowd, while the remaining space, on circle upon
     circle, tier upon tier, the audience was to be seen. On the right
     hand we had row after row of Queen's soldiers in their red jackets,
     lower down the Eurasian and middle-class Europeans, with a few
     natives. In the centre we had a very fair proportion of the _elite_
     of Calcutta: there was the Lieut.-Governor, the Chief Commissioner
     of Police, the Consuls of America and two or three other countries,
     some great native swells, ladies bespangled with jewellery and
     finery, while on the left was one mass of dark faces reaching right
     up to the canvas sky. It was the most picturesque audience I ever
     addressed, to say the least of it.

     "Our singing of 'Grace is flowing like a river,' was very weak,
     still everybody listened, nobody more so than the swell Europeans.

     "The solo, 'On Calvary,' was sung with good effect, and then I rose
     to do my best. The opportunity put new life into me. I was
     announced to speak on 'The Religion of Humanity,' but this did not
     seem to me to be the hour for argument of any description; there
     was no time for dissertation. I felt I must have something that
     went straight to the point. I had been talking to these Brahmo
     Samaj and other people upon Social Work, alluring them on
     afterwards by indirect arguments long enough. Now I felt that I
     must go as straight to the point as it was possible to do. So I
     took 'What must I do with Jesus?' and made it fit into 'The
     Religion of Humanity' as best I could.

     "I never hit out straighter in my life, and was never listened to
     with more breathless attention--except for the few wretched natives
     in the top seats, who would go out, I guessed, because they did not
     know the language, and came perhaps expecting I should be
     translated, and after sitting an hour felt that was enough.
     However, they soon cleared out, the audience taking no notice of
     the process.

     "Once done, however, a general movement took place; a Prayer
     Meeting was impossible. We retired feeling that a victory had been
     gained so far.

     "I cannot stop here to speak of the Meeting at which the Brahmo
     Samaj presented me with an Address of Welcome the next day.

     "All I know is, that nothing surprised me more than to hear some of
     the priests and laymen declare that they had gone with me in every
     word I had said the night before.

     "Other Meetings followed, interviews, visits to the houses of the
     leading natives, and with blessings without stint poured upon my
     head, and hand-shaking that almost threatened to lame me, the train
     tore me away from the packed platform, and I left Calcutta with
     unfeigned regret.

     "I stayed a night at Benares, and had the Town Hall crowded, with a
     leading Hindu in the chair. Quiet Meeting. Landed here (Bombay) six
     this morning with a hearty welcome, and, I think, with the promise
     of good Meetings, although anything equal to Calcutta is not to be
     expected; and the news of the death of the Prince has come in our
     way, the news of which we have only just received.

     "This will be my last letter, I presume, and I send with it, as
     ever, my undiminished affection to you all.

     "For THE GENERAL,

     "J. C. R.

     "Written in a terrible haste."

This was immediately followed by the following final days:--

     "Saturday:--
            Noon.  Interview with Governor.

        5.0  p.m. Interview with native Christian Committee.
        5.30 p.m. Welcome in pandal; a large temporary structure capable of
                  holding people, no seating being needed.

     "Sunday:--
       10.30 a.m. Meeting in pandal.
        3.0  p.m. Interview with Indian Judge.
        6.0  p.m. Meeting in pandal.

     "Monday:--
       10.0  a.m. Visit to our Institutions.
        3.0  p.m. Visit to General Assembly Institute.
        5.30 p.m. Drawing-room Meeting.
        8.45 p.m. Meeting of gentlemen at Town Hall.

The Bombay programme further included:--

     "Tuesday:--
        7.0  a.m. Visit to the Leper Asylum.
          Midday. Visit to the Gaekwar of Baroda.
        3.0  p.m. Meeting in a pandal.
         Evening. Meeting with native Christians.

     "Wednesday:--
        8.0  a.m. An assembly at the Institute.
        8.15 a.m. Interview with a solicitor.
        8.30 a.m. Interview with a Parsee engineer.
        9.30 a.m. Interview with Pressmen, who took him to see hospital for
                  animals.
        2.0  p.m. Interview with gentleman, who took him to see the
                  Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute.
        4.30 p.m. Reception at Mr. Jamsetjee Tatas.
        5.30 p.m. Meeting in the pandal.
        9.0  p.m. Lecture in the Framjee Cowasjee Institute to Indian
                  gentlemen.

     "Thursday:--
        8.30 a.m. Officers' Meeting.
        3.45 p.m. Officers' Meeting.
        4.30 p.m. Farewell procession.
        5.30 p.m. Farewell Meeting in pandal.

     "Friday:--
        8.0 a.m. Staff Council.
        5.0 p.m. Reception at Mr. Cowasjee Jehangiers. (This was, however,
                 abandoned on account of Prince Albert Victor's death.)

     "Saturday:  Sailed for Europe."

Remembering that The General was already nearly sixty-three years old,
such programmes in India might well, fatigue him. But these were easy
days, compared with many country ones of this journey, during which he
traversed Ceylon, visited South India, spoke to some 8,000 Syrian
Christians, and, calling at Madras and Calcutta, went on to the Punjab
and Guzerat. His final days in Bombay were, as we have seen, clouded by
a bereavement of the Royal House. But to his telegram to the Prince and
Princess of Wales (now King George and Queen Mary), he got the cabled
reply:--

     "Their Royal Highnesses' thanks for your prayers and sympathy."

It had thus already been seen that The General's plans for India were
answering their purpose. It became possible first to march large parties
through various tracts of country, so impressing thousands in a few days
more than the isolated labours of the best individuals could have done
in the course of years, and then it came to learn later from Officers
placed amongst them. All this The General knew could not mean all that
it would have meant amongst peoples who understood more perfectly our
teachings; but he saw no reason for not making the most of such
incidents. Why not abandon, so far as such people were concerned, our
system elsewhere, and recognise them as "Adherents," leaving them to
learn after, from Officers placed amongst them, all that was necessary
for them to become Salvation Soldiers. By this plan we avoided any
watering-down of our teachings or requirements, and yet those who were
not fit to be enrolled in our ranks were able, so far as they chose, to
abandon idolatry and every evil practice, to get the advantages of
Christian schooling for their children, and generally to improve
themselves, under our influence.

Famines, epidemics of cholera and plague, and other general calamities
really helped us to increase our influence in various districts. We
gathered many orphans and abandoned children and brought them up as our
own, whilst over wide tracts of country the people learnt to look upon
us as a family of "brothers born for adversity," whose help could be
relied upon not merely with regard to heavenly but to earthly things.

The barriers of caste, which bind Indians to treat each other to so
large an extent as if they were enemies are naturally a constant and
serious hindrance to us, especially as most of our people naturally
belong to the lower castes, or are even outcasts. And our plan of
organisation has helped us wonderfully in this matter, for the villager
of Guzerat, or Ceylon, who might be very greatly hampered amongst his
own natural surroundings, may be placed in an infinitely better position
in some other part of the country. Indians are marvellously quick at
learning languages, so that we need seldom hesitate about their
usefulness in any new appointment on account of difference of language.

And thus it has come about that we have already, after some thirty
years' work, nearly 2,000 Indian Officers, as absolutely devoted to the
service of Christ as any of their comrades of any other land. And the
forces under their command have shown already that they can deal
effectively with peoples utterly inaccessible to the ordinary Europeans.

The Bheels, when we first went amongst them, were all armed with bows
and arrows, living entirely by the chase, and so terrified at any sign
of officialism that our Officers had to avoid taking a scrap of paper
with them when visiting their districts. But we have now many Bheel
villages entirely under our teaching, and quite a number of Bheel
Officers who have learnt to read their own language, and to lead their
countrymen as fully to follow Christ as they do themselves.

So many of our people in Guzerat were weavers that one Officer set
himself specially to the task of improving their loom. He was soon able
to make one with which they could double their daily product. The making
of these looms created a new industry, also, so that we have been able
thus to help many. In India we have also commenced in three of our
Territories medical work, making it, after first cost of buildings,
equipment, and Staff, largely self-supporting, as we found that the
people really appreciated help more for which they were called upon to
make ever so small a return.

In the same way, respecting all our work, The General has always urged
the importance of applying, as far as possible, our general rule of
self-support; for though the people may have very little to give, the
very least they can do helps to protect us from the prejudice created by
the term "rice Christians," applied to those who are believed to have
made professions of Christianity for the sake of the food they hope to
receive.

And now the Government, having seen the practical effect of our work,
are beginning to give us opportunities such as we never had before. The
Doms, a tribe systematically trained to live by thieving, were placed
under our special care, and the result was such as to lead to our having
other unmanageables likewise given over to us. In fact, we are barely
now beginning to reap in India what in twenty-eight arduous years had
been sown.

Does some one ask, Where does The General's own hand appear in much of
this? Is it not all rather due to his having from the beginning, had so
able a helper, acquainted with the languages and mental habits of the
country, and other exceptionally able Officers both here and there?

Even if it were so, I should ask how all these people of ability placed
themselves so absolutely at The General's disposal as to wish to spend
all their lives under his direction in the greatest poverty in that
far-away land? And I should inquire, further, how it came to pass that
British, French, American, Swedish, Swiss, Dutch, and others could be
got to submit, not only to work in union under the same "iron"
regulations, but often under the leadership of women, and often under
that of Indian Staff Officers? Who else but General Booth has ever
attempted to place under command of a woman a missionary work, carried
on largely by men, over a territory larger and more populous than the
United Kingdom? Yet, undoubtedly, nothing has more contributed to the
success of our work in a country where women have been so largely
repressed, as the fact that The Army has thus demonstrated its
confidence in God's power to lift up the weakest to the uttermost
degree.

Nobody who reflects on these things will dispute that whatever The Army
has done for India has been due most of all to its first General. And so
surely as the knowledge of what is already done grows, shall we be
allowed to do more and more to show India what Christ really desires,
and so to capture it for Him.

In connexion with all our Indian work, one vastly important part of The
General's work comes ever before us, whether we think of Commissioner
Booth-Tucker or of one of his humblest native helpers.

Commonly enough in recent times The General was honoured because he had
won from the path of vice to that of virtue some notorious sinner. But
did he not even more remarkably earn the general gratitude by changing
the comparatively helpless and uninfluential, though well-meaning, into
enterprising and widely useful leaders in good work? How many millions
of people he has taught or urged to sing:--

    Were the whole realm of nature mine,
      That were a present far too small;
    Love so amazing, so divine,
      Demands my soul, my life, my all.

That grand verse was well known in this country, and widely sung, of
course, long before he was born. But alas! how many sing it even now
"with the understanding"?

How many thousands of choice spirits first learnt, under The General's
direction, to look fairly at the immensity of their responsibility to
God, as they sang that and similar verses? And how many only found out,
as ever-widening responsibilities were pressed upon them, how great
their "all" really could become. The humble labourer, without any great
speaking ability, and often involved in a struggle to earn the barest
livelihood for himself and family, was taught how to share in seeking
the Salvation of men. To-day he has become a well-known benefactor in
one way or another to thousands of his fellow-townsmen, and his
children, in the Far East or West, are helping to realise his grandest
thoughts of winning the whole world for God.

This result would never have come about simply by the reading and
singing of the most beautiful words. But the man who was first of all
made responsible, perhaps, only for the keeping of a Hall door, learnt
with astonishing rapidity how much our common life could accomplish for
God, and went on expanding in thought and purpose, as his
responsibilities were increased, until he became not merely a local
leader in every form of Salvationist effort, but a foreman or tradesman
exercising a widespread influence amongst his fellow-townsmen for all
that is good, and urging thousands of a younger generation forward in
every way, to the glory of God and the advancement of their country.

Such development, when it comes to be applied, say, to an educated lady,
produces one of those wise mothers of mankind whose practical counsels
and help are being sought by the greatest cities in these days, when men
have found out what largeness of both heart and understanding are often
to be found under a Salvation Army bonnet.




Chapter XVI

South Africa and Colonisation



The General visited South Africa three times--in 1891, 1895, and 1908.

His visits were very largely dominated, as will be seen, by the idea
that in South Africa good and abundant space could be found for Over-Sea
Colonies; enough space, in fact, to accommodate all the surplus
population of England.

The following extract from the record of his first journey is taken, in
the main, from one of his "letters to my children," dated from
Kimberley:--

     "The afternoon Meeting was a select gathering, with the Mayor in
     the chair. Most of the ministers of the district were present. I
     talked with freedom, questions were proposed, and I carried the
     audience with me.

     "At night we had a Social Meeting in the amphitheatre, which was
     well filled. The ex-Mayor presided. I do not know how long I
     talked, but they say two hours. Everybody was much interested. The
     doctor with whom I was staying, and a brother physician, came into
     the house and thanked me for my 'magnificent speech,' giving L5 to
     the fund for which we were collecting.

     "I was very glad to get to bed, and to find that I had not taken a
     serious cold, for everything was open behind me in the theatre, and
     the night was piercingly cold, whilst I perspired with the exertion
     of speaking, and felt the wind blowing at my back, striking me like
     a wet blanket. I was very tired.

     "Tuesday.--Officers' Meetings all day. If I had been pleased with
     what I saw of the Officers before, I was more so to-day. Their
     eagerness to hear, and quickness to understand, the readiness with
     which they assented to every call and everything laid before them,
     was delightful. No body of men more simple or apparently ready for
     action ever sat before me.

     "At night I endeavoured to deal with their hearts, making clear
     what a full consecration to the War included, and appealing to
     them for it. I don't think I ever gave a more heart-searching
     address, and it awoke a solemn feeling, almost amounting to gloom,
     which settled down upon every soul. You could see it in their
     faces. The knife of conviction pierced them through and through, as
     I called up the particulars in which they came short of that life
     of love, sacrifice, and service which the War demanded. We then
     cleared the decks, inviting those who felt condemned in regard to
     the past, and who were willing to make the surrender, to come out.
     The first to roll up was about as handsome a fellow as I ever saw,
     a Cornish-man, who fell down and began to cry out aloud to God.
     Others followed, and before we finished I suppose we should have
     nearly seventy down, row after row, sincere, beautiful cases. Some
     of the testimonies that followed were delightful. T. was one of the
     first to come out, and he confessed down to the ground, and wept
     like a child, the whole audience being much moved. It was ten
     o'clock when I got home, having talked nearly seven hours, and I
     was glad to get to bed.

     "Wednesday.--Officers' Meeting in the morning. A very precious time
     on matters of detail, which I believe helped the Officers very
     much."

Only those who thoroughly take in the meaning of these Officers'
Meetings can hope to understand The General's hold upon The Army, or the
value of his various journeys, for such Meetings had far more to do with
the success of his work than any of his great public gatherings. He
frequently uses the word "simple" in describing Officers, meaning men
who have not got so much puffed up by applause as to be incapable of
seeing their defects, and learning how to do better.

Can it be necessary to remind the reader that in The Army no
distinctions of race, country, age or colour exist, so far as Officers
are concerned? When it is inevitable to have together in one Officers'
Meeting groups who do not speak the language chiefly employed, some one
of their number is so placed amongst the group as to be able to
translate to them The General's addresses.

Here we have a gathering of men and women from near and far, most of
whom must needs carry on their work amidst small communities living very
widely apart, and where they could very rarely see another Officer, or
be visited by any leader. To bring all these up before the tribunal of
their own consciences as to the extent to which they had discharged all
the obligations they took upon them when they first engaged to form and
lead on the forces whose duties, in so vast a territory, must be too
varied and too difficult to prescribe by any fixed routine, could not
but be of priceless value. Would to God that all persons engaged in
missionary work were periodically passed through such examinations, by
fire! How easily may any one in such solitary spheres yield to
discouragement, or to some ill-feeling towards a predecessor in the same
appointment, or towards some leader who has not seemed sympathetic
enough!

Remembering that each of these has to go back to some position of lonely
toil, with no guarantee of salary, and no prospect of improving
circumstances, in a country whose large towns could be counted on the
fingers of one hand, you can understand the supreme importance and the
after-effect of such Meetings. The letter goes on:--

     "On this and the previous day, my host, the Doctor, had invited
     guests to meet me at luncheon. Yesterday we had the ministers, who
     were mostly very friendly and sympathetic. As the Doctor put it,
     'To-day we had the sinners,' who he reckoned were by far the most
     enjoyable--Judges, Commissioners of Crown Lands, etc. All were very
     respectful, and, to say the least of it, were in sympathy with my
     Social scheme, if not actually having strong faith in its success.

     "I had some further conversation with a member of the South African
     Cabinet, who said he was on the most intimate terms both with the
     leaders of the Afrikander Bund, and with Mr. Rhodes. He was quite
     sure that however any one from political motives, might disguise
     their feelings, they were equally in sympathy with me. We had some
     conversation as to the co-operation of the authorities, supposing
     lazy people turned out unwilling to carry out the engagements they
     might sign in England. He said he felt sure if anything were
     wanting in present law to ensure authority being respected, that it
     would readily be remedied."

This has reference to the scheme of an Over-Sea Colony in South Africa
with which The General had been occupied ever since 1890. He, of course,
always foresaw the risk that persons, who were sent out in connexion
with such a plan, might see in the colonies an easier career than that
of the cultivation of land, and that there must needs be some assurance
of their being held to their agreement in any such case. He goes on:--

     "At night, Farewell Meeting in the amphitheatre. It was a
     considerable strain on me, as I hadn't a minute to prepare. I had
     promised myself a couple of hours in the afternoon, when some Dutch
     ministers came down upon me to open a Y.W.C.A. building that they
     had just converted from a low public-house at Beaconsfield a suburb
     of Kimberley. If I would only go for half an hour they would be so
     grateful. I couldn't refuse, so my bit of leisure was seized upon.

     "However, we had a very good Meeting. We were nearly full. I made a
     new speech which went, I thought, with considerable power, and then
     commissioned separate detachments for operations amongst the Zulus
     and Swazis--outriders for the Orange Free State, and Officers for
     various branches of Social Work. The leaders of each detachment
     spoke very well indeed. Promising fellows, all of them.

     "At the close of the public Meeting I had to have another for
     Soldiers, Officers, and Auxiliaries. This I was compelled to
     conclude earlier than I should otherwise have done by the
     announcement that the electric light would soon give out. However,
     we had a very nice finish, and I got to bed about 11.30.

     "Thursday.--Breakfast with the Staff Officers at 8. An hour and
     three-quarters' good straight talk afterwards with beautiful
     influence, everybody so tender. At the close I said, 'Now let us
     kneel down,' and after a little prayer asked them to link hands
     with me, and let us give ourselves up again to Jesus for the
     service of God and The Army."

Such tender-hearted linkings together of those who have the leadership
of The Army's various departments have alone prevented the separations
of heart that must inevitably be threatened wherever a number of very
strong-willed men and women are engaged in labours into which they throw
their whole soul, and in which they cannot, perhaps should not, avoid
the feeling that their own department is, after all, the most important
in the world. But any one who thinks will understand how men and women
so blended together in fellowship with God and each other have been able
to override all contrary influences in every country.

     "E. (the leader of our Work in South Africa) then turned to me"
     (the letter goes on) "and made a few appropriate remarks about his
     own devotion to The Army, and on behalf of every Officer, present
     and absent, assured me that they loved The Army as it was, and did
     not want any alterations in _Orders_ or _Regulations_, and were
     prepared to live and die in the War. I don't remember anything more
     tender and affecting on the conclusion of a Council.

     "I shook hands all round and we parted. God bless them. I made a
     hasty call at the Rescue Home, and was very pleased with it--a
     really nice little place.

     "The platform at the station was crowded. A passage was made for
     me; but I readily reached the compartment, and having five minutes
     or so made a little speech, which was received with volley after
     volley, and cheer after cheer. There was a good deal of
     handshaking, any number of 'God bless you's,' and the train bore me
     away from a people with whom I have certainly had a really hearty
     and happy fellowship.

     "I should have said that, by request of my host, I went through a
     kind of board school, in a very commodious and suitable building. I
     saw room after room so far as I could judge of the happiest,
     healthiest, and I might say, most beautiful lot of children it was
     ever my privilege to see. They ought to make a splendid body of men
     and women for the future.

     "Friday.--I did not get on very well last night with the 'plank
     bed' or shelf which was dignified with the name of a sleeping
     berth. There was very little spring and no cushion. Moreover, I had
     heartburn. It was a cold night, and altogether I was glad when
     daylight came. The sun came out, and it was just as hot by noon as
     it had been cold at night.

     "We stopped at Cradock a little time, where a gentleman interviewed
     me with regard to 80,000 acres of land possessed by some syndicate
     of the town at Prieska, up beyond Kimberley. This kind of thing
     happens almost every day.

     "At a station a little further on quite a crowd of Salvationists
     and others had gathered. I could not see any sign of a town beyond
     two or three shanties. I used to think some of the places that had
     been dignified by the name of 'cities' in Canada were rather
     grotesque; but here it is carried to a greater extreme. However,
     they must have some method of distinguishing the place of ingress
     and egress from the train, and perhaps they are named in the hope
     of becoming what they are said to be--things that are spoken of as
     if they were.

     "Well, on the platform was as picturesque and motley a crowd as
     well could be imagined. I only wished at the moment the pencil of
     some artist had been there to have painted the Kafirs in their
     showy turbans and half-naked bodies, the women with babies on their
     backs, and the whites of various ranks and conditions, all mixed up
     with Salvationists. Among others was a Salvationist old woman,
     half-caste, who had trudged over the mountain fourteen miles from
     Somerset East, with a big drum over her shoulders, travelling
     during the night in order to get a glimpse of The General. All at
     once, whilst the people stared, she struck up a lively chorus,
     leading the singing, and beating the drum most vigorously. Then
     followed the choruses: 'No, we never, never, never will give in,'
     'Never say die,' and 'Steadily keep advancing,' etc. I beckoned to
     her, shook hands with her, wrote her name in a copy of _Aggressive
     Christianity_ in the presence of the crowd, and gave it to her, all
     of which was interpreted to her, as she spoke only Dutch. Then she
     wound up in good English with 'Victory for me, through the Blood of
     Christ my Saviour.' The little scene altogether was very striking."

Yes, surely that scene was striking for every one, and for evermore.
That union of races and languages to the glory of Christ, and for the
highest well-being of the whole world; that valuing of the humblest true
Soldier of the Cross above all the great ones of this world, accounts
for the creation, maintenance, and spread of The Army wherever they are
seen.

The following report of one of his Meetings with the natives fairly
represents one of them:--

     "The room could not contain the people who wished to listen to the
     General. Dark faces were to be seen at every window. The General
     did not talk at them, but he talked into them, and their close
     attention and many 'Amen!' showed that he was well understood. No
     sooner had he ceased talking than the mercy-seat was filled, and at
     least a hundred came to Christ to seek deliverance from sin, and
     the supplying of their hearts' needs. Amongst the number were eight
     or nine women from Central Africa; they had been brought down for
     immoral purposes, but the Army had got hold of them and rescued
     them.

     "Ere the General turned away he gave them still further advice as
     follows:

     "'My heart is drawn out to you. I am going a long way off, but I
     want you to think of me, and when you think of me, I want you to
     pray for me. Be decided to fight for Jesus. God will be on your
     side. Go in and get all your people saved, and be the friends of
     all. Before I go I should like to know who have made up their minds
     to trust God,'--and up went a hundred hands. 'That's right. Now all
     who have made up their minds to meet me in Heaven raise their hands
     again'--and once more every hand went up, this time accompanied by
     a tremendous shout."

These journeys to South Africa were, indeed, taken together, amongst the
most painful lessons of The General's life as to the smallness of hope
from the great ones of this world. The first visit, paid on the swell of
the first admiration for the "Darkest England" Scheme, filled him with
great expectations; and no wonder, for everywhere at that time
Governments, municipalities, and wealthy magnates talked as if they were
ready to assist him immediately to place the deserving, though poor,
crowds of the Old Country on the magnificent tracts of land he saw
everywhere unoccupied, or very slightly used.

But "Governments" of the elected type come and go, making the most
lavish promises and denouncing "the other party," who, on turning them
out, do ditto. And so it came to pass that The General made his third
journey to South Africa, in 1908, when seventy-nine years of age. His
life ran serious risk, because his going to Rhodesia himself was
considered indispensable in order so to impress some British or South
African "statesmen" that they might give him the needed help to
establish an Over-Sea Colony there. And, then, all the "statesmen"
denounced to Colonel Kitching by one of themselves as "a set of
----fools" say that "nothing can be done at present." And the old man
returns to die with his great dream unrealised.

[Illustration: MRS. BRAMWELL BOOTH]

The following account of one journey taken by Colonel Kitching alone,
who was not only his Secretary but his representative in many directions
throughout his latest years, shows the loving willingness of an Army
Secretary to do and bear anything for Christ's sake, and, what our Staff
Officers generally understand by the words "indefatigable," and
"unconquerable":--

     "After a long journey of thirty hours I reached ---- railway
     station, expecting, in the virgin simplicity of my youthful mind,
     to find his place within sight--perhaps across a couple of
     stiles--instead of which I found that it was thirty-six miles or
     more--four hours' drive in a Cape cart. The only 'boy' at the
     station with a vehicle was engaged, so I bade him come back again
     for me as soon as he had got rid of his fare, which he did in
     something over an hour, although he had said he should be 'back in
     a second.' When he did come he was unwilling to take me without his
     baas' leave, so we set off to find the baas; he was not at his
     house nor at his stable; he might be at church. I went and routed
     him out of his devotions, finally bargaining with him to take me
     there and back for L3!

     "Now Mr. ----'s 'farm' comprises some eighteen or twenty different
     farms, of which about 160,000 acres are in one block, and some
     80,000 acres more in three or four separate pieces. Each of these
     farms is managed by a farmer who is responsible to the top manager,
     who also has charge of one of the individual farms. My destination
     was a farm where Mr. ---- was believed by the railway people to be
     that day.

     "The first half of the ride we were cooked in the sun; then
     darkness came on--black darkness; then some ominous drops of rain,
     which were soon _sheets_ instead of _drops_, and such thunder and
     lightning as I never want to hear or see again in this life.

     "I was afraid we should get lost in the dark; for, although it was
     called a 'main road,' it was in reality merely a _track_--not that
     in many places--with any amount of 1 ft., 2 ft., 3 ft., and 4 ft.
     holes (no, I draw the line at the 3 ft. holes, upon consideration);
     but my driver, who dignified himself with the title of 'mail
     contractor,' was sure that his horses could find the way in the
     darkest darkness, as they do the journey each way twice every week.
     But when the darkness got so dense that we could not even see the
     horses except when it lightened, even he grew doubtful, remembered
     that he _himself_ had not driven them along that road for more than
     eight months (though his boy had done), and he thought that we had
     better stand still where we were till the storm was over and the
     moon rose; but I knew the moon would not rise till 10.30, and we
     were already about eighteen miles from anywhere!

     "My entreaties that he should proceed met with success, and the
     result that we lost the road twice, got into a deep hole and
     capsized--the whole caboose.

     "When at last we reached the farm, it was to be met with the
     announcement that Mr. ---- had left there the previous day, and was
     believed now to be about twenty-six miles (three hours nearly)
     further on.

     "I was soaked to the skin, as hungry as a hunter, and dead beat
     into the bargain. The farm manager insisted that I must stay the
     night--it was imposible to go on in that storm--and go on in the
     morning.

     "This is a little world. Mr. ---- had mentioned my name in speaking
     to him of The General's visit to Johannesburg, and he had
     remembered it as that of the only Salvation Army Officer from whom
     he had ever received a letter. Ten years ago or more he had
     addressed some inquiry or other to Headquarters, and I had written
     him in reply.

     "The next morning I drove on to -----, and found Mr. ----in his
     orchard. He had not received The General's wire saying I was coming
     for the simple reason that, not wanting to be bothered with mails
     or telegrams for a couple of days, he had instructed the post
     office people to forward all his dispatches to a place which he did
     not intend to go until the next day!"

If public receptions at railway stations, speeches and addresses by
Governors, Mayors, and Ministers, and Press eulogies could have
satisfied him, The General could not but have been delighted with South
Africa, as the following extracts may show. In _The Ladysmith Gazette_
we read:--

     "General Booth has flashed past Ladysmith like a meteor, but I am
     inclined to think he has left a trail of light behind him. It is
     fifteen years since I last saw the Leader of The Salvation Army.
     Those fifteen years have made but little alteration in the man.
     There is the same old Saxon profile, the same storm-defying,
     weather-beaten, almost eagle-eyed features, and the same slightly
     rasping, but intensely interesting in its earnestness, voice.

     "There is plenty of strength still in that patriarchal figure, and
     with the exception of a slight stoop The General is as vigorous as
     he was fifteen years ago. In appearance, The General reminded
     myself of Canon Kingsley. They have the same Anglo-Saxon,
     falcon-like features, and the same indomitable energy and courage.
     Canon Kingsley was not so well provided with hair as The General;
     but, on the contrary, he could boast of a more prominent nasal
     organ. Both men had flashing eyes, deeply-set and overhanging
     eyebrows, giving force and determination to the face.

     "Both the late Canon and General Booth were equally sturdy
     specimens of Saxon descent, and both worked for the masses. Canon
     Kingsley, as he would admit to-day, was before his time, and in
     aiding the Chartist movement made a fatal mistake. Canon Kingsley,
     as shown in _Alton Locke_, endeavoured to raise the masses to
     heights attainable only by men of education and men of thought, and
     to-day the recoil of that pernicious doctrine is being felt.

     "General Booth places a man in the position God intended him to
     occupy, and if the man can raise himself higher by strenuous effort
     then well and good.

     "The Salvation of General Booth is the true Salvation--the
     Salvation of regeneration, and the world's thinkers are surely
     recognising the fact that The Salvation Army is a factor to be
     reckoned with. General Booth and his people have succeeded when all
     others have failed."

_The Rhodesia Herald_, of Salisbury, said:--

     "General Booth has well been called the Grand Old Man of The
     Salvation Army, for undoubtedly it is his remarkable personality
     and fierce energy which has made The Army what it is to-day, and
     has enabled it to do a work which no other religious organisation
     has attempted to do on anything like the same scale, and to reach a
     section of the people who remained untouched by the more orthodox
     methods of other bodies. It is not so very many years ago that
     branches of The Army in many towns in the United Kingdom were
     striving to make headway against most determined
     opposition--opposition employing methods of which the authors soon
     became heartily ashamed. Yet to-day, the different branches of The
     Army are doing their work, not only unmolested, but helped and
     encouraged by all classes of the community. And this because The
     Army has wrung recognition by transparent honesty of purpose, and
     unceasing efforts to help those most in need of help and
     encouragement. As the aged General put it on his arrival in
     Johannesburg, the Organisation of which he is the mainspring has
     set before itself the task of giving a helping hand to the very
     poor, those who are without friends, and those who have fallen in
     the battle of life."

The members of the Cape Town and district Evangelical Church Council in
their address to General William Booth, D.C.L., said:--

     "We have been deeply touched by the energy, the wisdom, and the
     consecration with which you carry on your work at a period of life
     when most men have retired from active service.

     "We would join with our brethren of the Christian Churches
     throughout the world in assuring you of our admiration, mixed with
     our wonder, at the success which has attended your labours for the
     Salvation of the most helpless and degraded members of our race.

     "Hand in hand with your efforts for the Salvation of the souls of
     the fallen have gone a true Christlike care for the bodies of the
     unfortunate, and an attempt to stem the current of social evil and
     degeneracy.

     "We are deeply interested in your experiments in colonising those
     parts of our Empire which are at present sparsely populated, and
     thus relieving the tension of social problems in the larger cities
     of Great Britain, and that congestion of population which is a
     fruitful source of individual and of social degradation.

     "We trust your visit to South Africa may result in the settlement
     in the rich lands now untilled of a population, which by its
     industry, thrift, and character will compare with those of Canada,
     New Zealand, and Australia.

     "We rejoice that the great Captain of Salvation continues to lead
     the Organisation, of which you are the head and heart in one, to
     great victories over the forces of evil, and assure you that in
     this land we recognise The Salvation Army as a powerful force for
     the spiritual and social uplift of the people. It is always a
     pleasure for the Churches we represent to render any aid in our
     power to an Organisation for whose members and whose work we have
     the deepest regard.

     "It is the earnest prayer of the Council that your visit may be
     full of blessing to your community, that it may result in a fresh
     infusion of hope and enthusiasm into the hearts of your
     fellow-workers, and that God may abundantly fill you with spiritual
     and physical energy in the fulfilment of the great enterprise on
     which you have entered.

     "_August 26_, 1908."

The address of the Bloemfontein Town Council very carefully avoids any
reference to the proposed Over-Sea Colony. Perhaps the whole secret of
South Africa's indifference to it is revealed in the following extract
from a paper, whose name we omit, lest any appearance of hostility to
any locality or any element in that enormous country should seem to have
crept into our feelings here.

After half a column of compliments as to his good work and intentions
the editorial gentleman, not of Bloemfontein, goes on with his great
"But" as follows:--

     "But the social elevation, or the spiritual conversion of the boozy
     scum of a European nation may not be advanced at the cost of the
     well-being of our own people. We protest most earnestly against
     that at once. It does not matter whether he has fixed his eye upon
     Rhodesia or the Kalahari desert--these lands belong geographically
     to South Africa, and we need it for its own peoples. True, we have
     plenty of territory, even for others who may wish to come and
     settle amongst us, and wish to be of us.

     "But we have no room for the 'submerged tenth' of any other nation
     whatever."

In vain did The General keep explaining in every land he visited that he
had never thought of, or made any plan for, "dumping" crowds of wastrels
on any country, but only such people as had been tested and proved fit
for such an opportunity as they could not get in overcrowded countries.
There was always the same loud and continued applause for "his noble
work," and, then, almost everywhere--not often with the honest
outspokenness of that newspaper--the same "I pray thee have _me_ (my
country) excused from receiving this Colony."

And then the old man would give the tiny handfuls who, thanks to insane
constitutionalism, have been left to monopolise vast areas of the
earth, warnings of the future that may be remembered by generations to
come. Whilst in South Africa he was gladdened by receiving the following
report as to the multitudes he was sending out to Canada:--

     "Emigrated from October, 1903, to July 31, 1908, 36,308; of whom
     were assisted by loan, 9,400; total amounts advanced, L38,375;
     total amounts repaid (within first five years _already_!), L5,112."

But as to South Africa, he grasped the main feature of the situation
there; and thus wrote, in words that may be remembered, _not only in
that country,_ when, for the British Empire, it is for ever too late:--

     "The more I see of this country, the more I am convinced of the
     folly of the controversy that prevails in some minds, and of the
     fears that are entertained about the predominance of the Dutch
     element. Before many years have passed the question will not be as
     to what nation of whites shall have the mastery, but whether the
     whites will have any mastery at all; not whether it shall be Dutch
     land or British land, but whether it shall be a white man's land.
     The undisputed growth in intelligence of the African and Indian
     combined will soon give them so great a preponderance that they
     will capture the agriculture and trade generally.

     "What is to hinder them from the capture of the mineral production,
     and the mastery of the country in general? There is only one way
     for the white man, and that is to add to his numbers such as will
     join him in the struggle, and to convert the coloured element to
     righteousness and truth and honesty and industry.

     "I want to help them, but they cannot see far enough.

     "These are the sentiments that ought to be pressed upon the
     attention of our government."

Here is another letter which is valuable especially for the light it
gives with regard to The General's careful examination during his
journeys into all that concerned the efficiency of The Army and of every
leading Officer in it:--

     "I have not said much about the character and condition of the work
     generally, having reserved my ideas for the closing of my
     correspondence.

     "In a general way, however, I will make a few observations:--

     "1. The Territory must certainly be in better form than it has ever
     been before. This, considering the havoc made by the war, is saying
     a good deal. There are more Corps, more Officers, more Soldiers,
     plenty of money to meet their requirements, and as much favourable
     public opinion as is good for them, perhaps a little more.

     "2. So far as we have had opportunity for observation, the Officers
     and Soldiers appear to be in good spirits.

     "3. Some important advances are under consideration, or in
     progress, in the direction of properties, both Social and
     Spiritual.

     "4. Several very remarkable Revivals have taken place.

     "5. The Commissioner appears to be much improved.

     "6. The more I see of ---- the more I like him, and my impression
     is confirmed that he is a long way the best man in the country for
     dealing with the natives.

     "7. The Commissioner thinks that what there is to be known as to
     cattle, land, products, etc., is known to ----. I love him very
     much.

     "8. The same applies very largely to ----. What he does know he may
     know better than ----, though I am not sure whether his knowledge
     is so extensive.

     "9. I have seen little of ----; but he is said to be very
     successful in his present appointment. Two gentlemen who have been
     inspecting his place say they could not have believed that such
     wonderful results could have been achieved in so unlikely a place.

     "10. This man, ----, has sat on the platform, and prayed when he
     has been called upon to pray; but he has done nothing more. I shall
     instruct K., I think, to ask him a few questions, one of which will
     be whether he is willing to take a position in another part of the
     world."

Of course, I am only snatching such sentences as convey the main ideas,
without their fuller development, which would risk indicating the
persons referred to.

Will it be believed that, whilst this octogenarian was toiling in the
heat to prepare if he could a brighter future for some of the poor, a
syndicate of slanderers in London, some well educated, some of the
Trafalgar Square bawler type, were seeking to bless "the British
public" by enlightening them as to his selfish and foolish designs upon
them? According to their theories his every new scheme was only brought
forth to turn aside attention from his entire failure, and ensure a
continuous flow of money into his coffers!

Perhaps, the best feature of all about his "dreams" was that they never
became less cheery for all that, and their continuously increasing
infection of the world, despite every attack.

The General writes, after his great Meeting with some of our native
comrades as reported in connexion with his final Congress:--

     "I have been much occupied, as I have already told you I expected
     to be, with the _Native Question_; and I am satisfied that one of
     the greatest things ever done in the history of the world can be
     done here, and I am determined to make an attempt to do it.

     "I do not say that our chance is _greater_ than it is in
     India--though I am not sure whether it does not equal it in many
     ways. Anyway, it appears to me that it is open to us to realise a
     mighty success."




Chapter XVII

Japanese Heroism



Japan, amidst all the records of its modern progress, must certainly
count the honour of having properly recognised the value of The General
and his Army before the old "Christian" countries of Europe did so.

The Army's beginning in Japan was almost laughable in its feebleness.
The little company of Officers sent out by The General, in 1895, were
indeed truly devoted, and in their anxiety to be from the first "as
Japanese to the Japanese," were so taken in whilst halting in Hong Kong
that they landed in the most extraordinary garments--and it was a long
time before they seemed likely to make any impression upon the
non-Christian Japanese. But upon the Christians they, undoubtedly, made,
from the first, an excellent mark.

With all their lack of knowledge of the language, there could be no
mistake about their willingness to learn, and to be the servants of all
men. It was clear that they possessed those two great qualifications for
Apostolic success, an unlimited readiness for hard work, and an
unbounded faith in the will and power of Christ to save. Their first
interpreter, a student anxious to do his uttermost for Christ and his
country, was speedily won over completely to their side, and as he was
already known amongst the Pressmen, this became a very great help to the
progress of their work generally.

Yet, under several successive leaders, they toiled on for some years
with but little prospect. The language is one of the most difficult
imaginable for foreigners to learn, and, although there was from the
first great liberty as to Open-Air Meetings, and congregations were
gathered outdoors and into the little Halls that were contrived out of
shops and dwelling-houses, it seemed likely to prove slow work to raise
a Japanese force.

But all at once, in 1902, God gave the little company a great
opportunity. For years already some faithful Japanese under missionary
influences, had been lamenting the position of the girls given over to
immorality, who were severed for life from the rest of the community,
and kept under police supervision, in a special quarter called the
Yoshiwara of each city, as well as cut off from all the hopes of the
Gospel. A law had indeed been passed allowing such girls as might wish
to abandon their awful calling to do so; but it was so administered as
practically to remain a dead letter.

"Why," thought our leaders, "should we not issue a special edition of
our _War Cry_, explaining Christ's love and power to save the deepest
sunken in sin, and our Rescue Work, and then go and sell it in the
Yoshiwara?"

The idea was carried out, and, to all appearance, the first day, with
wonderful success. The great companies of pleasure-seekers saw in the
"Paper" a novelty of interest and bought and read it eagerly. But it was
far too great a success to please the brothel keepers, who at once hired
men to attack _The War Cry_ sellers, should they repeat their invasion.
When it became known that our Officers had thus been attacked, reporters
of the Tokio and Yokohama papers hurried to see the, for Japan, unusual
sight, and then the whole Press of the country came out strongly on our
side. We were fully recognised as the loving friends of the friendless
and oppressed, and from that day our standing in the country was
assured.

Not many girls were gathered into our little Rescue Home; but thousands
learnt the way of escape from their houses of bondage, and within a few
years many thousands returned to their old homes all over the country.
It should be explained that the brothels were really supplied as a
result of the heroic devotion of the girls to their parents and homes.
It was common for a girl, in any time of extra want or destitution, to
suggest or consent to her sale to one of the bad houses for the relief
of her family. This fact, however, of course increased both the
national sympathy for the victims, and the high appreciation of our care
for them.

But the main thing, after all, in all this action was the revelation of
an Army, unable as yet to make itself well understood in words but
capable of thus manifesting its resolution to fight for the liberation
of all men from the power of sin.

We had issued already a _Common People's Gospel_, written by our Chief
Secretary, Colonel Vamamuro, which gave a very clear explanation of our
teachings and system. This book was not only a sort of harmony of the
Gospels, but explained how we understand and teach the Salvation Christ
bought for us all. This Gospel came to be appreciated and utilised by
almost all the missions in the country, and greatly helped us also in
making clear our meaning to the nation. By its sale, as well as that of
_The War Cry,_ throughout the country very many, even of those who were
too far off for it to be possible for them to attend any of our
Meetings, were led to Christ.

And thus steadily, though slowly, we made our way, until we had Corps in
most of the great cities, and became known generally wherever there were
thinking and reading people. Our Halls were, and still are, very small,
it being almost impossible to find either large ones hireable, or large
spaces available for building upon, in the great cities. Yet marvellous
were the displays of God's power to save in the little rooms, which were
packed to the doors night after night, and in the Open-Air Meetings. Our
leaders in the country, for several years, were Officers who, amidst the
multitudes of India, or of the slums of London had seen how souls could
be won, in spite of every outward disadvantage, by the irresistible
power of the Holy Ghost. And thus the numbers of our Japanese Soldiers
and Officers steadily grew. Just as in England, men who had been
notorious in sin became equally notorious witnesses for Jesus. Japan is
a great country for holiday festivals, when all the streets are by day
beflagged and by night illuminated with Chinese lanterns, almost the
whole population turning out on such occasions. Our troops naturally
made the most of such days, and it became a common thing to see men and
even women kneeling in an Open-Air Meeting to seek Salvation.

So when it was announced, in 1907, that The General was coming, Japan
resolved to give him a welcome such as he had never had before. That a
man should undertake, at seventy-eight years of age, such a journey, was
felt to be a tribute both to the country and to the man himself, and
there was a desire, if anything more in non-Christian than in Christian
circles to hear him, and do him honour.

"Tell him," said a Tokio editor, "that he is coming to a country such as
he has never before visited--which can appreciate self-sacrifice, as we
have shown in the late war."

And from the moment when his steamer entered Yokohama Harbour to that of
his departure, nothing was omitted that could open his way to the ears
and hearts of the entire nation. I had the pleasure myself to witness
those unforgettable scenes, and to notice The General's own astonishment
at the universal interest of the people. In each city he found the
railway station decorated. A platform was erected, generally in some
public space, whence he could address the multitudes who came out to
hear him. The largest public buildings were crowded for his indoor
services, and hundreds came out publicly in reply to his appeals for
their surrender to Christ.

Not only was he received by the late Emperor in his palace, and welcomed
to every provincial centre by the Governors of the Provinces, and the
Mayors of the Cities, but again and again the most eminent men gave him
opportunities to plead with them for Christ. What a sight it was to see
the great platform crowded with all the chief men of a city, singing
like the rest of the audience "Stand up, stand up for Jesus." The
General was accepted by almost unanimous consent, as representing a life
of entire self-abandonment to the glory of God and the Salvation of the
lost, and far beyond anything even that at the moment appeared, was his
Campaign a general victory for the Saviour.

There could be no mistake as to the message he delivered, for, even to
the vast crowds of students gathered in the quadrangle of the
University, or in and around the Theatre of Kobe to hear him, he stood
and cried in no new terms, although with due adaptation to their ways of
thought, just as he might have cried to any English audience, that God
demanded and deserved a whole-hearted, life-long service from every one.

"What?" asked the Ambassador of a great power, "Do you really want me to
come out on to the stage and confess my sins before everybody?" when a
woman-Officer invited him to one of The General's last Meetings. Had His
Excellency done so, no Japanese would have thought it anything beneath
the highest human dignity, for they all recognised the value of that
courage for Christ and His War which The General personified to them.

We are still few in number and struggling hard for victory in Japan, for
the very appreciation of all that is excellent tends to create in the
people a self-satisfaction that fortifies them against all appeals for
repentance. But one of the leading officials of the Japanese Home Office
has recently paid a tribute to The General's helpfulness to every
people.

Mr. Tomioka says, in his _Society and Humanity_, after having studied
The Army in England and America, as well as in Japan, that he considers
it to be "the greatest and most successful Organisation in the world for
dealing with and helping the poor and unfortunate classes of society."
He attributes our success to the following reasons:--

1. The great personality of The General, whose character greatly
resembled that of his Divine Master--the Founder of Christianity.

2. Our aggressive spirit--ever marching on, like the Japanese soldiers
in the last war with Russia.

3. Our adaptation to the circumstances of every country.

4. Our straightforward and practical way of preaching Salvation.

5. Our principle of self-support. Teaching men and women to help
themselves.

6. Our scientific and business-like methods, as distinct from mere
sentimentality.

Some day, surely, men equally eminent in other countries will begin to
speak as heartily and thoughtfully of The General's life work.

That the great Mikado, to whose wisdom and energy Japan owed so much of
its great renewal and entry amongst the "civilised" nations, should have
passed into eternity only a few months before the Founder of a wider and
grander, because spiritual, Empire, is an interesting fact. The Mikado
received our General, in spite of every court usage that might have
hindered, because he found that all the greatest leaders and heroes of
Japan, like their Press, saw in him the personification of the highest
and noblest purpose for every land and every people.

The Japanese Government gave our Officers, women as well as men, a
liberty of access to their prisoners greater than we as yet possess in
this and most other "Christian" countries, because they saw the value of
our love for the victims of sin, and our power, by God's grace, to
inspire them with hope for themselves. How many more years, I wonder,
will it take other nations to follow this common-sense example?




Chapter XVIII

Co-operating With Governments



The Government of the Dutch East Indies, which was in the hands, at the
time, of a military man, has won for ever the honour of appreciating and
utilising The Army of The General they had never seen, before any of
those who had seen him. Certainly, The General never ran after earthly
rulers, or showed any disposition to court their favour; but he said
constantly, "Here we are; if any Government, municipal or national,
likes to use us, we can save them more than half of what they now spend
upon their poor and criminal classes, and do for these far more than
Christian Government officials, however excellent, ever hope to do. They
are invariably so bound to avoid any meddling with religion that they
cannot bring to bear upon those most in need of it, the heavenly light
and love and power, in which we place all our confidence for dealing
with these classes."

"Gentlemen," said a Town Councillor, in a German city, when the question
of subsidising The Army was being discussed, "The Army can do for your
poor what you never can attempt. You can only deal with them from
without. The Army works upon them from within, and produces results that
will considerably lighten your burdens."

The General had arranged for the Dutch Indies to be missioned from
Australia, that country being our nearest Field and one accustomed to
deal with pioneer effort. But when he found that Dutch officialdom
dreaded contact with British agents, though ready to welcome Dutch ones,
he very quickly changed his plans, and as soon as the Colonial
Government found that The Army was as much Dutch as English, and could
send them a Dutch leader, they showed themselves ready to use us as
fully as possible.

Our Officers in every town and village are supplied with all the
medicines and bandages they can use, for the Government has found that
they live amongst the poorest all the time, and are always ready to
bathe and bandage their wounded limbs and feet, or to give them the few
medicines needed to combat the ordinary maladies. Moreover, from some
terrible losses by death of Officers, in our earliest years there, it
was made only too plain to every one that our Officers would not abandon
their people in times of cholera or other epidemics, but would rather
suffer and die with them.

More unsanitary surroundings than we have in lovely Java could scarcely
be imagined, and no government can hope to alter the habits of an entire
people very rapidly. The Chinese and others in the cities have never yet
begun to consider dirt in house or street as dangerous, and the entire
population has grown up with such a love for bathing in the very same
canals which serve largely for drainage and every other purpose, that
there cannot, for a long time to come, be great hopes of much sanitary
improvement.

But when it was seen that we had Officers not only willing and ready to
live and die with the people, but, also capable of lifting them into a
new life, and of carrying out any simple administrative duties that
might be laid upon them, we had first one and then another of the
Government's institutions offered for our care, as well as the
provisioning of the hospitals. From daybreak in the morning till the end
of their evening Meetings, our Officers may be seen showing the people,
old and young, brotherly and sisterly love; and though they may not, as
yet, have succeeded in many places in raising up such a native force as
we should desire, the Government has found them as persevering as if
they had gained the crowd which their toils and endurances have
deserved.

The first Leper Institution placed in our charge was so rapidly
transformed from a place of despair and misery into a home of Salvation
hope and joy, that the Government naturally desired to see more such
institutions, adequate to receive the entire leper population of the
islands, which is, alas! large.

Our position in Java, and the consequent discussion of us in the Dutch
Parliament, led to our first public recognition in the world as a
Christian force. Because we do not baptise with water there has been in
Java a disposition amongst some Christian teachers to refuse to any of
our people burial in a Christian cemetery. But when in the Dutch budget
discussion this was made an objection to our receiving any grant, the
Colonial Minister simply read out the whole of our Articles of War, and
asked how any one could refuse to recognise as Christians those who had
signed such declarations.

The Governments of the various Australian Colonies must, however, have
the credit of first giving to our Officers public patronage. As has
already been mentioned, the Governors, Premiers, and Ministers have, for
some twenty-seven years past, been seen presiding over the anniversaries
of our Colonial work, speaking in no measured terms of all our
activities, and so helping us to get the means to support them.

The Queen Mother and the present Queen of Holland were the first royal
personages personally to visit our Institutions, although the present
King of Denmark, when Crown Prince, had for years used our Refuges in
that country for cases he thought deserving, and his brother, King
Haakon, of Norway, attended, as a warm friend, one of The General's
Meetings in Christiania.

Canadian and South African Governors and Ministers have acted like the
Australian ones in their public expressions of confidence in us, and
they have given us very considerable liberty in their prisons, so that
most of the criminal population comes more or less under our influence.

The greatest of our governmental victories have, however, been won in
Switzerland and Germany, where we were for so many years looked upon as
a dangerous, if not harmful, influence, owing chiefly to the gross
calumnies of "Christian" teachers and writers. The results of our work
upon those whose lives had been a disgrace and burden to the community
could not be hidden, however, and there is now scarcely a cantonal
government in Switzerland which does not subsidise some one or other of
our Institutions. The cities of Hamburg and Elberfeld, in Germany, have
led the way in granting to us similar assistance, and it can only be a
question of time before we gravitate into an equally honoured position
elsewhere. For although we continue to keep as far as possible aloof
from all parties, and party feeling, and have not, therefore, the means
of influencing and obtaining grants from politicians in the ordinary
way, we compel attention by what we do, and have, undoubtedly, done more
than any other religious community to create that inclination towards
intelligent care for the criminal and outcast which is almost becoming a
fashion, in governmental circles, nowadays.

It begins to look as if, had The General lived, some of the South
American republics would have been the first, after all, to gladden his
heart by a hearty and handsome co-operation. For twenty years he pleaded
for an opportunity to show what could be done for those whose life and
character have been wrecked amidst the breakers of modern life, if they
were removed from their old surroundings and compelled to live under our
influence in country air. We have come so far in this direction, in New
Zealand, that we have bought islands, where former inebriates and their
children can be kept completely severed from their old temptations, and
so have every opportunity to begin a new life if they will. Men, as well
as young people, are frequently handed over to us by the authorities;
but there is not yet anywhere a sufficient power given to detain those
who are disinclined to hard work.

And recently, The General was promised, in the course of interviews with
authorities, a considerable extension in the United Kingdom of the
liberty to deal with prisoners, which we have long enjoyed in America
and Canada. The long night, when prisoners were treated only as
troublesome animals against whom society needed protection, seems to be
passing, and with the new, earnest resolve to try and fit them for a
better life, which, without God's help, can never be done, we are
looking forward to greatly improved opportunities. In India, as has
already been noted, many persons belonging to the criminal tribes are
already under our care, and, wherever we have the opportunity to prove
what the power of God can do in such hearts, there can be no doubt of
the ultimate result.

Upon the question of temperance, there is happily a widespread awakening
amongst the nations. So convinced are all Governments and peoples that
drinking and crime are closely connected, that much has already been
done, with good effect, to lessen the sale of intoxicants in many lands,
and more is being promised. Anxious as we are to see the drink-traffic
abolished everywhere, it has never appeared to us to be desirable to
join in agitations of a political kind on the subject. And the wisdom of
this attitude has been shown, on both sides of the Atlantic, by the
manner in which this question has been used to embitter party strife.
But it was a puzzle at first to know by which course to steer. When a
Licensing Bill was before the English House of Commons, The General
wrote:--

     "The Licensing Bill has given me much anxiety, mainly because I see
     so imperfectly what we ought to do. However, we shall do what seems
     the best to be done--with what success has to be seen. I am
     heartily sick of politics and parties, and that, mainly, because
     they seem to me so insincere.

     "What an unsatisfactory thing is life, apart from the real work we
     do for God and the Salvation of souls! I want more faith, more
     conquering faith. I must have it.

     "I have got work to-day to do that cannot be done without Divine
     wisdom. I have asked for it. I am asking for it while I write, and,
     surely, it will be given; and yet it seems as though the Spirit
     whispers in my ear, 'You will not believe you have it when it is
     imparted.' But I will. Anyhow, I will make a desperate effort to
     believe that the Spirit of the living God guides my judgment,
     however I may feel, or whatever the outcome may be. Pray for me. I
     cling to life and the work I love so well."

Remarkably enough, the German police, who, more than any other,
suspected and watched and restricted us at first, have become the first
convinced of the value of our operations, and those in the city of
Cologne have been the very first heartily to arrange for our
co-operation with them by placing at our disposal a convenient
hand-waggon for the transport of helpless drunkards, and by arranging
for their officials to call us upon the telephone, whenever such help is
needed, instead of taking the poor drunkards to the cells.

This plan was arrived at only after the police had seen the work carried
out by our people with an ambulance which required the services of two
strong men. But there is reason to suppose that our cordial
relationships with the authorities in Cologne and elsewhere are largely
due to the good impression made upon them by The General himself. Of his
great Meeting in Cologne, attended by many officials, and other persons
of influence, he wrote:--

     "I had certainly a remarkable Campaign, and my Meeting in Cologne
     was one of the most remarkable in my history. Oh, it was a moving,
     hope-inspiring affair. Oh, what wonders the dear Salvation Army may
     yet accomplish in the Fatherland! I am sure it will be so, whoever
     lives to see it."

Thank God that he was spared to see another seven years of progress in
that direction since this was written.

In Japan, which cannot be supposed to be specially favourable to any
Christian Society, we have long had opportunity regularly to visit all
persons in custody, and as we have already seen, to invite all girls
living an immoral life to come to our Institutions.

Why is there still difficulty in the way of our work for the prisoners,
and other needy ones in Christendom? Chiefly, because there are
chaplains and others specially appointed to deal with such needs, and
who, naturally, do not wish to see others "interfering," as they think,
with their parishioners. In very many cases nowadays there is a much
better feeling than formerly, and such persons heartily welcome our
help, knowing that we never wish to meddle with any one's work, but only
to work where others can gain no entrance.

In a certain Australian jail, at the time when men there could be
sentenced to death for many crimes other than murder, a condemned man
was in such agonies of remorse that none of the warders could get any
rest. The help of one of our Officers was greatly desired, but the
chaplain would not consent, so that our Officer could not be admitted.
In another part of the prison, however, one of our Soldiers was a
warder, and those who knew this sought him out and brought him to the
distressed sinner, whom he very soon succeeded in leading to the
Saviour, who gave him a peace as complete as that which He gave to His
companion in crucifixion.

It is by this patience and efficiency that our Officers, wherever they
get opportunity, win the favour of authorities, prisoners, and sufferers
of every kind. Therefore, we reckon that it can only be a question of
time before our way is opened to do far more than ever for the
friendless of every land.

In times of special emergency, The General's Officers always find an
opportunity to distinguish themselves. Thus, in the last earthquake of
Jamaica our Officers in Kingston were said to have been the calmest and
readiest to undertake all that needed to be done. In those terrible
days, again, of earthquake and fire in San Francisco the Salvationists
provided food and shelter for the Chinese, and others of the most
despised; and in South Italy such was the impression produced by the way
in which our Officers laboured, when Calabria was desolated by
earthquake, that our Officer there, Commissioner Cosandey, had the
honour of a Knighthood conferred upon him in recognition of the manner
in which he had superintended the distribution of blankets and other
articles provided out of the Lord Mayor of London's fund, the skill he
manifested gaining the approval of both the Italian Government and the
British Ambassador there.

We seek neither honours nor rewards, however; but only the opportunity
to carry out our first General's plans for the good of all men
everywhere.




Chapter XIX

Conquering Death



Only those who have had some experience of a perfect
life-partnership--such as existed for thirty-five years between The
General and his wife--can form any conception of the sufferings he had
to pass through, in connexion with her prolonged illness and death.

She had always been more or less delicate in health, yet had, through
nearly all those years, triumphed so completely over weakness and
suffering as to be at once one of the happiest of wives and mothers, and
the most daring of comrades in the great War.

During much of 1887 she had suffered more than usually, and yet had
taken part with him in many great demonstrations; but in February, 1888,
new symptoms made their appearance, and she decided upon consulting one
of the ablest of London physicians, because she had always dreaded that
her end would come, like that of her mother, through cancer, and wished
to use every possible care to prolong, as much as might be possible, her
days of helpfulness.

When in February, 1888, Sir James Paget told her that she had,
undoubtedly, got this disease, and would, probably, not be alive for
more than eighteen months or two years, she received the announcement
with the greatest calm and fortitude. The General says:--

     "After hearing the verdict of the doctors, she drove home alone.
     That journey can better be imagined than described. She told me
     how, as she looked upon the various scenes through the cab windows,
     it seemed to her as if sentence of death had been passed upon
     everything; how she had knelt upon the cab floor and wrestled in
     prayer; and how the realisation of our grief swept over her.

     "I shall never forget, in this world or the next, that meeting. I
     had been watching for the cab, and had run out to meet and help her
     up the steps. She tried to smile upon me, through her tears; but,
     drawing me into the room, she unfolded to me gradually the result
     of her interview. I sat down speechless. She rose from her seat and
     came and knelt beside me, saying, 'Do you know what was my first
     thought? That I should not be there to nurse you, at your last
     hour.'

     "I was stunned. I felt as if the whole world was coming to a
     standstill. She talked like a heroine, like an angel, to me. She
     talked as she had never talked before. I could say nothing. I could
     only kneel with her and try to pray.

     "I was due in Holland for some large Meetings. I had arranged to
     travel there that very night. She would not hear of my remaining at
     home for her sake. Never shall I forget starting out that evening,
     with the mournful tidings weighing like lead upon my heart. Oh, the
     conflict of that night journey! I faced two large congregations,
     and did my best, although it seemed to me that I spoke as one in a
     dream. Leaving the Meetings to be continued by others, I returned
     to London the following evening. And then followed, for me, the
     most painful experience of my life. To go home was anguish. To be
     away was worse. Life became a burden, almost too heavy to be borne,
     until God in a very definite manner comforted my heart."

After this, there were two years and a half of such tortures for him to
bear! For some time, indeed, Mrs. Booth was still able occasionally to
take part with him, even in very large Meetings. But any one can
understand how such privileges only increased his sense of coming loss.

Her last address was delivered in the City Temple, on June 21, 1888, and
she had to remain for nearly an hour after in the pulpit before she
could move. Nevertheless, she was able to continue her help by writing
for our publications, and to individuals, for a long time after this.
Before the Self-Denial Week of 1888 she wrote to our Soldiers:--

     "Although not able to be at the front of the battle in person, my
     heart is there, and the greatest pain I suffer arises from my
     realisation of the vast opportunities of the hour, and of the
     desperate pressure to which many of my comrades are subject, while
     I am deprived of the ability to help them, as in days gone by."

In 1889 she wrote:--

     "I am now realising, as never before, how much harder it is to
     suffer than to serve. I can only assure you again, by letter, that
     my heart is as much with you as ever. Regard no opposition,
     persecution, or misrepresentation. Millions upon millions wait for
     us to bring to them the light of life."

To the great Crystal Palace Demonstration of 1889 she sent a message
which was displayed in large letters:--

     "My place is empty, but my heart is with you. Go forward. Live holy
     lives. Be true to The Army. God is your strength. Love and seek the
     lost. God is my salvation and refuge in the storm."

Hers was, indeed, a prolonged storm of suffering, the strain of which
upon The General cannot easily be realised. He would go out, time after
time, to his great journeys and Meetings with, necessarily, a gnawing
uncertainty as to what might occur in his absence, and would be called,
again and again, to what he thought might be her last agony, only to see
her, after hours of extraordinary pain and weakness, rally again, to
suffer more. To the very end her mind continued to be as clear and
powerful as of old, so that her intense interest in everything connected
with his work made it difficult for The General to realise that she
might at any moment be called away from him. Often through the long
hours of the night he would watch beside her.

To a party of Officers who visited her in 1889, she said:--

     "I feel that at this moment I could put all my children into their
     graves, and go to a workhouse bed to die, sooner than I could see
     the principles of The Salvation Army, for which I have lived and
     struggled, undermined and sacrificed. God will not fail you. Give
     the children my dear love, and tell them that, if there had been a
     Salvation Army when I was ten years old, I should have been as good
     a Soldier then as I am to-day."

To the last she maintained her interest in comrades who were furthest
off, as well as in those who were near. To Australians she sent the
message:--

     "Tell them I look on them and care for them, as for my English
     children, and that I expect them to gather in many a sorrowing
     mother's prodigal, who has wandered far from his Father's house."

Of one of those terrible occasions when it seemed as if the end had
come, The General writes, in December, 1889:--

     "To stand by the side of those you love, and watch the ebbing tide
     of life, unable to stem it, or to ease the anguish, is an
     experience of sorrow which words can but poorly describe. There was
     a strange choking sensation in the throat which threatened
     suffocation. After several painful struggles there was a great
     calm, and we felt the end had come."

What a mercy that nobody knew how many months of agony were yet to
follow! It was not till October, 1890, that the end really came. She
sent that year to The Army for its Self-Denial Week, the message:--

     "My Dear Children and Friends,--

     "I have loved you much, and in God's strength have helped you a
     little. Now, at His call, I am going away from you.

     "The War must go on. Self-Denial will prove your love to Christ.
     All must do something.

     "I send you my blessing. Fight on, and God will be with you.
     Victory comes at last. I will meet you in Heaven.

     "Catherine Booth."

On October 1st violent haemorrhage set in. The General was telegraphed
for, and after days and nights of continual suffering and extreme
weakness, she passed away on Saturday afternoon, October 4, 1890.

Writing immediately afterwards, The General said:--

     "Ever since our first meeting, now nearly forty years ago, we have
     been inseparable in spirit; that is, in all the main thoughts and
     purposes of our lives. Oh, what a loss is mine! It cannot be
     measured."

And yet, anxious, as in every other case, to make the very best of the
funeral for the good of souls, The General rose, by God's grace, so
completely above his own feelings as to be able to take part in all the
unparalleled services that followed. More than forty thousand people
visited the Congress Hall, Clapton, to look upon her remains there, and
to pray and give themselves to God in many cases, whilst her favourite
hymns were sung by bands of Cadets. The coffin was then removed to the
Olympia, the largest covered building we could hire in London, and
30,000 persons passed the turnstiles to attend the funeral service,
conducted mostly by signs, according to a printed programme.

The next day, the funeral march was restricted to Officers of whom 3,000
were present; but the crowds which looked on as it passed right through
from our Headquarters in the City to the Abney Park Cemetery were beyond
all computation. A crowd of 10,000, admitted by ticket, surrounded the
grave, where The General spoke, as one newspaper reported, "as a
Soldier, who had disciplined his emotion without effort, and straight
from the heart." Of his wonderful address, we have only room to quote
the final words:--

     "What, then, is there left for me to do? Not to count the weeks,
     the days, and the hours which shall bring me again into her sweet
     company, seeing that I know not what will be on the morrow, nor
     what an hour may bring forth. My work is plainly to fill up the
     weeks, the days, and the hours, and cheer my poor heart as I go
     along, with the thought that when I have served my Christ and my
     generation, according to the will of God, which I vow this
     afternoon I will, to the last drop of my blood, that then she will
     bid me welcome to the skies, as He bade her. God bless you all!
     Amen."

And then he knelt and kissed the coffin, and we lowered it into the
grave. The Chief of the Staff read a form of Covenant, which thousands
repeated, and then we parted.

From that very day The General rose up and went forward, sorrowing, as
every one could see, to his last days over his irreparable loss, but
never allowing his grief to hinder his labours for those who, amidst
their afflictions have no heavenly Comforter.

A still further blow was to fall upon him, only three years later. Mrs.
Booth had delighted, especially during her years of suffering, in the
fellowship of her second daughter, Emma, who had been married to
Commissioner Tucker, in 1890, and who had always seemed to The General
to be the nearest representative, in many respects, of her mother. He
had gladly given her up to go with her husband to India, and was equally
willing for her, later, to go to the United States. But he always kept
up a very full correspondence with her. Her last letter to him, written
on an American train, said:--

     "My Precious General,--

     "I am still on the wing. We were at St. Louis on Sunday, where we
     had, in some respects, a rather remarkable day. The entire feeling
     of the city has been distinctly different since your visit--the
     sympathy now is most marked.

     "I also spoke for 'fifteen minutes' (stretched a little) in the
     Merchants Exchange, a huge marble structure. No woman, they say,
     has ever been heard there before. This was on Saturday at noon, and
     quite a number of the leading business and money men turned up at
     Sunday's Meetings.

     "Can't write more. How I wonder how you are! Up above us all so
     high, like a diamond in our sky, though perhaps I ought to say
     cyclone or race-horse, or--but there is no simile fine enough.

     "Good-night! Would that you were here, so that I could say it, and
     hear all that you would like to say, and then start off again to
     try and carry out your wishes with better success, as

     "Your unfailing Emma."

Alas, alas, for the uncertainties of human life! Little did she imagine
that before the letter could reach him she would be gone from another
train, for ever from his side.

Her own devotion to the War, from her very childhood, had always been
such as to set an example to all who knew her. As head, for ten years,
of our Training Home for women Officers, she did more than can ever be
known to ensure the purity and excellence of The Army's leaders, so that
it may be easily guessed how much her father valued her.

As joint leader with her husband of our forces in India, and afterwards
in the United States, she never spared herself, but, in spite of
repeated illnesses, and without, in any way, neglecting her duties as
mother of six children, she travelled and laboured incessantly.

Starting out at one o'clock in the morning of October 28th, from
Colorado, to ride to Chicago, she managed to make a rush-call, between
trains, in Kansas City, to view a new building The Army was about to
take as an Industrial Home. Throughout most of the two days' journey,
she was in conversation with one or another Officer as to coming
extension of the work until, finding that Colonel Addie, whose Province
she last passed, had composed a new song, she asked him to sing it over
to her, and to repeat three times the last verse, which was as
follows:--

    Time and place will cease to know you,
      Men and things will pass away;
    You'll be moving on to-morrow,
      You are only here to-day.

Little did either of them imagine how terribly the words were to be
verified within four hours of their being sung.

Just as she was leaving her place in one carriage, to go to the sleeping
berth prepared for her in another, a tremendous crash announced to all
the passengers that the car through which she and one of our Officers
were passing had left the rails and been destroyed. Both were buried in
the debris. The Colonel (Holland) survived, but Mrs. Booth-Tucker, after
lingering in unconsciousness a couple of hours, passed away.

What a blow for The General! He wrote at the end of the year: "This has
been, is, and will be, to the end of my earthly chapter, a mysterious
and painful dispensation--at least, so it appears at the moment. What
God may do for me in the future, and how He may make it work for my good
does not at present appear. But He is able to make it mightily helpful
to His glory, and the Salvation of souls. With this prospect, God
forbid, then, that I should be other than content--nay, filled with
praise. I am at present strangely supported and cheered; and not
strangely either, for is it not what might have been expected, with so
many loving prayers going up to Heaven on my account hour by hour."

Remembering that he had lost not only the most tenderly beloved one left
to him, but an Officer holding one of the most important posts he had to
fill, we can somewhat estimate the grace that could thus sustain him,
and make it possible, even then, to go gladly forward!

Yet again he was to drink the bitter cup of family bereavement, this
time affecting his youngest daughter, who had married Commissioner
Hellberg, already mentioned as one of our first Swedish Officers.

Not only had he kept all the promise of his first brave and sturdy stand
for The Army as a student, but, gaining by every year's experience in
various lands, he had shown remarkable ability in many spheres.

With his no less able and devoted wife, he had laboured in India, at
International Headquarters, in France and in Switzerland, when
consumption, alas! showed itself, and, in spite of all that could be
done for him, during years of suffering, in Algiers, and in various
resorts of health-seekers, he steadily sank. Though, of course, death
had long threatened him, he was caught suddenly at the last, and died in
Berlin on the journey homewards to Sweden from South Germany, at a time
when his wife could not be with him.

It will be readily understood how much more trying this was to The
General than if he had been near to comfort his daughter in all her
sorrow. And yet this blow, falling upon him when he was seventy-nine
years old, found him no less resolute than ever. He sent this widowed
mother out into Denmark, where she was a stranger, to persevere in the
fight. She had showed herself, like her father; able to plead at the
very grave-side with the crowd, for God.

In connexion with the loss of Mrs. Booth we began a system of special
Memorial Services which have been wonderfully blessed. The first one,
held on the first anniversary of her death, in the Agricultural
Hall--one of the largest buildings in London, was altogether too large
for any speaking to be heard. The plan was adopted, therefore, as at the
funeral, of a complete form of service, each point of which was
indicated on the programme, and by large illuminated signs. By this
means the audience, of some 15,000, was able closely and unitedly to
join in all the songs and prayers, whilst scenes from Mrs. Booth's life,
and messages taken from her writings and from The General's, were also
on the great lantern screen passed on to them. Thousands of the most
careless and thoughtless were present; but there was no break in the
solemnity of the service. Hundreds went as requested, from the Meeting
to a room in the stables, to volunteer for life-service as Officers.

What it cost The General to be present on this, and, since then, on
similar occasions, specially after his daughter's death, may be
imagined; but he never hesitated to endure this, for the sake of the
many souls such services have invariably aroused to repentance, faith,
and self-sacrifice for the War. Writing, in 1905, to a friend, he
says:--

     "Were you at the Memorial Service? That was a trying ordeal for me,
     but I hear that many were benefited. It seems selfish to ask for so
     many intercessions; but I cannot get on without them. (In all our
     Memorial Services all present are asked to unite in prayer for the
     bereaved ones.) The mere fact of my knowing that so large a number
     of the very elect of the Kingdom are pleading for power and love on
     my account, helps me forward. God bless and keep and comfort you
     every day and every hour."

Undoubtedly, these services, whilst blessed to all present, have also
served to provoke much prayer and faith for all our bereaved ones, and
for The General most of all, and have thus made it easier for him, and
for all of us, to triumph over personal sorrows and losses, and press
forward to ever-increasing victory.

That The General's example of burying his own sorrows in redoubled
effort to cheer and help others has been followed everywhere, may count
as large compensation for all he has lost. And yet, all who knew him
best, have seen that the wound caused by Mrs. Booth's loss was never
healed. With the badge of bereavement, which we have substituted for any
costly mourning, ever upon his left arm, just as it was twenty years
ago, our first General went onward to the great re-union above, "as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing," his sadness ever touching as many
hearts as his merry remarks aroused.

Curiously enough, The General, whilst anxious at all times to remind
every one of death and judgment, and to prevent their being so
intoxicated by pleasure and passing trivialities as to prevent their
thinking of their souls and of eternity, abolished, so far as his
followers were concerned, the horrible formalities which, in all
countries have come to be thought necessary whenever death and the grave
come into view.

Nothing could be more opposed to everything taught by Christ than the
usual processes of "Christian burial," and the records of "the
departed." He who "brought life and immortality to light" through His
Gospel could not wish to see His people's graves surrounded exclusively
by signs of mourning, and then plastered over with flattering records of
earthly glory, making, as a rule, no mention of His Salvation, and the
eternal glories it assures. He manifested, indeed, and always shows the
deepest sympathy with our sorrows; but He does so most by teaching us to
make them steps to higher life and joy.

This great purpose The General aimed at in all his arrangements as to
burials, and thus alleviated sadness, and turned death into victory to a
very remarkable extent. No widow or orphan under his Flag will add to
all the inevitable costs of nursing the dying those of fashionable
"mourning," clothing, flowers, or monuments. The cross and crown badge
worn on the left arm by himself and his bereaved ones, sometimes for
years, whilst providing a most touching token of abiding affection for
lost friends, is, at the same time, a special declaration of faith and
hope, and yet obviates entirely the need for any peculiar dress "for the
occasion."

Every funeral thus becomes a very valuable opportunity for comforting
and strengthening the mourners, and for urging the unsaved to ensure an
eternal triumph. It would not be easy to compute the total of crowds
thus brought under the sound of the Gospel, in connexion with our
losses, every year.

Thus all these occasions for sadness have been turned into fountains of
joy, not merely to those most immediately concerned, but to the whole
community. We have not yet had time or opportunity, thank God!
sufficiently to redeem the grave and the cemetery from the scandal of
men-praising expenditure, for any sort of tombstone has generally been
too costly for our people. But the small, simple edge-stone which marks
the resting-place of "Catherine Booth, Mother of The Salvation Army,"
and which asks every passer-by, "Do you also follow Christ?" has set an
example, consistent with all our past and our eternal future.

Surely, the day will come when our General's teaching and practice in
this matter will help to lighten the burden of every bereaved family,
and make every cemetery the birthplace of crowds of souls. The music and
song with which we surround every deathbed and funeral, still too much
tinged sometimes with the follies of traditional show, have already been
used by God's Spirit to bring life and gladness to many a spiritually
dead soul.




Chapter XX

His Social Work



Most erroneously and unfairly it has been widely assumed that the great
work of The General was the establishment in the world of some Social
Institutions. Happily, we have got a verbatim report of an address to
his Social Officers gathered around him a year before his death in which
we have a complete statement as to the beginnings and principles of the
work, so that we can see exactly how he wished it to be regarded.

     1. By the Social Work, I mean those operations of The Salvation
     Army which have to do with the alleviation, or removal, of the
     moral and temporal evils which cause so much of the misery of the
     submerged classes, and which so greatly hinder their Salvation.

     2. Our Social Operations, as thus defined, are the natural outcome
     of Salvationism, or, I might say, of Christianity, as instituted,
     described, proclaimed, and exemplified in the life, teaching, and
     sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

     Here I would like to say that Social Work, in the spirit and
     practice which it has assumed with us, has harmonised with my own
     personal idea of true religion from the hour I promised obedience
     to the commands of God.

     To help the poor, to minister to them in their slums, to sympathise
     with them in their poverty, afflictions, and irreligion, was the
     natural outcome of the life that came to my soul through believing
     in Jesus Christ.

     Before many days--nay, before many hours--had passed after my
     conversion, I was to be found praying in the cottages in the
     working-class quarters of the town in which I lived, talking in the
     slums, comforting the dying, and doing, so far as I knew how and
     had ability, what seemed to me most likely to help the poor and
     miserable classes, both for this world and the world to come.

     3. But Social Work, as a separate entity, or department of the
     Kingdom of Jesus Christ, recognised, organised, and provided for,
     had to wait for The Salvation Army.

     For many years after the commencement of my public work, during
     which time I had, as opportunity served, helped the poor in their
     distress, I was deterred from launching out to any great extent in
     this direction by the fear so commonly entertained that by
     relieving their physical necessities I should be helping to create,
     or at any rate to encourage, religious hypocrisy and pretence.

     All this time, nevertheless, I felt, and often keenly felt, that
     there surely must be some way by which, without any evil
     consequences, I could legitimately fulfil the cravings of my own
     heart, as well as comply with the commands of my Lord, who had
     expressly told me that I was to feed the hungry, clothe the naked,
     care for the sick, and visit the prisoners. For a long time,
     however, I failed to see how this work could be done in any
     organised or extensive manner.

     Gradually, however, the way opened, and opened largely, as a result
     of our determination to make the godless crowds hear the message of
     Salvation.

     I said, "They shall hear; we will make them hear; and if they won't
     hear in any other way, we will feed them, and accompany the food we
     give them with the message to which they so determinedly turn a
     deaf ear." In the very earliest days of The Army, therefore, in
     order to reach the people whom we could not reach by any other
     means, we gave the hungry wretches a meal, and then talked to them
     about God and eternity.

     4. Then came the gradual unfolding of our Social methods, which
     have been so remarkably successful.

     My dear wife's heart had been particularly drawn out on behalf of
     the fallen outcasts of society, who, often more sinned against than
     sinning, appealed peculiarly to her large and tender sympathies.
     More than once she found opportunity for extending help to
     individual cases of misfortune, obtaining homes amongst her friends
     for some of the children, and assisting the poor mothers to win
     their way back to virtue.

     But it was not until the end of 1883, or thereabouts, that anything
     like a systematic effort in this direction was organised on their
     behalf. Touched by the helpless and pitiable condition of some poor
     girls who had sought Salvation at the Corps at which, with her
     husband, she fought as a Soldier, a baker's wife, living in one of
     the most wretched streets in Spitalfields, took the girls, in
     distress and trouble, into her own home. Before long it was crowded
     to its utmost capacity, and still other women were clamouring for
     admission. She implored us to help her, and we engaged and opened a
     house as our first Rescue Home, placing it under the direction of
     Mrs. Bramwell Booth.

     The breaking forth of the same spirit in different directions in
     other lands quickly followed.

     At about this time our first Prison Rescue Brigade, in the Colony
     of Victoria, was organised by the late Colonel Barker. So striking
     was the success attending his effort that, before many months had
     passed by, magistrates in the city of Melbourne were actually
     giving delinquents the option of being sent to prison or to our
     Prison-Gate Home, and the Government placed the former Detective
     Police Building at our disposal, at a nominal rental.

     Not only does the genuine Christian spirit carry the soul out in
     sympathy with misery, but it often leads it to prefer certain
     particular classes of sufferers or wrongdoers, on whom to lavish
     its self-sacrificing love, and restlessly spend itself in efforts
     for their benefit. In the case of one Salvationist, it will be the
     dying; in another the daughters of sin and shame; in another the
     homeless; in another the children, and in yet another the
     drunkards.

     With Colonel Barker, as with other comrades under our Flag to-day,
     it was the criminals.

     This spirit thrives and becomes more effective by what it feeds
     upon. It must, therefore, be wise to favour its preferences, so far
     as it is possible to do so without losing sight of the well-being
     of the whole.

     We did this with Colonel Barker, and we are acting on the same
     principle with others to-day.

     Then came our first Women's Rescue Home in Melbourne, to help us in
     the establishment of which the Colonial Government gave L1,000.

     It was upon foundations of this character that our Social
     Operations in New Zealand, France, South Africa, and several other
     countries were subsequently built up.

     For years past our Officers, men and women, both in the United
     Kingdom and elsewhere, had carried on what may be spoken of as an
     unorganised form of Slum Work; but it fell to the hands of my
     glorified daughter, the Consul, to institute, in London, what was
     then and for some time afterwards known as "the Cellar, Gutter,
     and Garret Brigade"--the forerunner of scores of Slum Posts, which
     are now such a recognised feature of our operations all over the
     world.

     Our first Men's Shelter was opened in Limehouse, London, during the
     winter of 1887-8, and was soon followed by the opening of similar
     Institutions in other countries, far-off and near at hand.

     From our earliest days drunkenness had been one of the many foes of
     God and man against which we had specially taken our stand, and
     thousands of its slaves had been rescued from its grip, and become
     valiant Soldiers in our ranks. Our first Inebriates' Home,
     conducted in the interest of women, was not, however, opened until
     1887. This was in Toronto, Canada.

     The Social Work in the United States had its birth in 1885, in an
     effort made on behalf of prisoners at Hartford, Connecticut.
     Similar efforts followed in other cities, and Rescue and Industrial
     Homes, Shelters, and Farm Colonies followed on in due course.

     All these enterprises and many others, to which I have not time now
     to refer, were prior to the publication of "In Darkest England and
     the Way Out," and had, no doubt, a powerful influence in inspiring
     that volume.

     Since then one branch or other of Social Work has been commenced in
     every country in which our Flag is flying.

     Notwithstanding the satisfaction produced by these and kindred
     efforts in my own mind, and in the minds of those immediately
     associated with me, and although the results were truly remarkable,
     and the possibilities seemed to be still more wonderful, the
     beginnings of these Social enterprises attracted comparatively
     little notice.

     The New Movement--for thus I may describe it--which, with half an
     eye, thoughtful men might have seen to be pregnant with blessings
     for the whole world, was almost unnoticed by either the Authorities
     or the Press; while our supplies of men and money for its conduct
     and extension were very limited.

     Suddenly, however, the scene was changed, and, all at once,
     everybody was asking, "What is The Salvation Army?" "Who is General
     Booth?" and "What is this Social Scheme?"

     This change was largely brought about by the publication of "In
     Darkest England and the Way Out," together with the notices of the
     Scheme in the Press which it brought about.

     Judged by the effect produced, the book was certainly a remarkable
     one. In the first place it had a title which, in a striking manner
     described its character. Everybody wanted to see it, and, as a
     result, it was sold, lent, read, thought about, and talked about in
     every direction. Nearly a quarter of a million copies were sold.
     The profits from the publication and sale amounted to about
     L20,000, of which sum I had the privilege of handing over
     L5,380--which might have been considered rightfully to accrue to me
     personally as the Author--to the fund devoted to the promotion of
     the object for which the book was published.

     In its pages I propounded those Schemes which I thought would prove
     most successful in alleviating the terrible misery I had described,
     and in rescuing some, at least, of the sufferers from the conduct
     that produced it.

     In order to set the Scheme in motion, I asked the public to give me
     L100,000, and a further L30,000 per annum to maintain it.

     I can never forget the morning that directly followed the
     appearance of the volume. I was, of course, in ignorance of what
     the nation would think or say about it.

     I had made plans for the book to be delivered to the newspapers at
     one and the same time, and, regarding the Press as being to some
     extent the voice of the people, I was anxious to hear what that
     voice would say.

     I was not kept long in suspense. As I ascended the stairs at
     Headquarters that morning, a gentleman with a countenance beaming
     with kindness and anxiety met me. I do not think he had ever seen
     me before, and I was certainly in complete ignorance of him.

     "General Booth, I believe?" he said.

     "Yes, sir," I answered.

     "I have been reading the critique in _The Times_ of your Darkest
     England Scheme," he said, "and, believing your plan to be right and
     good, I want to be the first to express my sympathy and practical
     assistance in carrying it out, and I wish to give you the first
     L1,000 towards the sum asked for."

     This gentleman proved himself a firm friend of the Scheme, actively
     co-operating with us so far as he had opportunity.

     A short time afterwards our friend was present at the opening of
     our first London Ex-Prisoners' Home. When I had finished speaking
     he expressed a wish to say a few words. I invited him forward for
     that purpose. He came, hurried and excited, began to speak,
     staggered, reeled, fell into my arms and immediately expired. It
     may be truly said that he died calling down blessings on the
     Darkest England Scheme.

     After meeting this gentleman on the stairs, I had scarcely sat down
     at my desk, with his cheque in my hand, before a telegram was
     handed me, from one of the most influential newspaper proprietors
     in the city, expressing a similar hope, and promising a similar
     amount for its realisation.

     But along with these cheering expressions of approbation there came
     the invariable murmuring objections. One of these strove to
     minimise the value of the effort, by arguing that it was only an
     attempt to extend The Army's religious influence. People said they
     would be willing to help if all religious and propagandist motives
     were eliminated from the Scheme.

     One night a gentleman was announced as wishing to see me. He
     declined to give his name, and the only description of him I could
     gain was that he was a prominent member of the Stock Exchange.

     "I want to ask you one question--only one," he said, upon entering
     my office, "about this Social Scheme of yours."

     "All right," I replied, "as many as you like."

     "Well," he continued, "I want to know whether you are going to give
     religion alongside your other benefits to these people whom you
     seek to help? I am not a religious man myself. I am not saved, and
     never shall be--I am a lost soul; but there is no reason why these
     poor wretches should not have religion; and if you will give them
     religion, I will help you."

     "Yes," I answered, "we will give them religion. While we won't
     refuse to help them because they are irreligious--but, on the
     contrary, will take in the vilest and the worst--we will give them
     all as much religion as we can."

     "I will help you," he answered, as he handed me Bank of England
     notes for L500.

     He came to see us again and again, proving for the time being a
     generous friend. Then he disappeared.

     In a very short time, and in the readiest and most kindly manner,
     L104,000 were subscribed. But, alas! only a very small proportion
     of the L30,000 that was asked for annually was forthcoming.

     In this, as in many other similar cases, I have found that whilst
     the public will be ready--nay, eager--to embrace a new thing, they
     soon get tired of it, run after some other novelty, and leave you
     largely to struggle for its continuance, as best you can.

     5. It is enough here to state that the results at the onset were
     remarkable. Amongst others four, which might have been expected,
     were immediately realised:--

     (a) The first was the bringing into public view the ocean of
     tears, misery, and evil which was rolling around us in every
     direction.

     (b) Another result was that people everywhere were awakened from
     their selfish lethargy, to look upon these waters of tribulation,
     and were amazed to find the depth, the darkness, and the despair
     with which they rolled forward, as well as the damnation to which
     they invariably led.

     (c) A further effect was that a large number of people were won
     over to care for the class whom it was proposed to benefit, and to
     believe in the possibility of the Scheme being realised. Many of
     these proved permanent friends of our Social Operations.

     (d) Yet another effect was that the fountains of compassion broke
     out in the hearts of large numbers of individuals, and led them to
     make similar efforts. Everywhere the call was sounded to labour for
     these poor lost people, and instances were adduced which showed
     that their humble toil was productive of very striking results.

     But until now nothing, or next to nothing, had been done to stop
     this rolling river, or deliver those perishing in its waters,
     because everybody had felt helpless in the presence of the enormous
     evil.

     But here, now, were results of sufficient magnitude to convince
     those who became interested in the matter that, by the employment
     of the methods set forth in "In Darkest England and the Way Out,"
     something permanently effective might be accomplished.

     On the other hand, others, as might have been expected, who had
     never manifested any particular interest before, either for or
     against, now came out openly as our enemies, and a stiff fight
     followed, out of which the Social Operations, although in their
     infancy, may be said to have emerged victorious.

     One of the results of this conflict of opinion was the "Darkest
     England" Inquiry.

     The preparation of "In Darkest England" will for ever remain
     remarkable in my own memory, as it was mostly written and
     corrected in the adjoining chamber to that in which my dear wife
     was suffering those awful agonies associated with the disease which
     finally carried her away.

     The spirit which originated and controlled the Social Work had
     been, pre-eminently, the spirit of her religion. She certainly was
     the most practical exponent of the Christianity of which I have
     been speaking that it was ever my lot to meet. It was her religion;
     she preached it with natural eloquence and remarkable skill; and,
     in life and death, she exemplified it.

     From that day to this the history of the Social Work has been one
     of steady progress and of surpassing interest, and I have sometimes
     wondered whether any movement, based so solidly upon principles of
     permanence, and so calculated to bless the classes for whose
     benefit it was, by the Providence of God, called into being, has
     ever existed within the memory of men.

     Now what has come out of this beginning?

     1. Here is a list of the various Social enterprises we have in
     hand. I do not vouch for its completeness; but, anyway, we have
     here a goodly number of schemes for the benefit of the poor and
     friendless already in active and useful  operation:--

        (a) For the Starving, we have--
           i. Children's Free and Farthing Breakfasts.
          ii. Midnight Soup and Bread Brigades for the Homeless.
         iii. Cheap Food Depots.
          iv. Special Relief Funds for cases of Special Destitution.
           v. Old Clothes' Depots for Slum Families.
          vi. Poor Men's Hotels,
         vii. Cheap Grain Stores.
        viii. Famine Loan Fund for Destitute Indians.

        (b) For the Drunkards, we have--
           i. Drunkards' Brigades.
          ii. Midnight Drunkards' Brigades (of use also in any sudden
              emergency--Fire, Flood, etc.).
         iii. Drunkards' Advice Bureaux.
          iv. Homes for Inebriates--Men and Women.

        (c) For the Paupers, we have--
           i. Workhouse Brigades.
          ii. Salvation Guardians of the Poor.
         iii. Pauper Colonies.
          iv. Pauper Transportation.
           v. Labour Bureaux,
          vi. Homes for the Aged.

        (d) For the Unemployed, we have--
           i. Labour Bureaux--Men and Women,
          ii. Industrial Homes.
         iii. Labour Wood Yards.
          iv. City Salvage Brigades.
           v. Workshops.

        (e) For the Homeless, we have--
           i. Midnight Scouts.
          ii. Shelters for Men and Women.
         iii. Metropoles.

        (f) For the Criminals, we have--
           i. Prison Visitation.
          ii. Police-court Work.
         iii. Prison-Gate Work.
          iv. Probationary Police.
           v. Correspondence Bureaux.
          vi. Ex-Criminals' Homes.
         vii. Criminal Settlements

        (g) For the Daughters of Shame, we have--
           i. Visitation of Streets, Brothels, Yoshiwaras, Clubs, etc.
          ii. Midnight Meetings.
         iii. Receiving Homes.
          iv. Rescue Homes.
           v. Factories, Laundries, etc.
          vi. "Out of Love" Funds.
         vii. Service Girls' Brigades.
        viii. Shepherding Brigades.
          ix. Maternity Homes.
           x. Investigation and Detective Department.

        (h) Slum Work. We have--
           i. Visitation.
          ii. First-Aid Brigades.
         iii. District Nursing.
          iv. "Poorest of the Poor" Aid.

        (i) For the Sick, we have--
           i. Visitation.
          ii. Hospitals.
        iii. Dispensaries.
         iv. Village Dispensing,
          v. Leper Hospitals,
         vi. Maternity Nursing.

        (j) For the Lost, we have--
          i. Inquiry and Correspondence Bureaux.
         ii. Legal Assistance.

        (k) Prevention and Protective Work for Young Girls. We
        have--
          i. Servants' Homes.
         ii. City Institutes.
        iii. Theatrical Girls' Home.
         iv. Registries.
          v. Students' Homes.

        (l) Anti-Suicide Bureaux. We have--
          i. Advice Department.
         ii. Loan Department.

        (m) The Home League.

        (n) Land Schemes. We have--

          i. Emigration.
         ii. Home Colonisation.
        iii. Colonisation over the Sea.
         iv. Lands and Farm Colonies.
          v. Small Holdings.

        (o) Deep Sea Brigades. We have--

          i. Mission Boats.
         ii. Life-boat.

        (p) Training Colleges.

        (q) Students' Homes.

        (r) Working-Men's Association.

        (s) Village Banks.

     The total number of our Social Institutions is now 954.

     The value of properties, etc., held for the use of our Social
     Operations  is:--

        At Home (U.K.)           L228,000
        In other Countries        747,000

        Total                    L975,000

     2. In the history of the Social Work, nevertheless, there have
     been, as you will know, any number of shortcomings. We have not
     realised all our expectations, nor fulfilled all our dreams. It was
     not to be expected that we should. This is an imperfect world; the
     Movement has been imperfect, and the people who have carried it on
     have been imperfect also. Consequently, it is only natural that we
     have had imperfect results.

     (a) Many things have been calculated to cause these shortcomings.
     For example:--

     i. There has been a great lack of direct aim at the true goal of
     our Social Work on the part of some Officers who have been engaged
     in its direction.

     Some of our comrades have been content with a "soup-and-blanket"
     regime. That is to say, they have too often been satisfied with the
     alleviation of the miseries of the hour, and have stopped short of
     the removal of the evils that have caused the poverty, vice, and
     agony from which the sufferings sprang.

     Consequently, the work, being superficial, has in some cases only
     had superficial and temporary results.

     You get out of a thing as much as you put in--and no more, and
     that, not only in quantity, but in quality. If you go in for
     root-and-branch efforts, you will get root-and-branch results.

     ii. Another cause of our shortcomings has been the lamentable fact
     that some of our Officers have been deficient in personal religion.

     Our Social Work is essentially a religious business. It can neither
     be contemplated, commenced, nor carried on, with any great success,
     without a heart full of pity, and love, and endued with the power
     of the Holy Ghost.

     iii. Another of our difficulties has been the scarcity of suitable
     people for carrying the work on. This was also to be expected.

     If we had been content with hirelings, and had sought them out from
     among the philanthropies and Churches, we should have found plenty
     in number, but it is equally certain we should have had
     considerably more doleful failures than those we have experienced.

     We are not only making but are now training the Social Officers,
     and we shall doubtless improve in this respect, whilst the work
     they turn out will be bound to improve proportionately.

     iv. Then again a further reason for our shortcomings has been our
     shortness of money.

     This need unfortunately is not passing away, as you will all well
     know. But I suppose some of you have come from distant lands with
     bags of francs and dollars to present The General with an ample
     supply of this requirement. He thanks you beforehand.

     (b) Nevertheless, and notwithstanding all our shortcomings, the
     position now occupied by our Social Operations, and the influence
     exercised by them on the great and small of the earth, is in
     evidence in every Continent and on every hand.

     There is no doubt that the world, as a whole, feels much of the
     admiration and gratitude which the Press lavished upon me on my
     recent Birthday--admiration which was assuredly intended not only
     for myself, but for The Army as a whole, and not only for The Army
     as a whole, but for its Social Workers in particular.

     1. And now, in conclusion, let me summarise a few of the advantages
     which have flowed out of the Social Work, and which will continue
     to flow out of it as long as time rolls on.

     (a) The first benefit I will mention is the Salvation of
     thousands of souls.

     (b) The world has been further benefited by the knowledge of
     Salvation spread throughout every part of the habitable globe.

     (c) The world has been further benefited by the Conviction that
     has been brought to governmental, philanthropic, and religious
     agencies, as to the duty they owe to the classes we seek to
     benefit.

     (d) The world has been further benefited by the sympathy created
     in the hearts of royal personages, scientists, literary people, and
     the Press generally; indeed, in every class and grade of mankind.

     (e) The world has been further benefited by the removal of misery
     on such an extensive scale as had never even been dreamed of as
     possible.

     Think of the multitudes who, by our operations, are daily saved
     from starvation, vice, crime, disease, death, and a hundred other
     nameless woes.

     In some of the principal cities in Italy, Holland, Germany, and
     elsewhere, visited during my recent Continental Campaign, I have
     been looked upon with unspeakable satisfaction and enthusiasm as
     The General of the Poor, and The Salvation Army has been regarded
     as their friend.

     (f) The world has been further benefited by the help which our
     Social Operations have afforded to the Field and other Departments
     of The Army all over the world.

     (g) The world has been further benefited by the confidence the
     Social Work has created in the hearts and minds of our own
     people--both Officers and Soldiers--as to the truth and
     righteousness of the principles and practices of The Salvation
     Army.

     (h) The world has been further benefited by the answer which the
     Social Work constitutes to the infidel's sneers at Christianity and
     the assertion of its effeteness.

     Truly, our future chroniclers will have to record the fact that our
     Social Operations added a celestial lustre and imparted a Divine
     dignity to the struggles of the early years of The Salvation Army's
     history.

To our own eyes in The Army, however, that which has been done in
connexion with the Institutions is only a very insignificant part of the
whole effect produced. Until the present movement all over the world in
favour of the betterment of the social condition of the masses of the
people has had time to accomplish definite results, our Institutions may
yet have a good work to do.

But the great work The General did in this connexion was the restoration
to men's minds of the Saviour's own view, that we owed to every man
every care that a truly brotherly heart must needs bestow. That
principle, as The General pointed out, had always been acted upon, as
best it could be, from the beginning, and is daily acted upon to-day,
wherever The Army exists.




Chapter XXI

Motoring Triumphs



During one of his Motor Tours The General remarked:--

     "It was here (Banbury) that the idea of a Motor Campaign was
     conceived. Seven or eight years ago (1900) I held an afternoon
     Meeting in this place. On that occasion a crowd of my own people
     and friends came to the station to give me a send-off. Such was the
     affection shown, and so manifest was the pleasure derived from my
     visit, that I said to myself:--

     "'Why should I not impart this satisfaction to those comrades and
     friends throughout the country who have never had the satisfaction
     of seeing my face, or hearing my voice?'

     "And then the idea occurred to my mind that the automobile would
     not only be the readiest means of transit, but the only plan by
     which I could reach the small towns and outlying hamlets. Moreover,
     it would perhaps prove the only method by which we could get
     through the crowds who would be likely to assemble on such a
     Campaign."

By most men, in their prime, it would be thought an ample filling up of
any week to address three large Meetings on the Sunday, and one each
week night; but The General, at seventy-four, saw that, travelling by
motor, and visiting in the daytime such smaller towns and villages as
had never seen him before, or not for many years, he could not only
reckon upon three large indoor Meetings every day, but speak, perhaps,
to millions of people he had never before addressed. And so in six Motor
Tours he passed from end to end and from side to side of Great Britain,
gathering crowds from day to day for six weeks at a time.

We have met with people frivolous enough to write of all that as if The
General's Motor Tours were luxuries! In one glorious sense they were
really so, for, to him, there could never be a greater luxury than to
proclaim the Gospel to a crowd. But, as a matter of fact, he found it
less expensive to travel in this way than to go as he ordinarily did for
a long journey to and from London by train to reach each town
separately.

And the economy of Army forces, by means of Motor Tours, has been
marvellous, every little Corps and village Outpost on the route on
week-days being given an opportunity to gather crowds they never
ordinarily reached together, and to unite their own efforts for once
with those of their General in trying to lift up Christ more than ever
before.

And The General was so alive to the value of inflaming the love of any
handful of villagers or children, but especially of his Soldiers and
Officers to the Master, that it was to him a continual delight to move
about amongst his Soldiery in every land.

The General could rarely venture to plan very far ahead, because his
public appearances had all to be made to fit in with other and often
even more important engagements, of which only his Staff knew anything.
It is, indeed, marvellous how few engagements he made ever had to be
broken, and how successful almost every Campaign of his has been, seeing
at how short notice most of them were undertaken. In one of his diaries
I found a bitter complaint of the waste of time involved in having to
wait for three hours between the steamboat and train. "Why," he asks,
"could they not have arranged a Meeting for me?"

One who has travelled 8,000 miles with him on four Motor Tours says,
though everybody, everywhere, pressmen included, were of necessity
impressed with his sincerity and transparency, they could see that he
had all the time only one object in view, the glory of God and the
Salvation of souls.

And it is the extent to which he led all ranks into the same spirit
which made it easy for arrangements to be made and carried out in so few
hours for the very largest demonstrations, as to which it was never
possible to hold any approach to a rehearsal, those joining in them
living usually so widely apart from each other.

An occasional private letter gives, perhaps, the best possible
explanation of his own heart in this perpetual motion towards the Cross.
Who that saw him in some grand demonstration could imagine that he had
been feeling just before it as this letter reveals:--

     "My feelings alternate; but my faith is steadfast. Morning, noon,
     and night I tell God He is my only help. He will not fail me.
     To-night's Meeting will be, as you say, a great strain; but the
     memories of God's goodness encourage me to go forward in spite of
     unutterable sadness and gloom."

And who that heard him on one of those Congresses, in which a great
company of his Officers and Soldiers felt themselves to be feasting on
heavenly manna for days together, could imagine his writing the week
after:--

     "If ever I felt my full agreement with my Lord's definition of
     service as expressed in the parable, I do to-day. After all, I am a
     poor, unprofitable servant, and I have lost no little sleep since
     Friday night in criticising regretfully and condemning my share of
     the wonderful Congress that has certainly taken a large part of the
     world by storm. Nevertheless, I thank God from the bottom of my
     heart for the part I have been allowed to have in the matter."

Amongst the incidents of all touring, but especially of motoring, are
storms such as the one The General thus triumphed over:--

     "We are still rushing on. I had five Meetings yesterday, Friday,
     and an hour's ride through the most blinding storm I ever
     encountered. Two of our cars broke down, gave up, and retreated to
     the nearest town for the night; another got through in a damaged
     condition, and three with difficulty arrived at our destination.
     However, we who did get in, were rewarded with a big audience and a
     big reception. It was very wonderful. I am now reckoning on the
     closing Meeting which takes place on Wednesday afternoon.

     "Everybody continues to bless me and speak well of me. Is it not a
     little surprising, and, viewed from the Master's Standpoint, a
     little dangerous? You must keep on praying that my faith fail not.
     Abundance of trying things await me. I must wait for my rest
     'until the Morning.' God bless you!"

Well may a man sometimes long for rest who has experiences like the
following:--

     "I nearly killed myself on Saturday and Sunday at Birmingham. For
     some cause or other both throat and head got wrong, and it was with
     difficulty I could frame my sentences or pronounce my words, and
     yet I had to meet the great opportunity that was presented. I am
     paying the price to-day in weariness extreme. There is hardly a
     bone in my body that does not ache, or a nerve that does not seem
     overstrung.

     "But I shall rally and be myself again; indeed, I must, for things
     of vast importance have to be attended to before the day is out.
     Our exchequer is empty, and I have to prepare for my autumn
     Campaign in Holland, Germany, Italy, etc."

     "A mile or two after Penzance, the chauffeur turned to General
     Booth, and 'Now she's waking up!' he said, with a satisfied sigh,
     as the great car began to hurry through the open lanes.

     "The General nodded his head meditatively. 'Yes,' he said, in his
     beard, 'people have to wake up before they begin to move. England
     wants waking up; I'm trying to wake her up myself, just a little,
     and then we shall move.'

     "I asked him what he made of our national apathy.

     "He shook his head. 'I don't know how it is," he said, 'but people
     are somehow afraid to examine themselves, afraid to see facts as
     facts. There is a spirit in England which is worse than opposition
     to religion; it's a spirit of--of--of detachment, of separation, a
     spirit which says, "I don't want you, I can do without you; and so
     long as you leave me alone I shan't interfere with you." It's a
     kind of slackness. They want waking up. They want rousing. They
     want a good shaking. It seems as if they have fallen into a deep
     slumber--opium-eaters!'

     "He is setting out to rouse England once again, make one great
     final effort for the future of humanity. The future of humanity, he
     believes, can only be secured by 'conversion.'

     "Look at him in his car! There he sits, with a light-coloured
     overcoat buttoned round his neck, a grey forage cap pressed over
     his ears, his hands in his pockets, his eyes looking straight
     ahead, and his lips biting at his beard--an old, old man in the
     newest of motor-cars.

     "Through lanes where Wesley rode his horse, poring over a book as
     he went, General Booth flies in his beflagged car--on the same
     errand. These two men, so dissimilar in nature, so opposed in
     temperament, and separated by nearly two hundred years, the one on
     horseback, the other in a motor-car, sought and are seeking the
     same elusive end--the betterment of humanity.

     "One feels as one rides along our country roads with General Booth
     the enormous force of simple Christianity in this work of
     evolution. One sees why Wesley succeeded, and why The Salvation
     Army is succeeding.

     "'We make too much of sin,' says evolution. 'We don't make half
     enough of sin!' cries The General. Politicians and men of science
     seem like scene-shifters in the drama of life, and religion stands
     out clear and distinct as the only actor.

     "'People have taken to The Salvation Army because it's so kind to
     poor people,' General Booth tells me; 'they know I love the poor,
     they know I weep bitterly for all the hunger and nakedness and
     sorrow in the world. People know I'm sincere. That's it! They know
     The Salvation Army is sincere, that it's doing kind actions, and
     helping those whom nobody else will help or can help. That's what
     makes us popular. Sympathy.'

     "But the secret of The General is not humaneness. His secret is the
     reality with which he invests sin. Hear him talk about sin, and you
     realise the man's spell.

     "At one moment he is full of humour and robust talk, a genial,
     merry, shrewd-eyed old gentleman; at the next--at the mention of
     real sin--his brows contract, his eyes flash, and his tongue hisses
     out such hatred and contempt and detestation as no sybarite could
     find on the tip of his tongue for anything superlatively coarse or
     ill-flavoured.

     "'Sin!' he cries to me. 'Sin is a real thing--a damnable thing! I
     don't care what science calls it, or what some of the pulpits are
     calling it. I know what it is. Sin is devilish. It is sin and only
     sin which is stopping progress. It is sin and only sin which
     prevents the world from being happy. Sin! Go into the slums of the
     great cities--pick up little girls of six years of age sold into
     infamy by their parents; look at the drunken mother murdering her
     child, the father strapping his cripple son--sin!--that's what I
     call sin; something beastly and filthy and devilish and
     nasty--nasty, dreadfully nasty.'

     "As you listen and as you realise that The Salvation Army contains
     numberless men changed in the twinkling of an eye from lives of
     such sin as this to lives of beneficent activity, you begin to feel
     that General Booth, right or wrong, has at least hit upon one of
     the most effective ways for helping evolution.

     "He makes sin as real to the individual as only the mystics can
     imagine for themselves. Perhaps humanity likes to be told how black
     it is, how far it is from the perfectness after which Nature is
     blundering and staggering. I know not; but it is manifest that when
     this grim old man, with the ivory face, the black, flashing eyes,
     the tangle of white hair and the tangle of beard, leans over the
     rostrum and calls sin 'beastly' and 'devilish' and 'nasty' the
     people sit as white and spellbound as the patient of the hypnotist.

     "It is a different General Booth whom the villagers flock to see as
     he drives, smiling and genial, through Cornish villages, whom the
     band plays into towns, and whom mayors and councillors receive with
     honour. But the reason of this honour and this popularity is the
     fact that he is a force, a living, breathing power who has made sin
     real to the world and has awakened the religious consciousness in
     thousands of human beings."

William Booth was always very wide awake to the discouraging emptiness
of mere demonstrations, and never expressed himself more contemptuously
with regard to them than when he thought that any of his Officers, in
the midst of some grand display, which was attracting unusual attention,
seemed to be likely to be satisfied with the show of what had been done,
instead of pressing forward to greater things.

Yet he saw that, in presence of the continual and enthralling
exhibitions of the world, there was absolute need for such
manifestations of united force as might encourage every little handful,
usually toiling out of sight, and convince the world that we were
determined fully to overcome all its attractions.

There had been before his time large demonstrations in favour
of teetotalism, and in some parts of the country the Sunday
Schools were accustomed annually to make displays of more or less
fashionably-dressed children and teachers. But The General was alone in
his own country and time in organising any such public demonstrations in
honour of Christ, and of total abstinence from sin and from
worldly-mindedness.

How perfectly The General could always distinguish between the enjoyment
of demonstration and of real fighting, was strikingly manifested on one
of our great Crystal Palace days. Looking down from the balcony upon the
vast display, when some 50,000 Salvationists were taking part in various
celebrations, he noticed a comparatively small ring of our converted
military and naval men kneeling together on the grass, evidently within
hearing of one of the band-stands upon which one Band after another was
playing, according to programme.

"Go and stop that Band," said he to one of his A.D.C.'s. "We must not
have those praying men hindered in their fight for souls by the music."

And this was only one example of his frequent abandonment of any
programme, or practice, or arrangement which seemed to him only to have
demonstrative effect, when any more enduring benefit could be otherwise
secured.

In short, demonstration in his eyes was only valued at its military
worth, and he never wished any one to become so occupied with appearance
as to miss enduring victory.

The following description, by a writer in a big London daily, of one of
The General's tours might be fairly accepted as a sample of them all,
and as giving some idea of the way in which they manifested his care for
all that concerned men:--

     "'An easy day' was The General's description of that on which we
     fared to mediaeval Godalming, through the beautiful Hindhead region
     to Petersfield, and thence in the evening to antiquity and
     Winchester. He meant that he had only to address three great
     gatherings (the day's course admitted of scarcely any of the
     customary wayside and hamlet musters), so his oratory would be
     merely a matter of five hours or thereabouts. There were solid fact
     in The General's airy designation; it _was_ an easier day than most
     of those of the tour; but it had sundry distinctions of its own,
     apart from the great, welcoming Meetings.

     "It was curious and pleasant to see gipsies salute The General from
     their wayside Bohemia on the road to Hindhead; it was delightful to
     see The General himself as he descended and spoke to the church
     school-children who hailed him by the wayside at Roke, in one of
     the most charming wayside spots on the journey. They stood with
     their teachers under the trees in the sunshine, little pictures of
     bloom and happiness. 'Now wouldn't you like to be running round the
     country on a motor?' he asked them straight away, and their answer
     come with hearty directness. In a naive and tender little speech,
     that had a touch of airiness, he told them of the joy of motoring,
     turning anon to the many glad and beautiful things within the reach
     of little people who yet might not go a-motoring, and so in simple
     little touches appealing to the joy of life and soul that the
     child-sense could understand.

     "'Isn't he like Father Christmas?' a little girl was heard to
     whisper. Here he charmed those in the morning of life; away at
     Petersfield in the afternoon the sight of him consoled some in
     life's evening. One poor old lady, who had lost the use of both
     limbs, was carried to her door and set in a bath-chair, and there
     she remained till The General had passed. We noticed the light on
     her face, and how vehemently she waved her handkerchief. An Army
     Officer chatted with her before we left the town in the evening. 'I
     can now die happy,' she said; 'I have seen The General. And when
     the call comes I know that God will send down the hallelujah motor
     for me, and the loss of my old limbs won't matter in the least.'

     "I have mentioned 'an easy day.' Having now described in a broad
     way the typical early stages, it may be well, in a somewhat more
     intimate and personal way, to give an idea of the work, moods, and
     trend of the average day of the whole tour. The stress and
     excitement it meant in the long stretch of country from the first
     town to the last were extraordinary. We mustered, as a rule, at
     nine in the morning for the day's work and travel, most of the folk
     of the town where the night had been spent turning out for the
     send-off.

     "The General was on the scene almost invariably to the minute.
     Nearly always at those starts he looked grave, resigned, and calm,
     but unexpectedly careworn. It was as if he had wrestled with all
     his problems, with a hundred world-issues in the watches of the
     night, and was still in the throes of them, and unable for the
     moment to concentrate his attention on the immediate town and crowd
     that hurrah'd around him. But, of course, he stood up and
     acknowledged the plaudits--though often as one in a dream. But the
     picturesqueness of his appearance in the morning sunshine--with his
     white hair, grave face, and green motor garb--took the imagination
     of the mass, and without a word from him the people were left
     happy.

     "He looked a new personality at the first important stopping-place,
     reached usually about an hour before noon. His air and mood when he
     stepped to the platform for the public Meeting had undergone a
     radiant change; all the more radiant, we noticed, if the children
     who had hailed him from the waysides had been many and strenuous.
     There was something of the child in his own face as he stepped to
     the platform's edge, and replied to the enthusiasm of the house by
     clapping his own hands to the people. There was always something
     naive and delightful in The General's preliminary task of
     applauding the audience.

     "Here came his first important address of the day, lasting an hour
     and a half, or even longer. It had many 'notes,' and displayed The
     General in many moods. He was apt to be facetious and drily
     humorous at first. He had racy stories to tell--and none can tell a
     story for the hundredth time with fresh zest than he--in
     illustration of the old and bitter prejudices against The Army. A
     typical one was that of an old woman, arrested for the hundredth
     time for being drunk and disorderly, who was given the option of
     going to prison or being passed over to The Salvation Army. Too
     drunk to realise what she did, she decided for the latter. She was
     kindly tended, set in a clean cosy bed, and watched over by a
     sister till the morning. When she woke the sunlight streamed
     through the window, and the happy, unaccustomed surroundings
     surprised her. 'Where am I?' she exclaimed in bewilderment. 'You
     are with The Salvation Army,' said the sister kindly and softly.
     'Oh, goodness gracious,' roared the old woman, 'take me away, or
     I'll lose my reputation!'

     "Often in these long and comprehensive addresses The General told
     how he found the work of his life. He was never so impressive as at
     this stage. And the tale in its intensity was ever new. His
     language was nervous, intense, almost Biblical, his figure
     suggestive of a patriarch's in a tragedy. 'Sixty years ago--sixty
     years ago--sixty years ago,' each time with a different and a
     grimmer intonation--'the Spirit of the Living God met me.... I was
     going down the steep incline when the great God stopped me, and
     made me think.'

     "In the last stage of his address he was the coloniser, the
     statesman, the social wizard who would recast character and
     rearrange humanity. He gave an epic sense to the story of
     emigration and colonisation. But he was invariably clear and lucid
     in his detail, so that the immediate and practical meaning of it
     all was never lost on the mayors, and corporation and council
     worthies, who heard him. Then miles and miles away at the second
     important stopping-place in the early afternoon, after incidental
     wayside speeches and idylls, he went over the same ground in a
     further address of an hour or more. Somehow in the afternoon he
     appeared to speak with added individuality and passion, as if the
     wants and woes of the world had been growing upon him since the
     morning.

     "A needed rest, perhaps a little sleep, then away once more by the
     waysides and through the welcoming hamlets. The third and last
     great stopping-stage was reached, as a rule, about eight o'clock.
     He typified serene old age as he stood up in the white car, passing
     the long lines of cheering humanity. Here in the evening light it
     was not easy to regard him as a propagandist. He might be a study
     for Father Christmas, or a philosopher who dealt much in
     abstractions and knew little of men. The General who, twenty
     minutes later, proclaimed his spiritual truths and his social
     ideals to a new audience, seemed, once more, an absolutely
     different personality. Often at these evening meetings he spoke for
     the better part of two hours."




Chapter XXII

Our Financial System



The continued strain to raise the money needed for the work was,
undoubtedly, to William Booth the greatest part of his burden all the
way through life. And it is to this day the puzzle which makes it most
difficult to write as to The Army's finances. On the one hand, we have
to praise God for having helped him so cheerily to shoulder his cross
that he did not seem many times to feel the burden that was almost
crushing him to the ground, and hindering all sorts of projects he would
gladly have carried out. Yet, on the other hand, we must guard against
saying anything that could lead to the impression that The Army has now
got to the top of its hill of difficulty, and needs no more of the help,
in small sums as well as in big ones, that has been so generously sent
to it.

It would be hopeless to attempt to estimate the numbers of appeals The
General sent out in any one year, for he not only tried at fixed periods
to get for his various funds truly interested subscribers, but was
always seeking to link the hearty giver with the deserving receivers.

But perhaps the very extremity of his one need helped him with the most
practical wisdom to avoid all unnecessary expenditure, and to cultivate
all those habits of economy and systematic effort which alone made it
possible to keep up so vast a work mainly by the gifts of the poor. To
this very day it is the same old struggle to get each L5 that is wanted
together. Yet all of it is precious to us because it so guarantees
exemption from indifference, and the pervasion of all our ranks
everywhere with the principles of self-help which The General always so
inculcated as to make The Army everywhere independent of the wealthy,
yet their trusted and skilful almoners.

Rejoicing as we do in all that, we cannot too strongly guard every one
against the impression that The Army has become, either at its centre,
or anywhere else, so situated that there is not at any given moment
extraordinary strain in some financial direction. It has come to be very
generally known that the individual Officer can only keep in existence
because he has schooled his desires to be content with what others all
around would regard as "an impossible pittance."

We hear one day of a great city where the conditions of life are such
that a Rescue Home is evidently urgently needed, and the lady who calls
our attention to the matter offers at once to find L500 towards the
fitting-up of such a Home. But we know that to keep it up requires gifts
amounting to some thousands of pounds each year, which, if not
subscribed locally, we shall have to provide from Headquarters.

Now what is to be done? Are we to stand still with what seems to us so
valuable an offer, not only of money-helps but of opportunity to help?
Under the circumstances we know what The General would have done. He
would without a moment's hesitation have said: "This ought to be done,
and must be done"; and, trusting in God, he would have made the other
step forward, though perfectly conscious that it would probably involve
him in new cares and anxieties.

"Four shillings and tenpence. Now, really, can't we manage that twopence
to make five shillings?"

Such an appeal, heard at a street-corner, where one of our Open-Air
Meetings is being closed, is, I fear, the first and last that many
people hear of The Salvation Army. They have not been present at the
Meeting. All the beautiful speaking and singing of happy men and women,
anxious to do anything they can for the good of others--of this the
passers-by know nothing. Many of them "would not be seen standing to
listen" amidst the crowd, still less when, for want of any considerable
crowd, they would be more conspicuous. Hence they have no chance to see
or know what really takes place. Had they even seen the whole process
of getting that four shillings and tenpence they would have noted that
most of the money really came from the Salvationists forming the ring,
who threw their pence, or sixpences, gradually, in the hope of inciting
others to do likewise.

As it is, I fear, many go their way "disgusted at the whole thing,"
because of the little scrap of it they have overheard.

But, pray, what is the essential difference between the call for
"twopence to make up a shilling," and the colossal call made in the name
of some royal personage for "an additional ten thousand pounds" to make
up the L25,000 needed for a new hospital wing? Surely, a hospital, whose
value and services commend it to the entire population should need no
such spurs as subscription lists published in all the papers, or even
the memory of a world benefactor to help it to get the needed funds. But
it does, and its energetic promoters, be they royal or not, deserve and
get universal praise for "stooping"--if it be stooping--to any device of
this kind needed to get the cash. Do they get it? is the only question
any sensible person asks.

And nobody questions that our "stooping" Officers and "begging Sisters"
get the twopences and shillings and pounds needed to keep The Army
going, in spite of all its critics--whether of the blatant
street-corner, or of the kid-gloved slanderer type.

If we reflect upon the subject we shall see how sound and valuable are
the principles on which all our twopenny appeals are based.

From the very beginning The General always set up the standard of local
self-support as one of the essentials of any real work. Whilst labouring
almost exclusively amongst the poorest of the poor, he wrote, in 1870:--

[Illustration: Emma Booth-Tucker

Born January 8th. 1860. Died October 28th. 1903.]

     "The entire cost of carrying on the Mission at present is about L50
     per week. The offerings of the people themselves at the various
     stations are now about L17 per week; indeed, nearly every Station
     is paying its own working expenses. Thus the poor people themselves
     do something. This they ought to do. It would be wrong to deprive
     them of the privilege of giving their mite, and if they prize
     the instrumentalities that have been blessed to them, and are
     rightly instructed, they will cheerfully give, however small their
     contribution may be."

It has only been by clinging to this plan that the little Society, begun
in the East of London, has been able to spread itself throughout the
world and yet remain independent, everywhere, of local magnates. And The
General had the sorry satisfaction of seeing the structure tested by the
most cruel winds of slander and suspicion, with the result that the
total of contributions to its funds during the last years has been
greater than ever before. Part, indeed, of our greatest difficulty with
regard to money now is the large total yearly at our disposal, when all
the totals in every country and locality are added together. Any one can
understand that this must be so, and that it could not help us to
publish the amount all together. If in a hundred places only a thousand
pounds were raised, anybody can see that to cry aloud about the hundred
thousand in any one of those places could not but make everybody in that
place less capable of strenuous struggle such as is needed to get
together each thousand.

Therefore, whilst publishing every year the properly audited
balance-sheet referring to amounts received and spent in London, and
similar balance-sheets, similarly audited, in each other capital, we
have always refrained, and always shall refrain, from any such massing
of totals, or glorying in any of them, as could help our enemies to
check the flow of liberality anywhere.

When, in 1895, there seemed to be a general cry for some special
investigation into the use made of the Fund raised as a result of The
General's "Darkest England" Appeal, we were able to get a Commission of
some of the most eminent men in the country, whose Report effectively
disposed of any doubts at the time.

The Commission had for Chairman Earl Onslow, and its members were the
Right Hon. Sir Henry James (afterwards Lord James), Messrs. Sydney
Buxton, Walter Long, and Mr. Edwin Waterhouse, President of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants, the Right Hon. Hobhouse, M.P.,
acted as Secretary.

The Report of no Commission could, however, still any hostile tongue.
The cry for "investigation" has always been simply the cry of enmity or
envy, which no amount of investigation could ever satisfy. The General
perfectly understood this at the time, and wrote to a friend of the
discerning order:--

     "How I feel generally with respect to the future is expressed in
     one word, or rather two, 'Go forward.' The Red Sea has to be
     crossed and the people rescued from Hell here and Hell hereafter.
     We must stick to our post.

     "I am quite aware that I may now, probably shall be, more
     misunderstood than ever. But God and time will fight for me. I must
     wait, and my comrades must wait with me.

     "I need not say that the subject has had, and still has, our
     fullest consideration; but I cannot say more until I see clearly
     what position the country will take up towards me during the next
     few days."

Need I say that this Report never checked for one day the ferocity of
the attacks upon the General or his Army. Had public opinion been
deluded by the babblings of our critics in any country we should not
only have lost all support, but been consigned to jails as swindlers and
robbers. But the fact that we get ever-increasing sums, and are ever
more and more aided by grants from Governments and Corporations, or by
permissions for street-collecting, is the clearest demonstration that we
are notoriously upright in all our dealings.

So many insinuations have been persistently thrown out, year after year,
with regard to the integrity of The General's dealings with finance,
that I have taken care not merely to consult with comrades, but to give
opportunity to some who were said to "have left in disgust" with regard
to these matters, to correct my own impression if they could.

Having been so little at Headquarters myself since I left for Germany,
in 1890, I knew that my own personal knowledge might be disputed, and
my accuracy questioned; therefore, I have been extra careful to
ascertain, beyond all possibility of dispute, the correctness of the
view I now give.

One who for many years had the direction of financial affairs at the
International Headquarters, and who retired through failing health
rather than become a burden upon the Army's ever-strained exchequer,
wrote me on November 28, 1910:--

     "The General has always taken the keenest interest in all questions
     bearing upon The Army's financial affairs, and has ever been alive
     to the necessity for their being so administered as to ensure the
     contributing public's having the utmost possible value for the
     money contributed, at the same time rendering a careful account
     from year to year of his stewardship.

     "Carefully prepared budgets of income and expenditure are submitted
     to him year by year in connexion with all the central funds,
     reports are called for from time to time as to the extent to which
     such estimates have been realised.

     "He was always keen and far-sighted in his consideration of the
     proposals put before him, and quick to find a flaw or weakness, or
     to point out any responsibilities which had not been sufficiently
     taken into account.

     "Until recent years, when his world-wide journeyings made it
     necessary to pass the responsibility on to the Chief of the Staff,
     he largely initiated his own schemes for raising money, and wrote
     his own principal appeals.

     "Those who refer to The General as 'a puppet in the hands of
     others,' or as anything but an unselfish, disinterested servant of
     humanity, only show their ignorance of their subject."

One of the schemes by which our finances have been greatly helped
everywhere, and which is now imitated by many Churches and Societies all
over the world--the Self-Denial Week, established in 1886--was The
General's own invention. It was at a time when, as he writes:--

     "In some Corps half, and in some more than half, of our Soldiers
     have been for months without any income at all, or at most with
     just a shilling or two. In addition, many of our regular
     contributors, as owners of land or of manufacturing houses, have
     suffered from the depression, and have not been able to assist us
     further.

     "The rapid extension of The Army has necessitated an increased
     expenditure. Our friends will see that our position is really a
     serious one.

     "What is to be done? Reduction, which means retreat, is impossible.
     To stand still is equally so.

     "We propose that a week be set apart in which every Soldier and
     friend should deny himself of some article of food or clothing, or
     some indulgence which can be done without, and that the price
     gained by this self-denial shall be sent to help us in this
     emergency.

     "Deny yourself of something which brings you pleasure or
     gratification, and so not only have the blessing of helping us, but
     the profit which this self-denial will bring to your own soul."

This effort, which in the year of its inauguration only produced 4,280,
has in twenty-six years grown till it totalled in Great Britain in 1911,
L67,161, and has so taken hold of the people's minds and hearts
everywhere as to produce even in poor little Belgium last year 7,500 f.

Perhaps it need hardly be explained that the system of special effort
and special begging near the entrance to railway stations, and in all
the most prominent places of the cities, which has grown out of this
week, with the approval of Governments and Press everywhere, has done
more than any one could have dreamt of to increase interest in the needs
of others, and holiness and self-denial in attending to them.

And it is, after all, upon that development of practical love for
everybody that The Army's finance depends.

Merely to have interested so many rich people in The Army might have
been a great credit to The General's influence, but to have raised up
everywhere forces of voluntary mendicants who, at any rate, for weeks at
a time are not ashamed to be seen begging in the streets for the good of
people they have never seen, is an achievement simply boundless in its
beneficent value to all mankind, and limitless in the guarantee it
provides for the permanent maintenance and extension of our work.

Do let me beg you to realise a little of the intense interest taken in
our finances locally by all our Soldiers. Did you ever get to know one
of our Corps Treasurers? If not, believe me, that your education is
incomplete. Whether he or she be schoolmistress in the mining village of
Undergroundby, shopkeeper in Birmingham, or cashier of a London or
Parisian bank, you will find an experienced Salvation Army Treasurer
generally one of the most fully-developed intelligences living. He or
she could easily surpass Judas Iscariot himself, either for ability at
bargaining, or for what we call "Salvation cheek." He considers the Duke
who owns most of his county, or the Mayor of the city, is "duty bound"
to help The Army whenever its Officer thinks a fitting moment has come
to him to ask them to do so--and the Treasurer never thinks that they
already have helped us enough.

Every farthing his Corps has received or paid, for years past, has
passed through his careful fingers. In any city Corps I would accept his
judgment about a "doubtful" coin before that of almost any one. And no
human being could surpass him in eagerness or care to get the very
uttermost possible value for every penny spent. Hours after great
Meetings are over you may find him with other officers busy still
parcelling coppers, or in some other way "serving tables." His own
business or family would very often suffer for his late hours of toil in
the cause, if God allowed that sort of thing. But God has seen to it
that many such a Treasurer has climbed out of the very gutter into a
well-to-do employer's position, _because_ he sought first His Kingdom
and His righteousness.

These Treasurers, if anybody took the trouble to interview them, would
make it impossible for any decent person to believe the lies that have
been told about our "not publishing accounts," our "extravagance," etc.
They know how carefully even the smallest Corps book or collecting-card
is examined, and with what precise and skilful method every account is
kept.

Like almost all our Local Officers, they are particularly cheery,
friendly men and women. I fear we have but few women Treasurers, as
finance, like so many other things, is supposed to be "beyond women's
powers," and the sisters really do not, as a rule, like arithmetic. But
man or woman, you have only to watch one of them a few moments, when
anybody is trying to arrange a joint excursion with various Corps, to
see that, with all their kindliness, the interests committed to their
charge always command their first sympathy. Treasurer Pitman, of
Leatherby, "never could see," and never will, why either Birmingham I or
Leamington, or any other Corps, should be more favoured, or more
burdened, than his own. Even should his words at times seem rough, or
few, he will charm you, almost without exception, if you get out of his
wife or the Captain, or somebody, all he does and suffers for Christ's
sake. Nobody will ever know how often it was the Treasurer who gave half
the "twopence to make up a shilling" in the street-corner collection
that, perhaps, made the impression that The Army was "not
self-supporting!"

But, in spite of all his jollity, the Treasurer is often a sorely-tried
and burdened man. For, Oh, it is a struggle to get the pence together,
week after week, especially where the Corps has a "Hall of its own," for
ground rent and interest on which it must pay L5 to L10 a week!

The Treasurer's great opportunity comes when he has the joy of
harbouring in his own home, for a night or two, the Chief of the Staff,
or some other "Special from London." Then he may get a chance to "put a
word in" for his Corps.

Does the Chief ask him, "Why do we not get on better in this town?"

"Well, Chief," he will reply, "just look at our Hall. It fairly
stinks--always has done, owing to that canal at the back. That has
almost made it impossible for us to get a large congregation, especially
in warm weather."

"But why don't you get a better place?"

"Well, there is nothing in the town large enough to let, and as for
building--any site that would be of use would cost a pile of money, and
we have no hope of raising any large sum here."

"Why? Have you no rich friends?"

"There are a few very rich men here. I was seeing one of them myself
only last month when we wanted to get some new instruments for our Band.
But what do you think he said to me?

"'Why,' said he, 'I have more than enough to do to keep up my own
church. We have got to rebuild it, and it will cost us L30,000.'"

"There is not a mill-owner in the place who does not want to get
Salvationist workpeople, even to the boys of our Soldiers, because they
know they can depend on them. But to help us to get a Hall! Ah! 'that is
not in their line.'"

Therefore, the Treasurer and every Officer must go on week after week,
with the miserable beg, beg, beg, which afflicts them, perhaps, even
more than the most critical listener. And then our great work must
suffer both for want of the needed plant to carry it on, and from the
appearance of too much begging, which, in so many instances, has
undoubtedly hindered our gathering in the very people we most wished to
help.

What stories of self-denial, not one week in the year more than another,
any such Treasurer could tell! How Officers managed to rear a healthy
and promising family upon less than a pound a week: how The General's
own granddaughters "made six shillings a week do" for their personal
support, for months, because their Corps could not afford more: how the
Sergeant-Major's wife did her washing during the night "before
Self-Denial Week came on," so as to be able to stand all day long
outside the station, in the cold, collecting: how widow Weak "keeps up
her cartridges"; that is to say, goes on giving the Corps a regular
subscription of sixpence a week since her husband's death, as before,
"lest the Corps should go down."

Lately they took me to see a German widow, now suffering in a hospital,
who when her whole weekly cash earnings outside only totalled two
shillings a week, invariably "put in her cartridge" two pfennigs, say a
farthing. No. I gave her nothing, nor did anybody else in my presence,
as her needs are now attended to; and I am sure she would rather keep up
the fact of never having received anything from, but always having given
to, The Army.

Of course we do not pretend that all Treasurers and Soldiers are of the
model sort. If they were, many of our bitterest financial struggles
would never occur. If everybody who "kept back part" of what they ought
to give to God were struck dead for singing such words as--

    Were the whole realm of nature mine,
      That were a present far too small.

God would need many a regiment of corpse carriers, I fear.

The General, seventeen years ago, wrote to a wealthy lady who had been
excusing somebody's want of liberality to us by some of the slanders
they had heard.

     "Tell your friends in Gull-town the same that I am telling the
     public: that nine out of every ten statements in the Press that
     reflect upon us are either out-and-out _falsehoods_ or
     '_half-lies_,' which are worse still; and that, though not
     infallible, when in one case out of ten we do make mistakes, there
     are circumstances which, if known, would excuse them very largely.

     "I am having wonderful Meetings--immense crowds, soul-awakening
     influences all day--Penitent-Forms; back-sliders, sinners and
     half-and-half saints coming back to God. Never saw anything,
     anywhere, in any part of my life, much more blessed.

     "Read my letter in _The War Cry_ about the Two Days--every word as
     from my heart.

     "Money or no money, we must and will have Salvation. If the rich
     won't help Lazarus through us, then their money must perish. We
     must do the best we can.

     "Join the Light Brigade, and give a halfpenny per week! We shall
     get through. Is your soul prospering? Cast yourself this morning on
     your Lord for a supply of _all your need_."

This "Light Brigade" is another invention of the General's, partly
founded upon the Indian habit of taking a handful out of every new
supply of food, and laying it aside for the priests.

The "Light Brigade" consists of Soldiers and friends who place on their
table a little box, into which all who like can drop a little coin by
way of thanksgiving to God and care for the poor before they eat. These
are called "Grace-before-Meat" Boxes, and in England alone they produced
last year L8,284. 17_s._ 2_d._ for the support of our Social Work.

Altogether I venture to say it will be found that for every shilling he
ever got anywhere he prompted the giving of at least a thousand
shillings to other benevolent enterprises, and that mankind is indebted
to him for the stirring up to benevolent action of countless millions
who never even heard his name.

At the same time it will be found that by his financial plans he has
made The Army so largely dependent upon public opinion that, were its
beneficent work to cease, its means of survival would at the same time
become extinct, so that it could not continue to exist when it had
ceased to be a Salvation Army.




Chapter XXIII

In Germany in Old Age


Though we have had occasion to mention Germany repeatedly, there has
been no opportunity to call attention to the great importance which The
General attached to our Work in that country. It seemed almost as though
we had been premature in our attack upon the country, so little were
either Governments or people prepared for our violent urgency, when we
began in Stuttgart, in 1886. But The General lived to see his annual
visits to Berlin looked forward to by the Press and public as a natural
provision for the spiritual wants of those who had practically ceased to
be of any religion.

In the following description of him, taken from German papers during one
of his last visits to that country, we get not only some idea of his
appearance to the people when he was eighty-one years of age, but his
sense of the importance of that people in the future of The Army. And it
is a remarkable fact that German cities should have been subsidising The
Army's work before any English one did so.

We have happily got complete enough accounts of The General's tour in
Germany, when eighty-one, to supply not merely a most artistic
representation of his own appearance and action at that age, but at the
same time to give an almost perfect view of the impressions and
teachings his Army has been giving out there for nearly thirty years.

In Duesseldorf, we are told:--

     "The old idealist spoke for an hour and a half with the fire of
     enthusiasm, throwing out every now and then some spark of his
     humour amidst his stream of eloquence. He did not speak like a
     dying greybeard, but like a young man ready to take up to-morrow
     morning the struggle with the misery of the whole world. Out of
     such material as this old man are made the great men who do great
     deeds on the battle-field, in the sphere of science, in the
     province of religion, of humanity, and of society."

The _Cologne Gazette_ goes more into detail, and says:--

     "At his great age the Founder and Leader of The Salvation Army
     hastens from continent to continent, from land to land, to awaken
     in Public Meetings love for your neighbour. After a journey through
     Holland he came into West Germany. In this week he speaks in great
     cities from Dortmund to Carlsruhe, each day in a new place, and
     often in several Meetings. Many thousands came together last Sunday
     from Essen and neighbourhood, so that the great hall of the
     Soldiers' Home itself was not large enough to hold them at the
     various Meetings. Here yesterday evening 2,000 people wanted to
     give him a warm welcome in the Emperor's Hall.

     "The eighty-one-year-old philanthropist, who strides so unbendingly
     along, is full of youthful enthusiasm. His tall figure, with its
     gleaming eyes, long curved nose, and flowing beard, help him to
     present himself to the audience, with lively gestures illuminating
     his thoughts, as at once accuser of our times and gentle judge. He
     is especially a gentle judge of fallen women and girls, 55,000 of
     whom, from ten years of age upwards, he tells us, The Army has
     rescued.

     "'The fallen young men are forgiven by their fathers and mothers,'
     says he. 'Why should not we also forgive the fallen girls? If
     nobody else will do so, we will.' This sentiment called forth
     general applause.

     "'And then,' The General went on, 'The religion of The Army has
     three main principles: (1) You must get right with your God. You
     must be reconciled with Him, and feel the kiss of His forgiving
     love. (2) You must live righteously in your own private life, in
     your family, and in holiness of heart. (3) You must give yourself
     up to the service of your fellow-men--must not wait to be called
     upon, but must have a fire in yourself--the fire of love.'

     "It took mightily hold of the audience as, following upon this
     definition of the religion of The Army, he told them that he felt
     himself now nearing the cold stream of death, but fully believed
     that this religion, which had carried him through so much of care
     and disappointment up to this day, would also carry him through the
     dark valley into Paradise, where he, who for so long had known no
     holiday, would at last find rest."

Everywhere in Germany it is this revelation of a religion, founded on
unshakable faith, which impresses even the sceptical journalist. Here
and there the tendency to doubt shows itself a little between the lines,
and it is suggested that the audience were only for the time being under
the spell of this remarkable speaker. But most impressive is always the
description of The General's calls to repentance and faith.

In Berlin for a number of years the General held Meetings in the great
Circus Busch on the National Buss-tag, Repentance Day; and, as the way
in which his name is pronounced by most Germans comes very near one of
the two words, it has almost become a Booth Day in the thoughts of many.

     "It was evident," says one paper, "again in the two Meetings held
     yesterday that the personality of the Founder and Leader of The
     Army still exercises its charm. Both Meetings were crowded; the
     Circus was filled from arena up to gallery with a pressing
     multitude. At the close of the evening address there was the call
     to the Penitent-Form, and 158 men and women, out of the most
     differing circles of society, obeyed the call. Mr. Booth spoke in
     both Meetings with the freshest energy and youthful fire, and
     to-day he travels to Denmark."

The _Frankfort Gazette_, and other papers, having the opportunity for
the first time to report The General's Meetings on a whole Sunday, a
little later, gave a much completer description of his preaching:--

     "The Founder of The Army," says the _Gazette_, "bears his
     eighty-one years lightly. He is still equal to all the toils of the
     agitation, and spoke for over five hours in three Meetings in the
     great hall of the Merchants' Union. The old gentleman keeps up his
     good humour, and perfectly understands how to intersperse
     interesting anecdotes in his addresses."

     "Last Sunday," says another paper, "was a Booth Day, and certainly
     a Repentance Day. The General came to win Soldiers for his Army,
     and ammunition for it, too; but there was plenty of opportunity for
     repentance given. Everybody knows now the why and wherefore of The
     Army's Meetings. There is music--then prayer with closed eyes, and
     then a little sister sings a religious song to a worldly tune. That
     was so yesterday; but then The General came as chief speaker. He
     had no need of any other influence; his mere appearance works upon
     every one.

     "The public was composed of all sorts of people. Politicians,
     Socialists, as well as clergymen and leaders in Church work were
     there, together with officials and working-men and women."

Nothing could be more impressive as to the ever-widening circles who
crowded to listen to The General than the following description of his
Meeting in Potsdam, the German Windsor, where the Emperor generally
resides. Says the local paper:--

     "One could not cease to marvel at the crowded state of the
     auditorium. The intelligent public, which generally keeps away from
     popular demonstrations, was there in force. Jurists, state
     officials, officers in uniform, doctors, and many ladies were
     amongst the hearers of The General."

But some of the papers in smaller but not less striking reports gave us
a far fuller description of what The General's appeals brought home to
the hearts of his hearers everywhere.

     "No laboured rhetoric," said a Leipzig paper, "distinguished the
     speech, and applause was not won by catchy phrases. The speaker
     talks like a plain man to plain people. Everybody listens
     enthralled as he tells of his life's work, of the unbounded love
     with which he would like to surround and lead to Salvation every
     one who lives and moves. One gets to understand how this man could
     gather around him such masses of disciples, and why, right and
     left, many a lady deeply touched puts her handkerchief to her eyes
     and many a man wipes a tear from his cheek."

Best of all, however, comes ever and anon in these reports the
testimony that The General has not been a mere talker, like so many
others of his day, but has raised up a real fighting force who have, by
gradual painstaking labour and endurance, won for him this unbounded
confidence in what he says of The Army's religion.

     "I remember," writes one reporter, "how in the nineties, in Berlin,
     no Soldier, much less a Sister, could appear in the street without
     being laughed at at every step, made fun of, and even abused, and I
     visited Meetings in which there was great disorder. But how the
     picture was altered a few years later! Quietly and patiently the
     Soldiers let scorn and even assaults pass, until the very rowdiest
     of the Berliners were sick of it. And on the other hand every one
     soon said that these people, after all, were doing nothing but to
     go right at the deepest miseries of the great cities--that they fed
     the hungry, visited the sick, and generally carried out practical
     Christianity."

     "True," writes another, "it is naturally not every one whose taste
     is pleased with the ceremonies of The Army; but before the
     world-wide, unending, unselfish work of the Salvationist every one
     feels like saying, 'Hats off!'

     "It was not mere love of sensation that led such a stream of men to
     the Princes Hall on Tuesday evening. They wished for once to come
     face to face with the old General whose work they had learnt in the
     course of time to value. Men of science, clergymen and officials
     and educated people generally, for once made The Army their
     rendezvous."

And those who had heard the General before immediately recognised that
they had not only to do with the very same resolute Leader, following
the one aim with undiminished ardour, but relying upon the same old
Gospel to win the world for Christ.

     "He speaks," says a Hamburg paper, "mostly with his hands behind
     his back, swaying gently to and fro. The short, sharp English
     sentences are translated one by one. It is the old recruiting talk
     of the chief captain in the fight against the sins of this world,
     the pressing exhortation to get converted at once, to-day, in this
     very hour. It is the old entreaty to become a child of God, in
     spite of all opposition; the old call to purity of heart and life.
     Whoever has wandered must come back again. He who has fallen a
     hundred times must get up again for the hundred and first time.

     "This General believes in the Salvation of the worst and the most
     deeply sunken. He preaches the gospel of holding on, of going
     steadily forwards, of freedom from the lusts of the flesh and from
     public opinion. He preaches at the same time the gospel of work, of
     unwearied faithfulness in business, and of love to all mankind.

     "When he has finished The Army sings with musical accompaniment and
     clapping of hands its glad and even merry-sounding songs, not
     without a mixture of that sudden inrush of enthusiasm which springs
     from the conviction of having the only faith that can make people
     blessed, and the consciousness of a resistance hard to be overcome.
     And then begins that extraordinary urgent exhorting of the sinner
     from the stage--the ten-and-twenty times repeated 'Come'--come to
     the Penitent-Form, represented here by a row of twenty chairs. 'In
     the last Meeting of The General's in Copenhagen thirty-three came
     out. How many will it be in Hamburg?' cries the leading Officer.

     "The first are soon kneeling, sobbing, praying, their hands over
     their eyes at the chairs. Ever new songs are sung--spiritual songs
     set to worldly melodies. Ever anew sounds the ringing 'Come' from
     the stage. Below, the men and women Soldiers go from one to
     another, speaking to the hesitating ones, laying a hand on the
     shoulder of the ready ones, and leading them to the front. What a
     long time it may be since any loving hand was laid on the shoulder
     of many of those Recruits! Life, the rough, pitiless life of the
     great city, has always been pushing them along lower and lower down
     till it got them underfoot. Here they listen to the sound of a
     voice of sympathy, and feel the pressure of a hand that wishes to
     lead them. And there above sits The General for a while in an
     arm-chair, saying: 'The deepest-fallen may rise again. He has only
     to step out into the ranks of The Army, which is marching upwards
     to the Land of Grace.' As we left the Hall the thirty-fourth had
     already come out."

It must be remembered that all these descriptions come from part of a
single month's journeys, and that The General was dependent upon
translation for nearly every moment of intercourse either in public or
private with the people, and that it will be entirely understood how
great a power for God in this world a man entirely given up may be after
he has passed his eightieth year, and with what clearness witness for
God can be borne even in a strange tongue when it is plain and definite.

     "From time immemorial it has been customary to class
     philanthropists amongst the extraordinaries, the marvellous
     people--who do not pass muster in the common world--exceptions.
     Nobody thinks of measuring himself with them, for the battle of
     life belongs to the egotists--each one of whom fights for himself.
     He who fights for others is smilingly acknowledged by the
     well-disposed as a stranger in the world. The ordinary man of the
     street pitilessly calls him a fool, and the mass considers him
     unworthy of a second thought. He is there, and he is endured so
     long as he does not bother any one.

     "There are three factors against which the old General has had to
     fight all his life long--against well-meaning hesitation, against
     hard-hearted egoism, and against the idle indifference born of
     ignorance. And these three streams that have flowed against him in
     every part of the world have not been able to hold him back. To
     those who think he has only become an important man, and to those
     who measure a man's worth by the outer honours he gains, he became
     a man of importance when London made him a citizen and Oxford an
     honorary Doctor. And now men are better inclined to excuse in his
     case the curious title of General of a curious Army.

     "I have often heard the grey-headed General in Public Meetings. For
     the first time on Saturday evening I got near to him in a more
     private way. And then it seemed to me like a picture, as when a
     grey warrior, a commander with snow-white beard and keen profile,
     stands upright by the mast of a ship and gazes straight before him
     towards a new country.

     "And General Booth, despite his eighty-one years, is looking out
     towards new land. He does not live on memories like the generality
     of old men. He does not allow himself any favoured spot by the
     fireside. Full of fight and always leading, General Booth stands at
     the centre of a gigantic apparatus. And the old gentleman does not
     look like allowing men to take the control out of his hands.

     "Everything about him displays energy and justifiable
     self-consciousness. He energetically shook my hand. With the
     ability of the man of the world he drew the conversation to that
     which was nearest to his heart. And what his eyes can no longer
     exactly observe his ears doubly well hear. He arrived on Friday
     evening from Denmark, holds three Meetings in Hamburg on Sunday,
     travels on to Potsdam on Monday, and occupies himself with thoughts
     of a journey of inspection in India.

     "The comfortable arm-chair that was offered him he declined almost
     as if it were an insult.' That is meant for an old man,' he said;
     and really the remark was justified when one heard the plans of the
     grey General, for he has plans such as one of the youngest might
     have. He appears to me like an able business man who constantly
     thinks how to expand his undertaking and to supply it with all the
     novelties that a time of progress offers. He has altogether modern
     views. He does not hold fast with the reluctance of old age to old
     things, except to the old faith.

     "In the Meetings The General seemed to me rather severe; but that
     disappears when you get at him personally, especially when you have
     got used to his way of speaking. He almost flings each sentence
     out. Every phrase, accompanied by some energetic gesture, is like a
     war cry. 'I will, and I carry out what I will,' seems to breathe in
     all about him; and who can complain of this will, this iron
     resoluteness with which he works at the raising up of men. He is in
     his kingdom an unlimited ruler, but one with a benevolent look who
     sees for the benefit of the blind. He must be all that for his
     extraordinary work.

     "The General asks us to put questions. I could not manage it. It
     seemed to me to be so useless in the presence of this important
     man. So he said, 'We are never satisfied with the progress we make
     in view of what still remains to be done.' He spoke of the progress
     made by the Social Work of The Army in Germany, and of his plans.

     "I never heard The General speak without his having plans, upon the
     carrying out of which he was at work with all his might. He puts
     his whole body and soul into whatever he is engaged in.

     "'The Salvation Army is the most interesting thing under the sun,'
     said The General at the close of this earnest talk, and then added,
     jokingly, 'next to the Hamburg Press.'

     "On the Sunday I saw him again as he spoke to a Meeting of
     thousands, a curiously mixed public, where there were many of the
     foremost gentlemen and ladies of society and many very common
     people. All, however, were equally enthused. I will only mention a
     couple of sentences out of the speech: 'The Army wants to come into
     competition with nobody, only to be a friendly helper--nobody's
     enemy, but the friend of everybody. It will gladly be an
     inspiration and example. It has become the almsgiver for many
     Governments. It is not British because it was born in Britain, just
     as little as Christianity is Jewish because it came into the world
     in Judea.'"--Else Meerstedt.

Now that we see it all but completed, we think this book singularly
wanting in reference to The General's frequent merriness of mood. We
have thought it needless to insert any of the amusing anecdotes that
could have been so abundantly culled from any of his visits to any
country had we not been so anxious to select from the small space at our
disposal what was most important.

Nor have we wished to present the reader with the portrait of an
infallible genius, or a saint who never said or did anything that he
afterwards regretted. A victim almost all his life to extreme
indigestion, it is indeed to all who knew him best marvellous that he
could endure so much of misery without more frequently expressing in
terms of unpleasant frankness his irritation at the faults and mistakes
of others. But really after his death as during his life we have been
far too busy in trying to help in accomplishing his great lifework to
note these details of human frailty.




Chapter XXIV

The End



It seems almost impossible to describe the ending of The General's life,
because there was not even the semblance of an end within a week of his
death.

The last time I talked with him, just as I was leaving for Canada in
January, he for the first time made a remark that indicated a doubt of
his continuance in office. He hardly hinted at death; but, referring to
the sensations of exhaustion he had felt a few days previously, he said:
"I sometimes fancy, you know, that I may be getting to a halt, and
then"--with his usual pause when he was going to tease--"we shall have a
chance to see what some of you can do!"

We laughed together, and I went off expecting to hear of his fully
recovering his activity "after the operation," to which we were always
looking forward. Oh, that operation! It was to be the simplest thing in
the world, when the eye was just ready for it, as simple and as complete
a deliverance from blindness as the other one had seemed, for a few
days, to be. But this time he would be fully warned, and most cautious
after it, and I really fancied the joy he would have after so long an
eclipse.

It seemed to me that he never realised how great his own blindness
already was, so strong was his resolution to make the best of it, and so
eager his perception, really by other means, of everything he could in
any way notice. We had difficulty in remembering that he really could
not see when he turned so rapidly towards anybody approaching him or
whose voice he recognised!

To Colonel Kitching during this dark period he wrote one day: "Anybody
can believe in the sunshine. We, that is you and I and a few more of
whom we know, ought to be desperate believers by this time--Saviours of
men--against their will, nay, compellers of the Almighty."

And his writing was always so marvellous, both for quantity and quality.
His very last letters to several of us consisted of a number of pages
all written with perfect clearness and regularity with his own hand. It
was, perhaps, the greatest triumph of his own unfailing faith and sunny
optimism that he kept even those who were nearest to him full of hope as
to his complete recovery of strength till within a few days of his
death; and then, gliding down into the valley, surprised all by sinking
suddenly into eternal peace without any distinct warning that the end
was so near. His youngest daughter, Mrs. Commissioner Booth-Hellberg,
was with him during the last days.

But, really, it would be only fair to describe his end as having begun
from the day when, during his Sixth Motor Tour, the eye which had been
operated upon became blind. Though after having it taken out, he very
largely rallied, and passed through grand Campaigns for some years, he
was ever looking forward to the operation on the other eye, which was to
restore him to partial sight. His cheeriness through those years and his
marvellous energy astonished all.

The following notes of his first foreign journey after the loss of sight
cannot but be of special interest, showing with what zest and enjoyment
he threw himself into all his undertakings for Christ:--

     "Saturday, _February_ 12, 1910.--The crossing has been quite rough
     enough. I slept very little, and it was with real difficulty that I
     shambled through the long railway depot to my train for Rotterdam.
     At eight o'clock was woke up from a sound sleep with a startling
     feeling. It is a pity I could not have slept on. Fixed up at the
     old hotel six floors up (the Mass Hotel). Very fair accommodation,
     but a little difficult to get anything to eat, that is, such as
     meet my queer tastes and habits. Nevertheless, on the principle of
     'any port in a storm,' I have had much worse accommodation.

     "Sunday, _February_ 13, 1910.--Had a wonderful day. Far ahead of
     anything experienced before in this place. My opinion about it is
     jotted down in _The War Cry_. I had, as I thought, remarkable power
     on each of the three occasions, and finished off at ten o'clock far
     less exhausted than I frequently am. Still, I scarcely got into my
     rooms before the giddiness came on in my head very badly, and
     continued off and on until ten the next morning. I can't account
     for it. It may be my stomach, or it may have something to do with
     the rocking of the steamer on Friday night. It may be what the
     doctors fear, my overtaxed brain, or it may be something else.
     Whatever it is, it is very awkward while it lasts. Fifty-seven
     souls for the day.

     "Monday, _February_ 14, 1910.--Left by the 12:37 p.m. train for
     Groningen. Slept a good bit of the way. Arrived about 5:12 p.m.
     Reception very remarkable, considering the population is only some
     78,000. It was one of the most remarkable greetings I have ever had
     in any part of the world. There must have been getting on for a
     couple of thousand people in the station itself, who had each paid
     five cents for a platform ticket, and outside 5,000 is a low
     estimate. Everybody very friendly.

     "Entertained by the Governor's wife's sister. The Meeting was as
     wonderful as the reception. Immense hall. Could not be less than
     1,500 people packed into it on one floor. I talked for an hour and
     three-quarters. Colonel Palstra, my translator, did splendidly, the
     people listening spellbound; not a soul moved until the last
     minute, when three or four went out for some reason or other. It
     was a wonderful time. Settled to sleep about 11:30 p.m. not feeling
     any worse.

     "Tuesday, _February_ 15, 1910.--Had a fair night's sleep. The
     strange feelings in the head continue off and on, and the fact that
     they don't pass off, in connexion with the entreaties of the Chief,
     and those about me, made me consent to give up the Officers'
     Council I was proposing to hold at Amsterdam next week, putting on
     Lectures on the evenings of the two days which I would otherwise
     have used for Councils. I am very loath to do this, from feeling
     that the Officers are the great need. So far I have been delighted
     with what I have seen of the Officers in the country. We ought to
     capture Holland.

     "The Governor has sent word to say that he is coming to see me this
     afternoon.

     "I have had a long sleep, and I hope I shall be better for it. The
     Governor has just come in. He appears a very amiable person, very
     friendly disposed towards The Army. We had a very nice conversation
     about matters in general, and at parting he expressed his kindest
     wishes for my future and for the future of The Army.

     "I left at a few minutes before seven. It has been snowing and
     raining, and freezing and thawing the last few hours, consequently
     the atmosphere is not very agreeable. However, my carriage was well
     warmed, and we arrived at Assen in half an hour.

     "A very nice hall--packed with a very respectful audience. I spoke
     on the old subject, 'The Lesson of my Life,' and made it 'better as
     new' as the Jew says about his second-hand garments. I was very
     pleased with it and the people were too. I am entertained by Baron
     and Baroness Van der Velts. The lady speaks English very nicely,
     and they are evidently very pleased to have me with them.

     "I was glad to settle to sleep about eleven, and thankful for the
     mercies of the day."

It was thus that nearly three years passed away. Then came at last the
time when the long-hoped-for operation was to take place.

Rookstone, the house in Hadley Wood, a village on the northern outskirts
of London, where The General died, stands almost at the foot of the
garden of the present General, so that they could be constantly in touch
when at home, and the General's grandchildren greatly enjoyed his love
for them.

But in the large three-windowed room, where his left eye was operated
upon, and where a few months later he died, his Successor, his youngest
daughter, Commissioner Howard, and his Private Secretary, Colonel
Kitching, had many valued interviews with him during those last months.
I had not that opportunity until it was too late to speak to him, for he
had said when it was suggested, full as he had been of the hope of
prolonged life almost to the end, "Oh, yes, he'll want to come and get
something for my life and that will just finish me."

Of the operaton itself we prefer to let the physician himself speak in
the following extract from _The Lancet_ of the 19th October, 1912:

     "...He was not in very good health in March, 1910; he had
     occasional giddy attacks and lapses of memory, and from April till
     June of the same year he had albuminuria, from which, however, he
     appeared entirely to recover. The vision of his left eye became
     gradually worse, but I encouraged him to go on without operation as
     long as he could. He did so until about the end of 1911, when his
     sight had become so bad that he could barely find his way about;
     indeed, he met with one or two minor accidents on account of not
     being able to see. It then appeared to me he had much to gain and
     very little to lose by an operation, and further, he was in much
     better health than he had been for some time. I pointed out to him
     that there was a risk and that if the operation failed he would be
     totally blind, but that there were very long odds in his favour,
     and that I was willing to take the risk if he was. He asked one
     question: 'If you were in my place would you have it done?' I said
     certainly I would. That quite decided him and all that remained to
     be done was to fix a time. General Booth at that date had some work
     which he wanted to finish, and eventually the date for operation
     was fixed for May 23rd. On that day I operated. I did a simple
     extraction under cocaine.

     "Nothing could have been more satisfactory, as will be seen from
     the notes, and the bulletin sent to the papers was, 'The operation
     was entirely successful; the ultimate result depends on The
     General's recuperative power.' When I covered the eye and bandaged
     it I thought that success was certain, and was confirmed in that
     opinion on the following morning when I lifted up the dressing and
     found all was well, and that the patient, when he partly opened the
     eye, could see. On the third day Dr. Milne, who was in attendance,
     at once saw that mischief had occurred, and the sequence of events
     I have narrated. How the eye became infected I am unable to say. I
     used every precaution; as I told the patient afterwards, the only
     omission I could think of was that I had not boiled or roasted
     myself.... I looked carefully for these before each operation. I
     regret two things in the case: (1) that the last operation was not
     done two or three months before when General Booth was in better
     health; (2) that it was not postponed for another month, in which
     case I should not have done it, for looking back on the whole
     history I feel certain that he was not in his best condition on May
     23rd when the operation was performed."

The General's own response when he was gently informed that there was
no hope of his seeing objects any more was:--

     "Well, the Lord's Will be done. If it is to be so I have but to bow
     my head and accept it."

He subsequently remarked that as he had served God and the people with
his eyes he must now try to serve without them. He continued to dictate
letters, and even to write occasionally as he had been accustomed to do,
with the help of his secretaries, and a frame that had been prepared for
the purpose. But the very struggles against depression and to cheer
others, together with the sleeplessness that resulted took from his
little remaining strength, and it became evident that he was gradually
sinking. Yet he was so remarkably cheerful and at times even confident
that all around him were kept hoping up to the very last.

To a group of Commissioners who visited him he said:--

     "I am hoping speedily to be able to talk to Officers and help them
     all over the world. I am still hoping to go to America and Canada
     as I had bargained for. I am hoping for several things whether they
     come to pass or not."

But on Tuesday, the 20th August, it became evident that the end was very
near. There gathered around his bed Mr. and Mrs. Bramwell Booth, Mrs.
Commissioner Booth-Hellberg, Commissioner Howard, who had been summoned
by telegram from his furlough, Colonel Kitching, Brigadier Cox, Adjutant
Catherine Booth, Sergeant Bernard Booth, Captain Taylor, his last
Assistant Secretary, Nurse Ada Timson of the London Hospital, and
Captain Amelia Hill, his housekeeper.

The heart showed no sign of failure until within half an hour of his
death, and the feet remained warm till within twenty minutes of the
event. But the heart and pulse became gradually weaker, the breathing
faster and shorter and more irregular, and at thirteen minutes past ten
o'clock at night it entirely ceased.

London awoke to find in our Headquarters window the notice, "General
Booth has laid down his Sword. God is with us."

The day after his death, at a meeting of all the Commissioners present
in London, the envelope containing the General's appointment of his
successor was produced by the Army's Solicitors, endorsed in the
General's own writing and still sealed. Upon being opened, it was found
to be dated the 21st August, 1890, and that it appointed the Chief of
the Staff, William Bramwell Booth, to succeed him. The new General, in
accepting the appointment, and promising by God's help to fulfil its
duties, expressed his great pleasure in discovering that it was dated
during the lifetime of his mother, so that he could feel sure that her
prayers had been joined with his father's for him at the time.

Immediately there began to pour in upon us from every part of the world
expressions of admiration and sympathy which were most valuable in their
promise for the Army's increased opportunity and usefulness in the
future.

His Majesty, the King, who had manifested deep sympathy with The General
in his illness, sent the following generous message, which was one of
the first to come to hand:--

     "Abbeystead Hall.

     "I am grieved to hear the sad news of the death of your Father. The
     nation has lost a great organiser, and the poor a whole-hearted and
     sincere friend, who devoted his life to helping them in a practical
     way.

     "Only in the future shall we realise the good wrought by him for
     his fellow-creatures.

     "To-day there is universal mourning for him. I join in it, and
     assure you and your family of my true sympathy in the heavy loss
     which has befallen you.

     "George R. I."

Queen Alexandra telegraphed:--

     "I beg you and your family to accept my deepest and most heartfelt
     sympathy in the irreparable loss you and the nation have sustained
     in the death of your great, good, and never-to-be-forgotten Father,
     a loss which will be felt throughout the whole civilised world.
     But, thank God, his work will live for ever.

     "Alexandra."

President Taft wired:--

     "Washington.

     "To General Bramwell Booth:

     "In the death of your good Father the world loses one of the most
     effective practical philanthropists. His long life and great
     talents were dedicated to the noble work of helping the poor and
     weak, and to giving them another chance to attain success and
     happiness.

     "Accept my deep sympathy.

     "Wm. H. Taft."

The King of Denmark wired:--

     "Express my sincere sympathy.

     "Christian R."

The Lord Mayor of London, Sir Thomas B. Crosby, wired:--

     "The City of London sincerely mourns the passing away of its
     distinguished citizen, General Booth, whose grand and good work
     entitles him to imperishable gratitude."

Whilst the Governors and Premiers of most of the Colonies where the Army
is at work cabled in similar terms. The Emperor of Germany, as well as
the King and Queen, and Queen Alexandra, sent wreaths to be placed on
The General's coffin, and the tributes of the press all over the world
will be found in the following chapter.

More than 65,000 persons came to Clapton Congress Hall to look upon his
face as he lay in his coffin, and more than 35,000 gathered for the
great Memorial Service in the Olympia, the largest obtainable building
in London, on the evening before the funeral. All the press commented
upon the remarkable joyfulness of our funeral services, and the funeral
itself the next day was admitted to have been the most impressive sight
the great city has seen in modern times.

In addition to officers, many bands from all parts of the country came
to join in it.

The coffin had been brought in the night to Headquarters in Queen
Victoria Street. The funeral procession was formed on the Embankment,
and whilst it marched through the city all traffic was suspended from 11
till 1 o'clock. The millions who witnessed its passage along the
five-mile march to Abney Park Cemetery seemed as generally impressed and
sympathetic as the multitude gathered there. It was indeed touching to
see not only policemen and ambulance workers; but publicans and numbers
of the people offering glasses of water to the sisters who had been on
their feet for six or seven hours before the service was ended.

The memorial services held all over the world on the following Sunday
were attended by quite unparalleled crowds, of whom very many publicly
surrendered their lives to God.

The following letters to members of his own family show the spirit of
affection and of cheerfulness which to the very last distinguished him.

To his youngest daughter, the widow of Commissioner Booth-Hellberg, who,
though she had been fighting in one post or another in this country,
India, America, Sweden, Switzerland, or France for over twenty years, he
still regarded as his "baby" and special darling, he wrote:--

     "Hadley Wood,

     "_May_ 3, 1912.

     "My very dear Lucy,--

     "Your letter is to hand. I am interested in all you say. It was
     very kind, indeed beautiful, of you to sit by the couch of dear
     Erickson all those hours. But it will be a recollection of pleasure
     all through your life, and I have no doubt, after the fading hours
     of this life have passed out of sight and thought, it will give you
     satisfaction in the life to come.

     "There is a great deal in your suggestion that we should do more in
     the hospitals. It would be, as you say, beyond question a means of
     blessing and comfort--indeed, of Salvation to many of the lovely,
     suffering, dying people whose melancholy lot carries them there.
     But the old difficulty bars the way--the want of Officers and money
     for the task. Well, we are doing something in this direction, and
     we must wait for the power to do more.

     "I think much about many of the things you say. Your practical
     common sense comes out at every turn. Based, as your comments and
     suggestions usually are, on the _religion of love_, makes them very
     precious.

     "Go on, my dear girl. God, I feel, is preparing you for something
     very useful in His Kingdom. I feel quite sure.

     "But, oh, do be careful and not overrun your strength.

     "Through mercy I am keeping better. I had a very trying day
     yesterday on the top of my table work, which I find a continuous
     trial to my nerves, but I came through it--that is, through
     yesterday's hard pull. It was a visit to my native town. But you
     will read about it in the _Cry_.

     "I am eating much more, not only in quantity, but am indulging in a
     little more variety.

     "My difficulty at the moment is, that while a good supper helps me
     to sleep, a scanty supper is agreeable to my brains, and my
     feelings hinder me from sleeping, as I am so lively after it.

     "_Later._

     "I have just had a nice little sleep. Quite refreshing it has been,
     and very welcome also.

     "I am now in for a cup of tea. What a pleasure it would be if you
     were here to pour it out and chatter to me while I drink it.

     "Well, I had anticipated this delight on my visit to Norway and
     Sweden in this coming July, but that, I am afraid, will not
     come--that is, my visit to Denmark; but I shall hold on to it
     (D.V.) in connexion with my Annual Campaign in Berlin and round
     about. Then I shall expect quite a long stay in your Territory,
     similar to my last; or better, I hope.

     "I am positively working night and day now, and only hope I shall
     not break down; but I am careful, after all, and seem to be really
     substantially improved.

     "I cannot finish this letter now, and, although it is not worth
     posting, I think it will be best to send it off. I may put in a
     P.S. if there is opportunity.

     "Anyway, believe me, as ever and for ever,

     "Your affectionate father,

     "W. B."

At his last public Meeting to celebrate his 83d birthday, at the Royal
Albert Hall, on the 9th day of May, the General had said:--

     "And now comrades and friends I must say good-bye. I am going into
     dry dock for repairs, but The Army will not be allowed to suffer,
     either financially or spiritually, or in any other way by my
     absence, and in the long future I think it will be seen--I shall
     not be here to see, but you will, that The Army will answer every
     doubt and banish every fear and strangle every slander, and by its
     marvellous success show to the world that it is the work of God and
     that The General has been His Servant."

In his last letter to the Chief, he wrote two months later:--

     "International Headquarters, London, E.C.

     "_July 4, 1912_.

     "My Dear Chief,--

     "I am pleased to hear that you are sticking to your intention of
     going away for a few days, in spite of my continued affliction, for
     affliction it can truthfully be called.

     "I am very poorly, and the trial of it is that I cannot see any
     positive prospect of a definite, speedy recovery. But it will come;
     I have never seriously doubted it. God won't let me finish off in
     this disheartening manner--disheartening, I mean, to my comrades,
     and to those I have to leave with the responsibility of keeping the
     Banner flying. God will still do wonders, in spite of men and
     devils.

     "All will be well. Miriam will get well, Mary will get well, and
     both be brave warriors. Florrie will flourish more than ever, and
     you will be stronger; and, although it may require more patience
     and skill, I shall rally!

     "I am in real pain and difficulty while I dictate this. These
     horrid spasms seem to sit on me like a mountain, but I felt I could
     not let you go without a longer good-bye and a more affectionate
     kiss than what is so ordinarily. This is a poor thing, but it
     speaks of the feeling of my heart, and the most fervent prayer of
     my soul. Love to all,

     "Yours, as ever,

     "W. B.

     "The Chief of the Staff."

To his second daughter, in command of The Army in the United States,
his last letter read as follows:--

     "_July 20, 1912_.

     "My dear, dear Eva,--

     "I had your letter. Bless you a thousand times! You are a lovely
     correspondent. You don't write your letters with your pen, or with
     your tongue, you write them with your heart. Hearts are different;
     some, I suppose, are born sound and musical, others are born
     uncertain and unmusical, and are at best a mere tinkling cymbal.
     Yours, I have no doubt, has blessed and cheered and delighted the
     soul of the mother who bore you from the very first opening of your
     eyes upon the world, and that dear heart has gone on with that
     cheering influence from that time to the present, and it will go on
     cheering everybody around you who have loved you, and it will go on
     cheering among the rest your loving brother Bramwell and your
     devoted General right away to the end; nay, will go on endlessly,
     for there is to be no conclusion to our affection.

     "I want it to be so. I want it to be my own experience. Love, to be
     a blessing, must be ambitious, boundless, and eternal. O Lord, help
     me! and O Lord, destroy everything in me that interferes with the
     prosperity, growth, and fruitfulness of this precious, Divine, and
     everlasting fruit!

     "I have been ill--I have been very ill indeed. I have had a return
     of my indigestion in its most terrible form. This spasmodic feeling
     of suffocation has so distressed me that at times it has seemed
     almost impossible for me to exist. Still, I have fought my way
     through, and the doctors this afternoon have told me, as bluntly
     and plainly as an opinion could be given to a man, that I must
     struggle on and not give way, or the consequences will be very
     serious.

     "Then, too, the eye has caused me much pain, but that has very
     much, if not entirely, passed off, and the oculist tells me that
     the eye will heal up. But, alas! alas! I am absolutely blind. It is
     very painful, but I am not the only blind man in the world, and I
     can easily see how, if I am spared, I shall be able to do a good
     deal of valuable work.

     "So I am going to make another attempt at work. What do you think
     of that? I have sat down this afternoon, not exactly to the desk,
     but any way to the duties of the desk, and I am going to strive to
     stick to them if I possibly can. I have been down to some of my
     meals; I have had a walk in the garden, and now it is proposed for
     me to take a drive in a motor, I believe some kind soul is loaning
     me. Anyhow, I am going to have some machine that will shuffle me
     along the street, road, and square, and I will see how that acts on
     my nerves, and then perhaps try something more.

     "However, I am going into action once more in the Salvation War,
     and I believe, feeble as I am, God is going to give me another good
     turn, and another blessed wave of success.

     "You will pray for me. I would like before I die--it has been one
     of the choicest wishes of my soul--to be able to make The Salvation
     Army such a power for God and of such benefit to mankind that no
     wicked people can spoil it.

     "Salvation for ever! Salvation--Yellow, Red, and Blue! I am for it,
     my darling, and so are you.

     "I have heard about your Open-Air services with the greatest
     satisfaction, and praise God with all my heart that in the midst of
     the difficulties of climate and politics, etc., you have been able
     to go forward.

     "I have the daily papers read to me, and among other things that
     are very mysterious and puzzling are the particulars that I gather
     of the dreadful heat that you have had to suffer, both as a people
     and as individuals.

     "You seem to have, indeed, been having lively times with the
     weather. It must have tried you very much.

     "My telling you not to fret about me is the proper thing to do.
     That is my business in this world very largely, and if I can only
     comfort your dear heart--well, I shall do good work.

     "Good-bye, my darling child. Write to me as often as you can, but
     not when overburdened. I am with you, and for you, and in you for
     ever and ever. Love to everybody.

     "Your affectionate father and General,

     "William Booth."

To an Officer whom he regarded almost as a daughter, and whose hearing
had been greatly affected, he wrote:--

     My Dear C.,--

     "Thanks for your sympathetic letter. It is good of you to think
     about me now and then. Specially so as you must be much and often
     exercised about your own affliction.

     "Perhaps you will think that it is easier for me to accept mine
     than it will be for you to accept yours. I have just been thinking
     that to have any difficulty in the Hearing Organ is not so serious
     as a difficulty with the Seeing. You can read and write, and with a
     little contrivance and patience you can hear any communication that
     may be specially interesting and important. It is true, you are
     shut out from the pleasure and profit that comes from the general
     conversation of a company, and from listening to Public Speakers,
     although a great deal that you miss is no serious loss at all!

     "In my case, I can imagine I am worse off. With me, reading is
     impossible, and writing is so difficult that, although I can
     scratch a few lines, the work soon becomes so taxing and difficult
     that I have to relinquish it. So we'll sympathise the one with the
     other. We will trust in God, take courage, and look forward to
     brighter days.

     "Anyway, God lives, and there are a thousand things we can do for
     Him, and what we can do we will do, and we will do it with our
     might."

Every thoughtful reader of this volume will naturally have asked himself
many times over, how was it possible for the Leader of a great
world-wide Mission to leave his Headquarters, year after year, for weeks
and sometimes for months at a time, without involving great risk of
disaster to his Army?

The answer, familiar to every one at Headquarters, and, indeed, to many
others, lay in the existence, largely out of sight even to the vast
majority of the Soldiers of The Army, of a man who, since his very
youth, had been The General's unwearyable assistant. It was the present
General Bramwell Booth, content to toil mostly at executive or
administrative work, whether at Headquarters or elsewhere, unseen and
unapplauded, who was ceaselessly watching over every portion of the vast
whole, and as ceaselessly preparing for advances, noting defects,
stopping mistaken movements, and urging at every turn, upon every one,
the importance of prayer and faith, the danger of self-confidence,
and, the certainty of God's sufficiency for all who relied wholly upon
Him. It was this organiser of victory in the individual and on many
fields who made it possible for the Army to march forward whilst its
General was receiving from city to city, and from village to village, in
motor and other tours, the reward of faithful service to the poorest
everywhere, and was also ever advancing on the common foe.

Therefore this book could not be complete without some account of the
then Chief of the Staff to explain his construction.

Born in Halifax, in 1856, amidst one of those great Revival Tours in
which his parents shared in the tremendous toils that brought, in every
place they visited, hundreds of souls into deep conviction of sin and
hearty submission to God, the little one must have drunk in, from his
very childhood, some of that anxiety for the perishing, and joy in their
deliverance, which form the basis of a Salvationist career. Named after
one of the greatest Holiness preachers, who accompanied John Wesley in
his campaigning, in the express hope to both father and mother, that he
should become an apostle of that teaching, the faith of his parents
received abundant fulfilment in his after life.

As a boy he shared with them all the vicissitudes of their eight gipsy
years, during which they were practically without a home, and the one
settled year of (as they thought) half wasted time, amidst the usual
formalities, always galling to them both, or ordinary Church life; so
that, with his usual acuteness of observation, he must have noted all
their horror of routine, and learnt, more than anybody noticed, the
reasons why the Churches had become divorced from the crowds and the
crowds from the Churches.

In his tenth year, when they settled in London, and began their real
life work, he cannot but have partaken fully of the satisfaction this
gave to them, whilst they were, as yet, buried amidst the mass of
East-End misery. It was shortly before the foundation of the Work that
he was converted at one of his mother's own Meetings. The shrinking from
publicity, which seems an essential part of every conscientious person,
held him long back from resolving to become one of their Officers. But
during all the years between his being saved and that great decision,
he was constantly helping, first in Children's Meetings, and then in
office work, so that at twenty-one he was already a very experienced
man, both in the work of saving souls, and in much of the business
management for which a great Movement calls.

When I first saw him at seventeen, he was still studying; but he had
been, during the previous eighteen months of the General's illness and
absence, his mother's mainstay in the managing both the public and the
office work of "The Christian Mission," and the Secretary and, largely,
manager of a set of soup kitchens, the precursors, in some ways, of our
present Social Wing. For all this to be possible to a lad of seventeen,
of delicate health, may give some little indication of the faculties
with which God had endowed him.

It was not, however, till five years later, when he had fully conquered
his own taste for a medical career that he gave himself fully to the
War. Alone, or with one of his sisters, he visited the towns where many
of our largest Corps were being raised, holding Meetings in theatres and
other popular resorts, so that he gained first-hand all the experiences
of Officers, both in the pioneering days and in the after years of
struggle against all manner of difficulty, when every sort of problem as
to individuals, and Corps, had to be dealt with from hour to hour.

This much to explain how it was possible for a man so young to become at
twenty-five the worthy and capable Chief of the Staff of an Army already
at work in both hemispheres and on both sides of the world. The reader
will also be able to understand how the Chief, travelling by night as
often as by day, could visit the General in the midst of any of his
Campaigns, and in the course of a brief journey from city to city, or
between night and morning confer fully with him, and take decisions upon
matters that could not await even the delay of a mail.

The comfort to The General, as he often testified, of the continual
faithful service of this slave of a son was one of the most invaluable
forces of his life. Whilst, on the one side we may see in such
self-renouncing abandonment a certificate to and evidence of the nature
of The General's own life, we must read in it, at the same time, some
part of the explanation of his boundless activities and influence.

For the Chief of those days, The General of these, to have gone to and
come away from his father's daily scenes of triumph without getting the
slightest appetite himself for public displays, or yielding in the
slightest to the craving after human support or encouragement, to turn
him aside from the humdrum of duty, is one proof of those gracious
evidences of God's saving and keeping power with which the history of
The Salvation Army abounds.




Chapter XXV

Tributes



The great tribute The General received by the vast assemblies in every
country at his Funeral and Memorial services, said far more than any
words could have expressed of the extent to which he had become
recognised everywhere as a true friend of all who were in need, and of
the degree to which he had succeeded in prompting all his Officers and
people to act up to that ideal.

The following, a small selection of the most prominent testimonies borne
to his life by the Press of various countries, will give some idea of
what was thought and felt by his contemporaries about him and his
work:--



The Christian World, _August 22, 1912_


"No name is graven more deeply in the history of his time than that of
William Booth, Founder and General of The Salvation Army, who passed to
his rest on Tuesday night. At sixteen, the Nottingham builder's son
underwent an 'old-fashioned conversion,' and, as he told a
representative of _The Christian World_, 'within six hours he was going
in and out of the cottages in the back streets, preaching the Gospel
that had saved himself.' From that day he toiled terribly, and never
more terribly than since his sixtieth year, after which the Social
Scheme was launched, and The General undertook those evangelistic tours
in which he traversed England again and again in every direction, and
covered a great part of the Western world. How he kept up is a miracle,
for he was a frail-looking figure, and he ate next to nothing--a slice
or two of toast or bread and butter or rice pudding and a roasted apple,
were his meals for many years past. It was his great heart, his
invincible faith, his indomitable courage that kept him going.

"Plutarch would have put William Booth and John Wesley together in his
'Parallel Lives.' Each man 'thought in continents.' 'The world is my
parish,' said Wesley, and Methodism to-day covers the world. So General
Booth believed in world conquest for Christ, because he believed in
Christ's all-conquering power, and he had the courage of his conviction.
He learnt much from Wesley, for he began as a Methodist. He knew what
can be done by thorough organisation, and what financial resources there
are in the multiplication of small but cheerful givers. Like Wesley,
too, he combined the genius for great conceptions with the genius for
practical detail, without which great conceptions soon vanish into thin
air. He was more masterful than Wesley. When he broke away from the
Methodist New Connexion, and founded the Christian Mission of which The
Salvation Army was the evolution, he found that committees wasted their
time in talk and were distracted in opinion. He read lives of Napoleon,
Wellington, and other great commanders, and came to the conclusion that
a committee is an excellent thing to receive and carry out instructions
from a masterful man who knows what he wants, but otherwise they are
worthless. He persuaded those of his colleagues who had unbounded belief
in him, and whose sole concern was the progress of the Mission, to
accept the military organisation with himself as Commander-in-Chief, and
with his driving power and the inspiration of his heroic example, those
Officers went to every part of Great Britain and to something like fifty
different countries and 'did exploits.' That system may work with a
selfless Christian hero who is a born Caesar or Napoleon. The Salvation
Army's severe testing time has now come, when it will be seen whether,
after all, the more cautious Wellingtonian methods of Wesley laid firmer
foundations.

"The secret of General Booth's personal force and commanding power was
an open one. To him there were no realities so demonstrable as the
realities of the spiritual world--most of all, the reality of Christ's
real personal presence and saving power to-day. He found that
unquestioning faith in Christ's saving power worked everywhere and under
all conditions. We differed from him on theological details, but we
gladly recognise that scores of thousands of 'moral miracles,' in the
shape of lives remade that were apparently shattered beyond repair and
trodden in the mud of dissipation and bold habitual sinning, verified
the faith. The burglar who had been forty years in prison and penal
servitude, the most shameless of Magdalens, the drinker and gambler
brought down to the Embankment at midnight, greedy for a meal of soup
and bread, the man or woman determined to end a state of despair and
disgust with the world by suicide, these, under the influence of The
Salvation Army, became 'new creations.' But the same conviction, and the
evidences of its miraculous Operation, captured a large number of men
and women of the cultured and refined classes, who were either the
victims of moral weakness, or who felt the challenge to service and
sacrifice for the sake of others. Kings, Queens, and Royal Princes and
Princesses were glad to see General Booth, and gave their encouragement
to his work, and it was fitting that, when King Edward died, a Salvation
Army band should comfort the widowed lady by playing in the courtyard of
Buckingham Palace her husband's favourite hymns.

"The Social Work was an inevitable outcome of the evangelistic work. It
had its dangers, and The Salvation Army has not escaped all of them
without scathe. But it was found that the difficulty with thousands of
the Converts was that of giving them a chance to redeem their past, and
to nurse them physically and morally till they were able to stand alone,
in a position to take their places again in the ranks of decent and
self-respecting citizenship. Then there was the 'Submerged Tenth'--the
human wreckage tossed hither and thither by the swirling currents of the
social sea. To safeguard the one class, and to save the other from
themselves and their circumstances, the Social scheme was launched, and
those who estimate its success by moral valuation rather than in terms
of finance, will say that it has justified itself, though it never
accomplished what The General fondly hoped.

"Now that his worn-out body lies awaiting burial, The General's personal
worth and the worth of his work are frankly confessed even by those who
were once his bitterest critics. _The Times_ had a leader in which it
said that he rose from obscurity to be known as the head of a vast
organisation 'well known over all the world, and yielding to him an
obedience scarcely less complete than that which the Catholic Church
yields to the Roman Pontiff.' We wish _The Times_ had followed _The
Standard_ in dropping the invidious quotation marks from the title,
General. William Booth was a great leader of men in a world campaign of
individual and social Salvation. Why reserve the title only for men
skilled in the art of wholesale human slaughter?"



The Times, _August 8, 1912_


"The death of General Booth, which we announce with great regret this
morning, closes a strange career, one of the most remarkable that our
age has seen, and will set the world meditating on that fervent,
forceful character, and that keen, though, as some would say, narrow
intelligence. Born of unrecorded parentage, educated anyhow, he had
raised himself from a position of friendless obscurity to be the head of
a vast Organisation not confined to this country or to the British race,
but well known over half the world, and yielding to him an obedience
scarcely less complete than that which the Catholic Church yields to the
Roman Pontiff. The full memoir which we publish to-day shows how this
Salvation Army grew up--the creation of one man, or rather of a pair of
human beings, for the late Mrs. Booth was scarcely less important to its
early development than was her husband. Both of them belonged to the
Wesleyan body, of which William Booth at the time of his marriage was a
minister, though a very independent and insubordinate one; and deep
ingrained in both was the belief which is a more essential part of the
Wesleyan than of any other creed, the belief in conversion as an
instantaneous change affecting the whole life. Booth himself had been
converted at fifteen, and at sixty he wrote of 'the hour, the place of
this glorious transaction' as an undying memory. Out of this idea of
conversion, as not only the most powerful motive force in life, but as a
force which was, so to speak, waiting to be applied to all, arose the
whole Salvation Army Movement. It was not, of course, in any sense a new
idea. Christians had been familiar with it in all ages, and both the New
Testament and the history of the early saints supply instances in
support of it. But Booth was probably more affected by more recent
evidence. Imperfect as had been his training for the ministry, he
doubtless learnt pretty thoroughly the history of Wesley and Whitefield,
and of the astonishing early years of the Methodist movement. In his own
youth, too, Revivalism was an active force, and he himself had been
strongly moved by an American missionary. His originality lay in
carrying down the doctrine not only to the highways and hedges, but to
the slums, the homes of the very poor, the haunts of criminals and
riff-raff; in getting hold of these people; in using the worst of
them--'converted,' as he honestly believed--as a triumphant
advertisement; and then in organising his followers into a vast Army,
with himself as absolute Chief. On the methods adopted nothing need be
added to what is said in the memoir; they are familiar to all, though
not so familiar as they were some twenty years ago.

"The root-idea of William Booth's religion, the object of his missionary
work, was 'the saving of souls.' Translated into other language, this
means the establishment of a conviction in the minds of men, women, and
children that they were reconciled to God, saved, and preserved to all
eternity from the penalties of sin. We do not propose to enter on the
delicate ground of theological discussion, or to argue for or against
the truth or value of such a conviction. The interesting point, in
relation to General Booth's ideas and personality, is to note how this
belief is worked into the system of The Army in the official programme,
fantastically called the Articles of War, which has to be signed by
every Candidate for enrolment. This curious document, which will greatly
interest future social historians, consists of three parts--a creed, as
definite as any taught by the Churches; a promise to abstain from drink,
bad language, dishonesty, etc.; and a solemn promise to obey the lawful
orders of the Officers, and never on any consideration to oppose the
interests of The Salvation Army. The last part, the promissory part, is
made much stricter in the case of Candidates for the position of
Officer; these solemnly promise not only to obey The General, but to
report any case they may observe in others of 'neglect or variation from
his orders and directions.' Membership of the Organisation thus depends
on absolute obedience, and on a profession of faith in Salvation in the
definite sense formulated in the Articles of War. The two are
inseparably conjoined. When we reflect upon what human nature is, in the
class from which so many of the members of The Army have been drawn,
when we think how difficult it is to reconcile the hand-to-mouth
existence of the casual labourer with any high standard of conduct, let
alone of religion, General Booth's success, partial though it has been,
is an astonishing fact. It implies a prodigious strength of character,
and a genius for seeing what would appeal to large numbers of humble
folk.

"Will that success continue now that General Booth is dead? Everywhere
we hear that The Army is not bringing in Recruits as fast as of old. Its
novelty has worn off; its uniforms are no longer impressive; its street
services, though they provoke no opposition, do not seem to attract the
wastrel and the 'rough' as they did at first. We can readily believe
that the work goes on more or less as before; but the gatherings, we
suspect, are mostly composed of those who have long frequented them and
of a certain number of new members drawn rather from existing sects than
from persons till now untouched by religion. Then, with regard to the
other side of The Army's work, the Social Schemes outlined in _In
Darkest England_ have met with only moderate success, as all cool
observers foretold in 1890. They have, at least, provided no panacea for
poverty. Probably Mr. Booth felt this during the last years of his life;
but he has been spared the sight of the still further decline of his
projects, which to most of us seems inevitable. Of course, some persons
are more confident: they argue that Napoleon's system did not disappear
after Waterloo, nor Wesley's system with the death of its founder, and
that the Roman Catholic Church is as strong as ever, though Pope after
Pope disappears. That is true, but for the very reason that these
systems were elaborate organisations, based on the facts of life. The
Code Napoleon and the Methodist Connexion were much too well adapted to
human needs to disappear with their authors. On the other hand,
movements and systems which depend wholly upon one man do not often
prove to be more than ephemeral. But none would deny that there is much
to be learnt from The Salvation Army and from the earnest, strenuous,
and resourceful personality of the man who made it. Let us hope that, if
The Army as an Organisation should ultimately fade away, the great
lesson of its even temporary success will not be forgotten: the lesson
that any force which is to move mankind must regard man's nature as
spiritual as well as material, and that the weak and humble, the poor
and the 'submerged,' share in that double nature as much as those who
spend their lives in the sunshine of worldly prosperity."



The Daily Chronicle, _August 21, 1912_


"To-day we have the mournful duty of chronicling the passing of William
Booth, the Head of that vast Organisation, the Salvation Army. The world
has lost its greatest missionary evangelist, one of the supermen of the
age. Almost every land on the face of the globe knows this pioneer and
his Army, The Army which has waged such long, determined, and successful
battle against the world's ramparts of sin and woe. Not one country, but
fifty, will feel to-day a severe personal loss. From Lapland to Honolulu
heads will be bowed in sorrow at the news that that striking figure who
has been responsible for so much of the religious progress of the world
of to-day is no more.

"The stupendous crusade which he initiated had the very humblest
beginnings. It opened in the slummy purlieus of Nottingham, that city
which gave to the world two of the greatest religious leaders of modern
times--General Booth and Dr. Paton. It has passed through periods of
open enmity, opposition, criticism, but its Leader and his band of
devoted helpers have never lost sight of their high aim. They were
engaged in 'war on the hosts that keep the underworld submerged,' and
they have now long been justified by their unparalleled achievements.
The time of scorn and indifference passed, and General Booth lived to
receive honour at the hands of kings and princes, and to have their
support for his work.

"It is not given to every man who sets out with a great purpose to
accomplish his aims. But of General Booth it may be said that he did
more. His Movement reached dimensions of which he probably never dreamed
in its early days, yet the extraordinary results made him ever hungrier
for conquest. In a way the latter years of his life were perhaps the
most notable of his whole career. He displayed a vitality and enthusiasm
which seemed to increase with the weight of time. At a time when most
men seek a greater measure of repose, General Booth worked on with all
the freshness of early years. And it can be said that he has died in
harness. He did not lift his finger from the pulse of the far-reaching
Organisation which he brought into being until death called.

"The story of the growth of The Salvation Army is the most remarkable in
the history of the work of the spiritual, social, and material
regeneration of the submerged. From the by-ways of all the world human
derelicts, which other agencies passed by, have been rescued. No one was
too degraded, too repulsive to be neglected. The work is too great to be
estimated in a way which can show its extent. It has been achieved
mainly by two great factors. The first is perfect organisation. Lord
Wolseley once described General Booth as the greatest organiser in the
world. The second feature was the wonderful personality of The Army's
chief. He impressed it not only upon his colleagues but upon those whom
he wished to rescue, and on the public at large. He radiated human
sympathy and enthusiasm. His loss will be a heavy one for the world; it
will be a severe blow for The Army. But we cannot think that his good
work has not been built upon sound foundations, and that the war he
directed so ably and so long will be relaxed. Nationally The Army has
done magnificent work in fifty countries, and it has, therefore, tended
to promote a greater spirit of brotherhood among the nations. To-day the
whole world will unite to pay its tribute to a splendid life of devotion
to a great cause. To that world he leaves a splendid example, and it
will be the highest tribute that can be paid to his memory to keep green
that lofty example which he set before all peoples."



The Daily Telegraph, _August 21, 1912_


"It is with no ordinary or conventional regret that we record this
morning the death of General Booth. The news will be received by
hundreds of thousands of Salvationists with profound and reverential
grief, and by many who are not Salvationists, and who never could be,
with respectful and sympathetic sorrow. For, whatever we may think of
William Booth and of the wonderful Organisation which he so triumphantly
established, it is certain that he belonged to the company of saints,
and that during the eighty-three years of a strenuous life, he devoted
himself, so far as in him lay, to the solemn duty of saving men's souls
and extending the Divine Kingdom on earth. That success attended his
efforts is, from this point of view, not of so much consequence as that
the success was deserved by the patient, devout, and self-sacrificing
zeal of the Founder of The Salvation Army. Long ago William Booth
prevailed against the easy scepticism of those who found fault with his
aims, and the sincere dislike of humble and reverent men, who doubted
whether the cause of religion could be advanced by such riotous methods.
Not only was The General of The Salvation Army a saint and a mystic, who
lived in this world and yet was not of this world, but he also was
possessed of much practical ability and common sense, without which the
great work of his life could never have been accomplished. We need only
refer to that remarkable book which he published in 1890, _In Darkest
England, and the Way Out_, in which will be found proposals to remedy
the crying evils of pauperism and vice by such eminently wise expedients
as Farm Colonies, Oversea Colonies, and Rescue Homes for Fallen Women;
to say nothing of picturesque but also practical devices, such as the
Prison-Gate Brigade, the Poor Man's Bank, the Poor Man's Lawyer, and
Whitechapel-by-the-Sea. How is it possible to ridicule the objects or
character of a man who has proved himself so earnest a worker for God?
As a matter of fact, William Booth was nothing less than a genius, and
towards the end of the nineteenth century the world at large gave very
generous recognition, not only to the spirit and temper, but to the
results of an extraordinarily effective, and, indeed, epoch-making
Movement. At the instance of King Edward VII The General was officially
invited to be present at the Coronation ceremony in 1902. Nothing could
have marked more significantly than this single fact the completeness of
the change of public feeling; and when, in 1905, William Booth went on a
progress through England, he was welcomed in state by the Mayors and
Corporations of many towns.

"Is it better to live in this world with no religion at all or with a
narrow and violent form of religious belief? People will judge the
deceased teacher and chief, in respect of his theological and
propagandist work, in accordance with the views which they hold upon
this alternative. As regards his social labours, his passionate efforts
to help the 'submerged tenth,' his widespread helpfulness of the poor,
his shelters and refuges, the feeling must and will be almost universal
that he was an energetic and warm-hearted benefactor of his kind, who
wrought much good to his times, and helped others to do it, and who had
what Sir John Seeley called the 'enthusiasm of humanity' in very
honourable, if noisy and demonstrative, form. But, since The General
mingled all this with a cult--a distinct theological teaching, a theory
of the Divine government and destiny of mankind which was in external
form, as Huxley styled it, 'Corybantic'--the question does and must
arise whether religion of the Salvationist school does good or harm to
the human natures which it addresses. It is not necessary to dwell upon
the dislike--we might, indeed, say the repulsion--felt by serious and
elevated minds at the paraphernalia, the pious turmoil, the uproar and
'banalite' of much that has developed under the Banners of The Salvation
Army. Prayers uttered like volley-firing, hymns roared to the roll of
drums and the screaming of fifes, have been features of this remarkable
revival which outraged many of the orthodox, and made even the judicious
and indulgent ask whether any good could come out of such a Nazareth.
Nobody gave utterance to this feeling with greater moderation or
kindliness than Cardinal Manning, when, while confessing that the need
of spiritual awakening among the English poor was only too well proved
by the success of General Booth--that the moral and religious state of
East London could alone have rendered possible The Salvation Army--his
Eminence added these grave sentences: 'Low words generate low thoughts;
words without reverence destroy the veneration of the human mind. When a
man ceases to venerate he ceases to worship. Extravagance, exaggeration,
and coarseness are dangers incident to all popular teachers, and these
things pass easily into a strain which shocks the moral sense and
deadens the instinct of piety. Familiarity with God in men of chastened
mind produces a more profound veneration; in unchastened minds it runs
easily into an irreverence which borders upon impiety. Even the Seraphim
cover their faces in the Divine Presence.'

"Yet against what new movement of spiritual awakening in the
people--against what form of religious revival might not the same
argument of offended culture and decorous holiness be employed? And
where would the lower masses of men be to-day if Religion had not
stooped out of her celestial heights--from the first chapters of
Christendom until the last--to the intellectual and moral levels of the
poor and lowly? In the sheet, knit at four corners, and lowered out of
Heaven, there was nothing common or unclean. If, as is practically
certain, General Booth, by the vast association which he founded and
organised, touched with the sense of higher and immortal things
countless humble and unenlightened souls; if, in his way, and in their
way, he brought home to them the love and power of Heaven, and the duty
and destiny of men, then it is not for refined persons who keep aloof
from such vulgar tasks to mock at the life and deeds of this remarkable
man. The particulars which we give elsewhere of his career show how,
like Wesley, Whitefield, and Spurgeon, in this country, and like
Savonarola, Peter the Hermit, and the Safi mystics abroad, William
Booth, the builder's son of Nottingham, was obviously set apart, and
summoned by time, temperament, and circumstances for the labours of his
life. Like Luther, his answer to all objections--worldly or
unworldly--would always have been, 'I can no other'. Meeting in Miss
Catherine Mumford the wife who exactly suited him, and reinforced by
many children, all brought up in the temper and vocation of their
parents, The General made his family a sort of Headquarters' Staff of
The Salvation Army, and celebrated his household marriages or bewept his
domestic bereavements with all the eclat and effect of oecumenical
events. We saw him buy up and turn into stations for his troops such
places as the 'Eagle Tavern' and 'Grecian Theatre,' overcome popular
rioting at Bath, Guilford, Eastbourne, and elsewhere; fill the United
Kingdom with his _War Cry_ and his fighting centres, and invade all
Europe, and even the Far East. At home he plunged, insatiable of moral
and social conquests, into his crusade for 'Darkest England,' being
powerful enough to raise in less than a month as much as all England and
the Colonies contributed for the Gordon College at Khartoum in response
to another victorious general. For General Booth certainly ended by
being victorious. If the evangelical creed he inculcated was rude,
crude, and unideal, it was serious, sincere, and stimulating. He waged
war against the Devil, as that mysterious personage was understood by
him, with the most whole-hearted and relentless zeal. He enjoined, let
it be remembered, an absolute temperance, soberness, and chastity upon
the Officers and rank and file of his motley host; and, ugly as some may
think the uniforms of Salvationists, the police and magistrates know
that they cover for the most part honest hearts. Could The General have
affected all this--or a tenth part of it--if he had not lent himself to
the eternal necessities and weaknesses of the uneducated, and given them
his drill, his banners, his drums, his prayer-volleys, his poke-bonnets,
and his military tunics? We doubt it, and in contemplating, therefore,
the enormous good this dead man did, and sought to do, and the neglected
fields of humanity which he tilled for the Common Master, we judge him
to be one of the chief and most serviceable figures of the Victorian
age; and well deserving from his own followers the ecstasy of grief and
veneration which is being manifested, and from contemporary notice the
tribute of a hearty recognition of pious and noble objects zealously
pursued, and love of God and of humanity made the passion and the
purpose of a whole unflinching life."



Daily Chronicle, _August 22, 1912_

By Harold Begbie


"Scarcely could you find a country in the whole world where men and
women are not now grieving for the death of General Booth. Among peoples
of whom we have never heard, and in languages of which we do not know
even the alphabet, this universal grief ascends to Heaven--perhaps the
most universal grief ever known in the history of mankind.

"One realises something of the old man's achievement by reflecting on
this universal grief. It will not do to dismiss him lightly. More, it
will not do to express a casual admiration of his character, an
indulgent approbation of his work. The man was unique. In some ways he
was the superman of his period. Never before has a man in his own
lifetime won so wide a measure of deep and passionate human affection.

"It will not do to say that by adopting vulgar methods and appealing to
vulgar people, General Booth established his universal kingdom of
emotional religion. Let the person inclined to think in this way dress
himself in fantastic garments, take a drum, and march through the
streets shouting 'Hallelujah.' There is no shorter cut to humility. Many
have tried to do what William Booth did. Many men as earnestly and as
tenderly have sought to waken drugged humanity and render the Kingdom of
Heaven a reality. Many men have broken their hearts in the effort to
save the Christian religion from the paralysis of formalism and the
sleeping sickness of philosophy. It is not an easy thing to revivify a
religion, nor a small thing to rescue many thousands of the human race
from sin and misery.

"Let us be generous and acknowledge, now that it is too late to cheer
his heart, that General Booth accomplished a work quite wonderful and
quite splendid, a work unique in the records of the human race. Let us
be frank and say that we ourselves could have done nothing like it. Let
us forget our intellectual superiority, and, instead of criticising,
endeavour to see as it stands before us, and as it really is, the
immense marvel of his achievement. Our canons of taste, our notions of
propriety, will change and cease to be. The saved souls of humanity will
persist for ever.

"I remember very well my first impression of General Booth. I was young;
I knew little of the sorrow of existence; I was perfectly satisfied with
the traditions I had inherited from my ancestors; I was disposed to
regard originality as affectation, and great earnestness as a sign of
fanaticism. In this mood I sat and talked with General Booth, measured
him, judged him, and had the audacity to express in print my opinion
about him--my opinion of this huge giant, this Moses of modern times. He
offended me. The tone of his voice grated on my ears. His manner to a
servant who waited upon him seemed harsh and irritable. I found it
impossible to believe that his acquaintance with spirituality was either
intimate or real. Saints ought to be gentlemen. He seemed to me a vulgar
old man, a clumsy old humourist, an intolerant, fanatical, one idea'd
Hebraist.

"Later in my life I met him on several occasions, and at each meeting
with him I saw something fresh to admire, something new to love. I think
that he himself altered as life advanced; but the main change, of
course, was in myself--I was able to see him with truer vision, because
I was less sure of my own value to the cosmos, and more interested to
discover the value of other men. And I was learning to know the sorrows
of the world.

"There is one very common illusion concerning General Booth. The vulgar
sneers are forgotten; the scandalous slander that he was a self-seeking
charlatan is now ashamed to utter itself except in vile quarters; but
men still say--so anxious are they to escape from the miracle, so
determined to account for every great thing by little reasons--that his
success as revivalist lay only in his powers as an organiser. Now,
nothing is further from the truth. General Booth was not a great
organiser, not even a great showman. He would have ruined any business
entrusted to his management. He would long ago have ruined the
organisation of The Salvation Army if his life had been spent on that
side of its operations. Far from being the hard, shrewd, calculating,
and statesmanlike genius of The Army's machinery, General Booth has
always been its heart and soul, its dreamer and its inspiration. The
brains of The Army are to be looked for elsewhere. Bramwell Booth is the
man of affairs. Bramwell Booth is the master-mind directing all those
world-wide activities. And but for Bramwell Booth The Salvation Army as
it now exists, a vast catholic Organisation, would be unknown to
mankind.

"General Booth's secret, so far as one may speak about it at all, lay in
his perfectly beautiful and most passionate sympathy with suffering and
pain. I have met only one other man in my life who so powerfully
realised the sorrows of other people. Because General Booth realised
these sorrows so very truly and so very actually, he was able to
communicate his burning desire for radical reformation to other people.
The contagiousness of his enthusiasm was the obvious cause of his
extraordinary success, but the hidden cause of this enthusiasm was the
living, breathing, heart-beating reality of his sympathy with sorrow.
When he spoke to one of the sufferings endured by the children of a
drunkard, for instance, it was manifest that he himself felt the very
tortures and agonies of those unhappy children--really felt them, really
endured them. His face showed it. There was no break in the voice, no
pious exclamation, no gesture in the least theatrical or sentimental.
One saw in the man's face that he was enduring pain, that the thought
was so real to him that he himself actually suffered, and suffered
acutely. If we had imagination enough to feel as he felt the dreadful
fears and awful deprivation of little children in the godless slums of
great cities, we, too, should rush out from our comfortable ease to
raise Salvation Armies. It would be torture to sit still. It would be
impossible to do nothing.

"This wonderful old man suffered all his life as few have ever suffered.
And his suffering arose from the tremendous power of his imagination. At
a Meeting he would tell amusing stories, and in the company of several
people he would talk with a gaiety that deceived; but with one or two,
deeply interested to know why he was a Salvationist, and what he really
thought about life, he would open his heart, and show one at least
something of its agony. He was afflicted by the sins of the whole world.
They hurt him, tore him, wounded him, and broke his heart. He did not
merely know that people suffer from starvation; that children run to
hide under a bed at the first sound of a drunken parent's step on the
stair; that thousands of women are friendless and defaced on the
streets; that thousands of boys go to their bodily and spiritual ruin
only for want of a little natural parental care; that men and women are
locked up like wild beasts in prison who would be good parents and
law-abiding citizens were love allowed to enter and plead with them--he
did not merely know these things, but he visualised and felt in his own
person the actual tortures of all these perishing creatures. He wept for
them. He prayed for them. Sometimes he would not sleep for thinking of
them.

"I have seen him with suffering face and extended arms walk up and down
his room, crying out from the depths of his heart: 'Oh, those poor
people, those poor people!--the sad, wretched women, the little,
trembling frightened children meant to be so happy!--all cursed with
sin, cursed and crushed and tortured by sin!' And he would then open his
arms as if to embrace the whole world, and exclaim, 'Why won't they let
us save them?'--meaning, 'Why won't society and the State let The
Salvation Army save them?'

"His attitude towards suffering and sorrow was, nevertheless, harder in
many ways than that of certain humanitarians. He believed in a Devil, he
believed in Hell, and he believed in the saying that there are those who
would not be persuaded though one rose from the dead. And so he held it
the wisdom of statesmanship that when all men have been given a fair
opportunity for repentance, and after love has done everything in its
power to save and convert the lawless and bad, those who will not accept
Salvation should be punished with all the force of a civilisation that
must needs defend itself. The word punishment was very often on his
lips. I think that he believed in the value of punishment almost as
profoundly as he believed in the value of love. He believed that love
could save the very worst man and the very worst woman in the world who
wanted to be saved; and he also believed that nothing was so just and
wise as rigorous punishment for the unrighteous who would not be saved.
I think that he would have set up in England, if he had enjoyed the
power which we give to politicians, two classes of prison--the reforming
prison, controlled only by compassionate Christians who believe in love;
and the punishing prison, which isolates the evil and iniquitous from
contact with innocence and struggling virtue. In that direction this
most merciful man was merciless.

"Why he became a Salvationist is very clear. He knew that the centre of
life is the heart. He saw that all efforts of statesmanship to alter the
conditions of existence must be fruitless, or, at any rate, that the
harvest must be in the far distant future of humanity, while the heart
of man remains unchanged. He suspected the mere respectability which
satisfies so many reformers. Even virtue seemed to him second-rate and
perilous. He was not satisfied with abstention from sin, or with the
change from slum to model lodging-house. He held that no man is safe, no
man is at the top of his being, no man is fully conscious of life's
tremendous greatness until the heart is definitely and rejoicingly given
to God. He was like St. Augustine, like Coleridge, and all the supreme
saints of the world in this insistence upon the necessity for a cleansed
heart and a will devoted to the glory of God; he was different from them
all in believing that this message must be shouted, dinned, trumpeted,
and drummed into the ears of the world before mankind can awaken to its
truth.

"He made a tremendous demand. Towards the end of his life he sometimes
wondered, very sadly and pitifully, whether he had not asked too much of
his followers. I think, to mention only one particular, that he was
wavering as to his ban upon tobacco. He was so certain of the happiness
and joy which come from Salvation, that he had no patience with the
trivial weaknesses of human flesh, which do not really matter. Let us
remember that he had seen thousands of men and women all over the world
literally transformed by his method from the most miserable animals into
radiant and intelligent creatures conscious of immortality and filled
with the spirit of unselfish devotion to humanity. Is it to be wondered
at that The General of this enormous Army should scarcely doubt the
wisdom of his first terms of service?

"But towards the end he suffered greatly in his own personal life, and
suffering loosens the rigidity of the mind. Those of his own household
broke away from him, the dearest of his children died, trusted Officers
forsook him, some of those whose sins he had forgiven again and again
deserted his Flag, and whispered scandal and tittle-tattle into the ears
of degraded journalism. He was attacked, vilified, and denounced by the
vilest of men in the vilest of manners. Sometimes, sitting alone by
himself, blind and powerless, very battleworn and sad, this old man at
the end of his life must have suffered in the solitude of his soul a
grief almost intolerable. But he became more human and more lovable in
these last years of distress.

"We are apt to think that very remarkable men who have risen through
opposition and difficulty to places of preeminence, must sometimes look
back upon the past and indulge themselves in feelings of
self-congratulation. It is not often true. A well-known millionaire told
me that the happiest moment in his life was that when he ran as a little
boy bareheaded through the rain into his mother's cottage carrying to
her in a tight-clenched fist his first week's wage--a sixpenny bit. Mr.
Lloyd George told me that he never looks back, never allows himself to
dream of his romantic life. 'I haven't time,' he said; 'the present is
too obsessing, the fight is too hard and insistent.' Mr. Chamberlain in
the early days of Tariff Reform, told me much the same thing. Perhaps we
may say that men of action never look back. And so it was with General
Booth. He might well have rested during these last few years in a large
and grateful peace, counting his victories, measuring his achievement,
and comparing the pulpit in Nottingham or the first wind-battered tent
in East London with this innumerable Army of Salvation which all over
the world has saved thousands of human beings from destruction.
Sometimes smaller men are able to save a family from disgrace, or to
rescue a friend from some hideous calamity, or to make a crippled child
happy for a week or two, and the feelings created by these actions are
full of happiness and delight. But this old, rough-tongued,
weather-beaten, and heart-tortured prophet, who had saved not tens but
thousands, who could see with his own eyes in almost every country of
the world thousands of little girls rescued from defamation, thousands
of women rescued from the sink of horrid vice, thousands of men new-born
from lives of unimaginable crime and iniquity, thousands of homes once
dreary with squalor and savagery now happy and full of purest joy; nay,
who could see, as I have seen in India, whole tribes of criminal races,
numbering millions, and once the despair of the Indian Government,
living happy, contented, and industrial lives under the Flag of The
Salvation Army--he who could see all this, and who could justly say,
'But for me these things had never been,' was not happy and was not
satisfied. He ached and groaned to save all such as are sorrowful.

"In the last letter he ever wrote to me, a letter that broke off
pitifully, because of his blindness, from the big, bold, challenging
handwriting, and became a dictated typewritten letter, occurred the
words, 'I am distressed.' He was chiefly distressed by the over-devotion
most of us pay to politics and philosophy, by the struggle for wages, by
the clash between master and man, by the frivolity of the rich, the
stupor of the poor, by the blindness of the whole world to the necessity
for the cleansed heart. He did not want to establish a Salvation Army,
but to save the whole world. He did not want to be acclaimed by many
nations, but to see suffering and poverty and squalor clean banished
from the earth. And he believed that with the power of the State at his
back, and with the wealth now squandered in a hundred abortive
directions in his hands, he could have given us a glad and unashamed
England even in a few years. He knew this and believed it with all his
heart. And he held that his dictatorship would have hurt no just man.
He suffered because poverty continues and thousands are still unhappy.
For such men this world can never suffice. They create eternity.

"Others may criticise him. And no man ever lived, I suppose, easier for
every little creature crawling about the earth in self-satisfied
futility to criticise and ridicule. For myself, I can do nothing but
admire, revere, honour, and love this extraordinary old realist, who
saved so many thousands of human beings from utmost misery; who aroused
all the Churches of the Christian religion throughout the world; who
communicated indirectly to politics a spirit of reality which every year
grows more potent for social good; who was so tender and affectionate
and cordial, and who felt for suffering and sorrow and unhappiness
wherever he found it with a heart entirely selfless and absolutely pure.

"Even if The Salvation Army disappeared from every land where it is now
at work--and, though it will not disappear, I anticipate during the next
ten years many changes in its organisation--to the end of time the
spirit of William Booth will be part of our religious progress. We
cannot unthink ourselves out of his realism, out of his boundless pity,
out of his consuming earnestness. He has taught us all to know that the
very bad man can be changed into the very good man, and he has brought
us back, albeit by a violent method, to the first simple and absolute
principles of the only faith which purifies and exalts humanity.

"When the dust has blown away, we shall see him as perhaps the greatest
of our time."



The Post of Berlin


"What he aimed at, for the solution of the Social question and the
uplifting of the lowest classes of people by their own works, assures
for him the respect of the entire civilised world."



Berlin Local Gazette


"In the person of General Booth was embodied one part of the Social
question, and, if any man succeeded in bringing any part of it even
nearer to a solution one must say it was William Booth.

"His plainness as a man, his genial gift as an organiser, his burning
zeal, his self-sacrificing devotion to his aim, prepared and levelled
the road for him, and no man, friend or foe, will withhold from him
their tribute of high respect as he lies on his bed of death."



The Morning Post of Berlin


"General Booth, the ancient blind man, always kept his glad heart. He
was able to point his opponents, who brought up their theoretical maxims
against him (and who latterly became ever fewer) to his practical work."



The Berlin Evening Paper


"There has hardly ever been a General who in an almost unbroken career
of victory subdued so many men and conquered so many countries as
William Booth. His person gained the high respect of his contemporaries
through his long, priestly life, and he will ever remain an example of
how much, even in a time of confusion and division, one man can do who
knows what he wants, and keeps a clear conscience."



Berlin Midday Paper


"In General Booth we have, undoubtedly, lost one of the most successful
organisers of the day."



Berlin Day Paper (Tageblatt)


"Whoever has seen and heard Booth in a huge Meeting in Circus Busch will
never forget him--the snow-white, flowing beard and the great, upright
figure in the blue uniform, with the red-figured jersey, the furrowed
face of typical English character, and the finely mobile orator's mouth,
with the searching eyes under the noble forehead, and the prominent nose
that gave him almost the aspect of an eagle."



German Watchman


"With that constant will power which sprang from deep and upright
conviction, and with a faculty for organisation which won hearty
recognition from all who knew him, he was able to do such great things."



National Gazette, Berlin


"His unselfishness and his zealous devotion to his creation (The Army)
was beyond all question."



Berlin Exchange Courier


"Whoever saw and heard him knows that he remained, after all, the
simple, unassuming, humble man. The secret of this personality was the
embodiment of an unshakable religious devotion. It rang out in his
burning, earnest words, it breathed in the deep heartfelt prayers in his
Meetings, it expressed itself in wondrous deeds of love, which ignored
difficulties and shrank from no sacrifice. This made of him the
organising genius who led the world-wide Salvation Army, with all its
higher and lower departments, with strength and security. William Booth
was as its Founder and General perhaps the most popular man of our day."



Neckar-Journal of Heilsbron


"And so General Booth, who has now died at eighty-three, risen to be one
of the greatest benefactors of the murdering industry period. His name
is graven in brass in the social history of the nineteenth century.

"He was a man through whose soul the great breath of brotherly love and
devotion moved, and, therefore, his example will never be forgotten."



The Baden Press of Carlsruhe


"The Salvation Army is to-day the mightiest free Organisation of Social
help in the world, and the man who made it was once a street missionary,
despised, and without influence, whom part of the despairing mass of the
East of London threw stones at, whilst another part, with
alcohol-fevered eyes, hung on his lips. 'If ye have faith like a grain
of mustard seed!'"



The General Gazette of Erfurt


"In General Booth, one has closed his eyes who was able to make a
visible reality of the faith that can remove mountains. The Bonaparte of
free Social help has died."



The Cologne Times


"One of the greatest benefactors of mankind has passed away, and as
success is the greatest joy, also one of the happiest of men. The
Salvation Army is a good, Christian undertaking, and William Booth was
one of the noblest Christians whose name history can record."



Hanover Courier


"Booth was the born orator of the people. He possessed above all the
rare gift of keeping always to the level of his hearers, and so to speak
about the highest themes that the wayfaring man understood him."



Hamburg Strangers Paper

"To the last he was the living, energising centre of The Army, and to
the last breath in the truest sense its General."



Munchen Latest News


"With the decease of General Booth, mankind has to mourn the loss of a
willing, self-sacrificing benefactor, a noble philanthropist of the most
distinguished purpose."



The Kingdom's Messenger of Berlin


"What he accomplished in the fighting of drunkenness or other evils is
too well known to need description. Taken all in all, whatever any one
may have to say about any details of The Army's methods, one must agree
with _The Daily Chronicle_ that the loss of General Booth is a heavy
blow, and the whole world will unite with us in applauding such a life
of devotion to a great end."



The Cross Gazette of Berlin


"It was seen that he was not merely a preacher of repentance, but a real
shepherd of his sheep, who had an open heart, and a good understanding
for all in need."



German News of Berlin


"He was no quack, no charlatan, and Carlyle, had he known him, would
have certainly put him into his list of heroes as priest and prophet. It
is great, what The Army has done in fighting manifold human miseries,
such as drunkenness. We have often known learned men and politicians who
went over the sea scoffers at it come back its admirers."



Markish People's Paper of Barmen


"Our opposition on principle does not prevent our acknowledging that The
Army has done much good to the poorest of the poor."



German Daily Paper of Berlin


"With the greatest pity he combined the most iron discipline, and
sacrificed to the happiness of all every personal enjoyment."



Germania of Berlin


"But the light that always led him out of the deepest darkness to the
day was his sympathy for his brethren, whose misery in the East End of
London so deeply laid hold of him."



Daily Look-round of Berlin


"Perhaps the most remarkable fact about him was that with all his
gigantic plans he never lost himself in phantasy, but always knew how to
keep himself down to the practical."



Strassburg Post


"Hard upon himself, he exercised the same severity upon others, from the
highest of his Officers to the least in his Army."



Schwalish Mercury of Stuttgart


"He made his Army out of the soil of London's misery-quarter, and its
present is the work of his unwearyable devotion, the energy sustained by
the fire of his zeal for his idea."



Muhlhaus Daily


"His personality grew out of the old Puritan spirit."



Elbing Latest News


"He is the model of a successful business man. But he is a business man
who never works for himself, only for others. So wrote one of the man
whom death has now taken from what was the creation of his life. In him
has passed away one of the characteristic figures of the century's
tendency. His many-sidedness, it is not too much to say, had no equal.
Bringer of Salvation--social politician--wholesale business man--are
only three comparisons which cannot by far exhaust the description of
the phenomenon Booth. If ever the word can rightly be used of any one,
then of William Booth it can be said he was a benefactor of mankind."



Altona News


"Modern time has few men to show whose spirit had any such
world-embracing might, and who, out of so unlikely a beginning, knew
how to raise up _so_ gigantic a work as compels us to be filled, if not
with love to him, at least with the greatest respect for his honourable
intentions."



Vogtland Gazette Plauen


"These were the innermost feelings of his whole life which drove him to
his marvellous life's work--religious zeal and sympathy."



Frankfurt Gazette


"William Booth had a mighty will, and he strove on for tens of years
from promise to fulfilment."



Augsburg Evening Gazette


"His brilliant talent for organisation, and his ability always to strike
the right note, which would take with the masses, were the most
outstanding specialities of the deceased."



Rhein-Westphalian Gazette


"Here is a work done by an extraordinarily organising genius so great
and such a model, socially speaking, as to fill even the opponents of
the old philanthropist with respect."



Journal Des Debats, Paris


"Never, perhaps, has a man been the creator of such Social Work as this
one who has died after having passed fifty years running all over the
world in search of the miserable ones; who had no hope."



Gaulois, Paris


"His life may be thus summarised. He brought back to God and to morality
many souls who had gone to materialism and vice. He founded pretty well
everywhere 750 Refuges for the unfortunate; he found work for those who
had none; he despised human respect in order to do good."



The Little Republican, Paris


"It is a very exalted moral figure which has disappeared from this
world, as well as even more than a person singularly famous. If he
became a preacher, he was certainly born an apostle. He had the genius
of conversion, and wanted no other career here below. There is not a
city of the Anglo-Saxon world where his Army has not snatched, by
hundreds, men from drunkenness and women from prostitution."

[Illustration: Commander Miss Booth

In Charge of the Salvation Army Work in U.S.A.]


The Republic, Paris


"An indefatigable organiser, ceaselessly working for the success of his
effort, he created besides numerous groups of Salvationists, night
Refuges, popular Restaurants, Workplaces, journals, and reviews."


The Intransigent, Paris


"In General Booth passes away a truly world-personage, whose influence
extended to the two hemispheres, and, perhaps, as much amongst the
savage as the civilised.

"He discovered, his real path, and founded The Salvation Army, which has
recruited millions of faithful ones in the most diverse nations--even in
our sceptical France."



The Voltaire, Paris


"We have not to judge his religious efforts, nor even his methods, which
often seemed to us from some aspects so very absurd.

"But one must recognise that The Army created Hospitals, Retreats,
Refuges without number in all countries of the world, including France,
and that the devotion of its Soldiers has been unbounded. From the
social point of view General Booth was certainly a benefactor."



Gil Blas, Paris


"Struck by the misery which some quarters of London displayed to him, he
conceived the idea of evangelising these masses, and to bring them along
with the Christian light, physical comfort, and moral union.

"An intelligent work, humane in its principles, beautiful in its
aspirations, it merits that we salute with respect the remains of him
who undertook it with all his disinterestedness and all his heart."



General Business Paper of Amsterdam


"The world has to mourn the death of one of the noblest men who ever
lived, of a man who undiscouraged by scorn, contempt, and continual
mockery, kept on working according to his convictions, conscious that he
had a great vocation to fulfil, seeking the welfare of his fellows of
no matter what race or class they might belong to.

"With his departure will be mourned a man who accomplished great things,
and of whom his most ardent opponents have to admit that he by his
example and by his incomparable power to work, and his mighty talent for
organisation, has been able to be a blessing to many.

"William Booth has gone to his eternal rest. He has not lived and worked
in vain. His name does not belong only to his Fatherland, but to the
whole world, for he was a benefactor to every land, to all humanity. If
any name shall continue to live, it is his."



The People, Amsterdam


"A man has died whose figure, owing to his career, his self-chosen
sphere of labour, his manifested power and talent, and through his
success, too, has become a world-figure, who may be variously judged,
but awakened sympathy everywhere, and scarcely anywhere enmity.

"Booth was the man for the outcasts of society, for the poorest and most
miserable, for those who had no strength left, and were entirely unarmed
in the fight for existence."



The Fatherland, Amsterdam


"Yes, truly he was a great idealist. That was why he could not be
content to remain an ordinary minister. His ideal went beyond the circle
of his communion. He wanted to overcome the world by love and Divine
worship, and work for all mankind. And we see the results everywhere
just as in this country, so at the other side of the world."



The Amsterdammer


"The saving of souls was the great, all-consuming passion of the Founder
of The Salvation Army. To satisfy this heart-moving desire he began his
wide-stretched Organisation, and, notwithstanding the great Social Work,
which represented a great amount of practical social betterment, he
continued in every direction in The Army only to honour the opportunity
it gave him to win souls for God and The Army."



The Evening Courier, of Milan


"When he stepped to the front of the platform, he seemed transfigured.
His rapid and incisive words poured from his mouth with unrestrained
eloquence.

"'All the foundation of all we say,' he cried, 'are the eternal truths
of the Gospel, indestructible as the pillars of the throne of God.'

"The Apostle spoke out. In that body, worn with age, was born again
something of that unconquerable faith which had made Booth as a lad cry
out seventy years before, in a prophetic transport, 'The trumpet has
sounded the signal for the fight. Your General assures you of success
and a glorious reward. Your crown is ready. Why do you wait and hesitate
so? Forward, forward, forward!'

"Booth was not one to be intimidated. He tolerated insults with Olympic
patience. He just wiped off the dirt his persecutors threw at him, and
smilingly invited them to follow him. Thus, about seventy years of age,
he began the beneficent career which accomplished a truly marvellous
work of philanthropy and love, and which gained for him not only the
esteem and veneration of the poor of East London, and of the choicest
citizens, but the personal friendship of his Sovereign."



The Age, of Milan


"The death of Booth causes consternation through all England, because
through the vast Organisation, The Salvation Army, he was so well known
for his works of humanity and beneficence.

"Indeed, he was one of the most celebrated men in the world. The great
humane work he founded during the seventy years of his apostolate is
destined to remain as one of the highest expressions of modern
philanthropy and charity. The Army is an immense federation of hearts
and consciences which was created, guided, and led to triumph by Mr.
Booth."



The Press, of Turin


"The Founder and General of The Salvation Army, dead at eighty-three
years of age, after seventy years of unwearyable apostolate, was one of
the purest and most popular heroes of modern Christianity. He was not
content to preach the Gospel only from the parchment--a mystic and a
poet, yet a practical man of forethought, he was able, out of nothing,
to create a Society of militant propagandists for the social redemption
of the lost crowds, and to fight against idleness, alcoholism, and evil
habits."



The Halfpenny Paper


"The message that General Booth is dead will cause sorrow not only in
his country or in Europe, but all over the world. Now, at his death, the
whole world knows his name, and thousands follow in his footsteps."



Social Demokrat


"No free religious movement has ever become so great or laid so strong a
hold upon all classes of society.

"General Booth will be named in history as one of the strongest and most
remarkable personages that ever lived. He was a product of society, such
as it was, and the Movement he raised was born of that state of things,
firstly as a reconciler, and then as a protest.

"To accomplish such a work as has been done cannot be without result on
the future shaping of society."



The Morning


"To-day The Salvation Army stands as one of the mightiest and most
remarkable religious organisations that the world has ever seen."



Jonkoping Post


"One of our times, and perhaps all times, greatest and most remarkable
personages, The Salvation Army's Founder and General, William Booth,
died in London yesterday evening. Behind him lies a path such as few
have ever travelled. Before him lies the rest with his Lord, in whose
service he laboured almost all his long life."



Swedish Morning Standard


"The world has lost one of its noblest and most remarkable men. A great
benefactor of mankind has been called home. Our times' greatest
spiritual General has died at his honourable post. Peace to his brave
and worthy memory."



Norkoping News


"Few of the most noted men of the day did anything like as much work as
The General. He was the leading spirit in all this world-Organisation's
least details. He spent most of his time travelling all round the
world."



Gothenburg's Post


"Wherever in the world men's hearts beat for men's sorrows and misery,
the message of General Booth's death will be received with sadness and
mourning. For with General Booth departed the greatest modern apostle of
Christianity, charity, and mercy--a sort of Saviour up to the level of
modern machinery and wholesale industrial city life, and one of the most
discussed and remarkable of modern personages."



Gothenburg's Evening


"William Booth's life was one in storm and battle--a great man's life,
the life of an unwearied fighter. Now the whole world bows before the
great man and the great life which will live through all time, and go on
bringing help to the suffering."



Smaland's Post


"Booth's blessed and energetic all-world-embracing efforts have, during
the last decades, had general recognition, and his native land has in
various ways testified its respect for what he has done in the service
of mercy."



Upsala News


"William Booth's sleepless energy and restless activity succeeded in
forcing his work's recognition, even where people did not approve his
methods, and many who before despised him will, now that he is gone,
admit that he has done more for his fellows than many whose names have
gone down to posterity."



Malmo S. S. Daily


"It is one of the day's strongest personages who is gone--a man with the
utmost wealth of energy and power. One could hardly believe he belonged
to our times, and yet he had all the qualities of our nervous and
restless epoch. There was much in him to remind of the old prophets--the
lonely man of God fighting with the mighty and the wrong. Nobody can
dispute that The Army did much good."



Stockholm Morning


"It lay in the Leader's extraordinary foresight that The Army had a
great and blessed work to fulfil to save the deepest sunken in the
community."




Chapter XXVI

Organisation



The high reputation which The General gained as an Organiser seems to
make it desirable to explain, as fully as we can, what he aimed at, and
by what means he made The Army the remarkable combination it has become.
We have, happily, in several of our books his own dissertations on the
subject, for he always sought to make clear to all who should follow
him, especially in this respect, the reasons for his plans. In his
introduction to _Orders and Regulations for Staff Officers_, he writes
as follows:--

     "Some of the Converts resided in other parts of London, and they
     soon commenced themselves to hold Meetings afterwards, and to win
     souls in their localities. I was entreated to care for these also.
     The Christian Churches, even when they were willing to receive
     these Converts, were as a result generally so much occupied with
     the maintenance of their own existence, or so lukewarm in coping
     with the necessities of the poor people, as to be unequal to the
     task of caring for them. I soon found that the majority of those
     who joined the Churches either relapsed again into open
     backsliding, or became half-hearted professors. I was, therefore,
     driven to select men and women who I knew to be lovers of souls,
     and to be living holy lives, for the purpose of caring for these
     new Converts. These helpers I afterwards directed to hold Meetings
     in the streets and in cottages, and then in Halls and other Meeting
     Places. The Lord was with them in great power, and hundreds of
     wicked and godless people were converted and united together in
     separate societies.

     "These operations were, in course of time, extended to the
     Provinces, where my late beloved wife, who was my unfailing helper
     and companion in this work until God took her from me, preached
     with much acceptance and remarkable results. It soon became
     difficult, and at length impossible, for me to express my wishes
     and give my instructions to my helpers by word of mouth, and
     consequently I had to issue them in the form of correspondence.
     This I also soon found to be a task beyond my ability. And yet, if
     unity and harmony were to be preserved among the people God had
     given me, and if the work were to be carried on successfully, it
     was evident that they must know my wishes. I was, therefore,
     compelled to _print_ such Directions and Rules as I deemed to be
     necessary.

     "This practice has continued to the present day, and been increased
     by reason of the advance of the Work to an extent I never could
     have anticipated. Some seventeen years ago I issued a volume of
     _Orders and Regulations for Field Officers_. More than once since
     then this book has been enlarged, and revised to date, and,
     although some further developments have been made since that time,
     that volume may be taken as the expression, in general terms, of my
     present convictions of what a Field Officer of The Salvation Army
     should be and do, and as such I commend it to the attention of
     Officers and Soldiers of every rank in The Army throughout the
     world.

     "Soon after the publication of the _Orders and Regulations for
     Field Officers_, a volume describing the duties of Divisional
     Officers was issued. This volume has also been outgrown, by reason
     of continued developments in the organisation of the Army rendering
     further enlargements necessary.

     "Meanwhile, the ablest and most devoted Officers throughout the
     world have been contriving, and, with the authority of
     Headquarters, executing what have seemed the wisest and best
     methods for attaining the objects we have in view. It now appears
     to me not only desirable, but absolutely necessary, that these
     usages should be again examined and classified, and, if found to be
     in harmony with our principles, corrected, reduced to writing, and
     then, endorsed by my authority, published for the benefit of The
     Army throughout the world, and for the advantage also of those who
     will hereafter be our successors in the responsibility for carrying
     forward the War. The _Orders and Regulations_ contained in this
     volume are the result.

     "It was my intention to make this book a complete Compendium of
     Regulations for Staff Officers of all Departments in all parts of
     the world; but it became evident that, owing to the multiplication
     of the different branches of our operations, and the diversity of
     the Regulations required by their varied character and conditions,
     such a volume would have been swollen to most inconvenient
     dimensions, and I therefore determined to omit everything not
     applying to the Officers under the command of the British
     Commissioner.

     "It must not be inferred from this that the Staff Officers employed
     at International Headquarters, or of those engaged in the Social
     Work, do not rank equally with those whose duties are herein
     described. Further _Orders and Regulations_ required by them, and
     for Staff Officers in other Territories, will be issued from time
     to time as needed. The Regulations contained in Part I of this
     volume are to be carried out as far as possible in all Territories
     and Departments.

     "The Regulations herein contained must not be regarded as a final
     authority on the duties and responsibilities to which they refer.
     Development has been the order of The Army from the beginning, and
     will, I hope, remain so to the end. Our methods must of necessity
     be always changing with the ever varying character and
     circumstances of the people whom we seek to benefit. But our
     principles remain as unchangeable as the Throne of Jehovah. It is
     probable that in succeeding years other _Orders and Regulations_
     will be issued by the Central Authority to take the place of these
     I am now publishing. It is right, and safe, and necessary that it
     should be so. God will, I believe, continue to make known from time
     to time, to those who follow His good pleasure, the way in which
     the War should be carried on, and The Army will, I hope, continue
     to receive and record in _Orders and Regulations_ that manifested
     Will, and, by obedience, continue to go forward from victory unto
     victory!

     "I think I may truthfully say that in no words which it has been my
     privilege to write in the past, and in no work that it has ever
     been my lot to undertake, have I been more conscious of the
     presence and guidance of another Spirit, than in the preparation of
     these Regulations. That Spirit has been, I believe, the Spirit of
     Eternal Light. I have asked wisdom of God, and I verily believe
     that my request has been favourably regarded. Of this, I think,
     these Regulations will, to those for whom they have been prepared,
     bear witness.

     "These Regulations are not, I repeat, intended as a finality. If
     any Staff Officer into whose hand this book may come, or may be
     brought into knowledge of the working of the Regulations contained
     in it, can suggest any improvement, let him do so. If he can show
     any plan by which the end aimed at can be more simply, or
     inexpensively, or effectually gained, either as regards work, or
     men, or methods, or money, by all means let him make the discovery
     known to us. God is in no wise confined to any particular person
     for the revelation of His will. It would be the vainest of vain
     desires were I so foolish as to wish that it should be so. Let Him
     speak by whom He will. What I want to see is the work done, souls
     saved, and the world made to submit at the Saviour's feet.

     "I cannot conclude without saying that there has been present with
     me, all the way through the preparation of this book, a vivid sense
     of the utter powerlessness of all system, however wisely it may
     have been framed, which has not in the application of it that
     Spirit of Life who alone imparts the vital force without which no
     extensive or permanent good can be effected.

     "And now, on the completion of my task, and at the moment of
     placing it in the hands of my Officers, this conviction is forced
     upon me in an increasing, I may almost say, a painful, degree.

     "No one can deny that the religious world is full of forms which
     have little or no practical influence on the minds, or hearts, or
     lives, of those who travel the weary round of their performances
     day by day. Are the Regulations that I am now issuing at no distant
     date going to swell the number of these dead and powerless systems?
     God forbid that it should be so! Nothing could be further from my
     contemplation than such a result.

     "However, there must be Regulations. They are necessary. If work is
     to be done at all, it must be done after some particular fashion,
     and if one fashion is better than another--which no one amongst us
     will question--it must be the wisest course to discover that best
     fashion, and to describe it in plain language, so that it may be
     acted upon throughout our borders until some better method is made
     known. We want certain things done in The Army for the Salvation of
     souls, for the deliverance of the world from sin and misery, and
     for the glory of our God; and the Regulations herein set forth
     represent the best methods at present known either to me, or to
     those around me, for the accomplishment of these things. Therefore
     praying for God's blessing upon them I send them forth with the
     expectation that the Staff Officers whom they concern will render a
     faithful, conscientious, and believing obedience to all that they
     enjoin."

All this was only written in 1904, and there has been nothing since
materially to change the system set forth in the 350 odd pages which
follow, and which explain as fully as was necessary how the plans which
are so fully explained in the volume of _Orders and Regulations for
Field Officers_, above referred to, were to be carried into effect
throughout the whole country.

The opening chapter of these _Regulations_ explains the Organisation as
follows:--

     "THE GENERAL DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY

     "The divisions of The Army in the Field are at present as follow:--

     "Ward, under the charge of a Sergeant.

     "Corps, under the charge and command of a Field Officer.

     "Section, under the charge and command of a Sectional Officer.

     "Division, under the charge and command of a Divisional Commander.

     "Province, under the charge and command of a Provincial Commander.

     "Territory, under the charge and command of a Territorial
     Commissioner.

     "A Ward is a part of a town or neighbourhood in which a Corps is
     operating, placed under the charge of Local Officers, whose duty it
     is to watch over the welfare of the Soldiers and Recruits belonging
     to it.

     "A Corps is that portion of a country in which a separate work is
     carried on, and for which it is responsible. It may consist of a
     city, a town, or a particular district of either, and it may
     include one or more Societies in adjoining places, or it may
     consist of a number of such Societies grouped together, in which
     case it is called a Circle Corps.

     "A Section is a group of Corps placed under the command of one or
     more Officers.

     "A Division consists of a number of Corps grouped together with
     that part of a country in which these Corps are situated.

     "A Province comprises a number of Divisions.

     "A Territory consists of a Country, or part of a Country, or
     several Countries combined together, as The General may decide."

In _Orders and Regulations_ for his Territorial Commissioners, that is,
those who hold the highest command over whole countries, he writes:--

     "The higher the authority with which Officers are entrusted, and
     the larger the responsibilities resting upon them, the greater is
     the need for that absolute devotion to the principles of The Army,
     and that complete abandonment to the purposes of God which our
     _Orders and Regulations_ express and represent, and without which
     no system, however perfect, and no body of men, however capable,
     can achieve the great work He has called us to do in establishing
     the Kingdom of God in the earth."

One of the greatest problems connected with all organisation is the
keeping up to the ideal of those who are in danger of forgetting it;
and, therefore, the following section will, we think, be found
especially interesting to those who may ask, How has it been done, or
how is it to be done? It is the section on "The Development of Field
Officers," and reads as follows:--

     "The Divisional Officer is responsible for seeking to develop the
     spiritual life of the F.O.'s. No matter what gifts or zeal the
     Officer may possess, if he is not walking in the light, and living
     in the favour of God, it is vain to hope that he will be really
     successful.

     "The D.O. must always, therefore, when he comes in contact with
     Officers under his command, make inquiries with regard to their
     spiritual life, leading them to acknowledge their faults and heart
     conflicts, so that he may give suitable counsel and help.

     "The D.O. must regard himself as responsible to God for
     maintaining the _devotion_ of the Officers under him to the great
     purpose to which they have already consecrated their lives. He
     cannot expect to deal faithfully with an Officer on such matters
     unless he does so, and he must bear in mind how easy it is to draw
     back from that whole-hearted sacrifice without which no Officer can
     succeed.

     "The D.O. must see that his Officers possess, and live in, the
     _spirit_ of The Army. Without it their Officership will be like a
     body without a soul, or like a locomotive without any power. The
     D.O. must encourage Officers to cry out to God for this, and must
     continually explain its importance.

     "The D.O. must understand that if Officers under his command
     decline in their love for souls and become careless about the
     progress of their work, he will have failed in a very important
     part of his duty. The D.O. exists for the purpose of helping and
     saving his F.O.'s.

     "The D.O. is responsible for the development of energy and
     enterprise in his Officers. One great temptation of F.O.'s is to
     settle down and to be content with a formal discharge of duty, and,
     what is worse still, to offer all sorts of excuses for their
     lackadaisical Laodicean condition. Few people have in themselves
     sufficient force of character, human or Divine, to keep them
     pushing ahead for any considerable length of time. Officers who
     when they first enter the Field are like flames of fire, will, if
     not looked after, get into ruts, and content themselves with
     holding so many Meetings, doing so many marches, raising the
     ordinary Corps funds, Meeting the ordinary expenditure, keeping the
     ordinary number of Soldiers on the Roll, and doing everything in
     the ordinary day, while the world, undisturbed, is going forward at
     express speed to Hell. The D.O. should endeavour to prevent this
     settling down on the part of his Officers by continually stirring
     up their minds with inducements to labour and encouragements to
     renewed activity and increased sacrifice for the Salvation of the
     world.

     "The D.O. is also responsible for the improvement of the gifts of
     his Officers and of their efficiency for the work they have in
     hand. He must not only show them wherein they fail, but must teach
     them how they may do better.

     "The D.O. must encourage his Officers. If they have gifts and
     capacities--and none are without some--he should cheer them
     forward by acknowledging them. He should point out where they do
     well, at the same time setting before them the higher positions of
     usefulness they may reach with a little application and
     perseverance. He may always remind them of Officers who during the
     early part of their career have had little success, but who, by
     sticking to the fight have reached positions of great usefulness.
     There are few Officers who during their early days are not cast
     down and tempted to think that they do not possess the gifts
     necessary to success, and that they have missed their vocation in
     becoming Officers. This class of melancholy feelings should be
     battled with by the D.O. with all his might, for if allowed to run
     their course the result will be not only depression, but despair,
     and perhaps desertion.

     "The D.O. should give particular attention to the development of
     the ability, energy, and religion of the Lieutenants in his
     Division. Their position in a Corps often makes it difficult for
     them to exercise their gifts to advantage, and they are often
     depressed and discouraged. A D.O. should always inquire on his
     visiting a Corps having a Lieutenant--

     "Whether he is happy with his C.O. and in the Work;

     "What special work he has to do and for which he is actually
     responsible.

     "Every Division must have its own Officers' Meeting, which should
     always be conducted by the Divisional Officer, unless the
     Provincial Commander, or some Officer representing Headquarters be
     present.

     "Every Officer in the Division must be present at, at least, one
     Officers' Meeting in each month; and where it is possible, in great
     centres Meetings should be held once a week. The D.O. must be
     careful that the Officers' Meetings do not involve a financial
     burden on the Officers, and he must make such plans as will avoid
     this, and submit the same to the P.C.

     "It will sometimes be found convenient to pool the travelling
     expenses, but this may easily work unfavourably to the smaller
     Corps instead of in their favour, and in such cases the D.O. must
     assist his F.O's with part of the travelling expenses incurred in
     attending Officers' Meetings in all such cases where F.O's are
     drawing the standard salary or less for their support. Should his
     Funds be insufficient to meet the whole of the burden in such
     cases, he must apply to the P.C. for assistance.

     "The Officers' Meetings should always be held in a comfortable
     room of a size proportionate to the number of Officers present. The
     Officers should be seated directly before the leader.

     "Only Field Officers shall be admitted. A D.O. who wishes to meet
     his Local Officers with his F.O. may announce a Special Meeting for
     that purpose at any time.

     "There shall always be at the beginning of a Meeting some
     considerable time spent in prayer for--

     "The Officers present and the Division in general;

     "The universal Army, its Officers and Soldiers, and especially for
     any portion of it that may be suffering persecution or passing
     through trial;

     "For wisdom for those upon whom the direction of the Army lies;

     "The supply of money and all else needed to carry on the War.

     "The mightier baptisms of the Holy Ghost, and the Salvation of a
     large number of souls.

     "The D.O., or any other Officer present, shall have the
     opportunity, if desired, of pouring out his soul in loving
     exhortation to his comrades, but nothing in the nature of
     discussion or the expression of opinions on any orders that may be
     given must be permitted.

     "The Officer being most used of God at the time should be asked to
     urge his fellows to more holy living, greater self-denial, and
     increased activity.

     "There shall be the opportunity for the publication of any great
     blessing that may have been obtained, or any remarkable work of
     grace that may have been realised in the souls of the Officers
     present, or in their Corps, or for the description of any other
     wonderful work of God that may have been wrought during the week in
     the Division. When at all possible, every Officer present should
     pray aloud during the Meeting.

     "There should occasionally be a time set apart for the confession
     of unfaithfulness and for the open reconsecration to God and the
     War on the part of any Officer.

     "There should be a general rededication of all present to the War
     at every Meeting.

     "There must be a time set apart for the statement by the D.O. of
     any event of general interest to the whole Army, or of any
     remarkable occurrence in the Division, or any Meetings,
     Demonstrations, or other services of importance that may be likely
     soon to take place in the Division or elsewhere.

     "There must be an opportunity after the Meeting, to transact
     business. It is of the greatest importance that there should always
     be time allowed for personal intercourse between the D.O. and the
     Officers present. The D.O. should always announce at the
     commencement of the Meeting that he will be glad to see any Officer
     present, personally, at its close.

     "It will be seen what an enormous power the D.O. possesses in this
     Meeting for inspiring, directing, and controlling all the forces of
     his Division; how every week he can spend the greater part of a
     day, and as much more time as he likes, in making his Officers, who
     have the leadership of The Army in that neighbourhood, think and
     feel exactly as he does. How solemnly important, then, must it be
     that the D.O. should think and feel just as our Lord Jesus Christ
     would have him think and feel on such an occasion, and in the
     presence of such an opportunity.

     "It is most important that the D.O. should arrange beforehand, with
     great care, such business as will have to be transacted. For
     instance, he should have, among other things--

     "A list of the matters requiring attention. He will save himself
     much trouble and correspondence, much loss of time, and much
     expense in travelling by seeing the Officers about matters that
     concern their Corps, and themselves personally at the Meeting. If
     he have no such list, it is probable he will forget some of the
     most important questions of business he has on hand.

     "He should have a list of the Officers he wants to see, together
     with the business upon which it is necessary that he should confer
     with them.

     "Notes must always be taken by him of the results of these
     interviews, according to rule. Especially should any engagements
     the D.O. makes for himself be carefully recorded.

     "The D.O. should make some personal spiritual preparation for the
     Meeting. There must of necessity be many things of a perplexing and
     trying character in connexion with the Officers whom he will have
     to meet, and the condition of the Corps concerning which he will
     have information. He ought, therefore, to make an opportunity
     beforehand for special prayer for Divine guidance and strength, and
     so enter the Meeting with his mind calm, and confident in the
     assurance not only of the Divine favour in his own soul, but that
     God will sustain and direct him in the Meeting and in all the
     business that may subsequently come before him.

     "The condition of heart and spirit in the D.O. at such times will
     be instinctively felt by every Officer in the room before the
     Meeting has been going on for a quarter of an hour, and this will
     have far more influence--as has been remarked before--on his
     Command than anything he may say or do. How important is it, then,
     that he should be as Saul among the prophets--not only head and
     shoulders above every one present as regards authority, but in the
     possession of the wisdom and power of the Holy Ghost!"




Chapter XXVIII

The Spirit of The Army



As pointed out in the foregoing chapter, The General was always anxious
to make clear to all, and to avoid, the possibility of a continuance of
organisation and a routine of effort without the spirit in which the
work has been begun. We could not better describe that spirit than he
did in the following address to his Officers gathered around him in
London, in 1904.

He pictured to them the idea of Seven Spirits sent out from Heaven to
possess the soul of every Officer, and thus described the action of two
of them:--

     "The Spirit of Life

     "We begin with the good Spirit--the Spirit of Life. What did he
     say? What were the words he brought to us from the Throne? Let me
     repeat them: 'O Officers, Officers, I am one of the Seven Spirits
     whom John saw. I travel up and down the earth on special errands of
     mercy. I am come from Him that sitteth on the Throne, and reigneth
     for ever and ever, to tell you that if you are going to succeed in
     your life-and-death struggle for God and man, the first thing you
     must possess, in all its full and rich maturity, is the Spirit of
     Divine Life.'

     "Now, before I go to the direct consideration of this message, let
     me have a word or two about life itself

     "Life, as you know, is the opposite principle to death. To be alive
     is to possess an inward force capable of action without any outside
     assistance. For instance: anything that has in it the principle by
     which it is able to act in some way, independent of the will of any
     other thing or creature outside of itself, may be said to be alive.
     It has in it the principle of life.

     "This principle of life is the mainspring and glory of God's
     universe.

     "We have it in different forms in this world. For instance: We have
     material life. There is living and dead water, and there is living
     and dead earth.

     "Then there is vegetable life. In the fields, and woods, and
     gardens, you have living trees, and flowers, and seeds.

     "Then there is animal life. Only think of the variety, and
     usefulness, and instinctive skill of unnumbered members of the
     animal world.

     "Then, rising higher in the scale of being, you have human life.
     Every man, woman, and child posesses, as it were, a trinity of
     existence; namely, physical life, mental life, and soul life; each
     being a marvel in itself.

     "Then, rising higher still, we have a life more important, and
     bringing more glory to God than any of the other forms that I have
     noticed, and that is _Spiritual Life_.

     "On this Spiritual Life let me make one or two remarks.

     "Spiritual Life is Divine in its origin. It is a creation of the
     Holy Spirit. I need not dwell on this truth. Jesus Christ was at
     great trouble to teach it. 'Marvel not,' He said, 'ye must be born
     again. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
     born of the Spirit is spirit.' You have gone through this
     experience yourselves. You must insist on it in your people.
     Spiritual life proceeds from God. It can be obtained in no other
     way.

     "Spiritual Life not only proceeds from God, but partakes of the
     nature of God.

     "We see this principle, that the life imparted partakes of the
     nature of the author of being that imparts it, illustrated around
     us in every direction.

     "The tree partakes of the nature of the tree from which it is
     derived. The animal partakes of the nature of the creature that it
     begets. The child partakes of the nature of its parents. So the
     soul, born of God, will possess the nature of its Author. Its life
     will be divine.

     "This is a mystery. We cannot understand it, but the Apostle
     distinctly affirms it when he says, the Son of God is a partaker of
     the Divine nature.

     "Spiritual Life, like all other life, carries with it the
     particular powers belonging to its own nature.

     "Every kind of life has its own particular powers--senses,
     instincts, or whatever they may be called.

     "Vegetable life has its powers, enabling it to draw nutrition out
     of the ground.

     "Fish life has power adapting it to an existence in the water.

     "Animal life has powers or senses suitable to its sphere of
     existence, such as seeing, hearing, tasting, and the like.

     "Human life has faculties, emotions, loves and hatreds, suitable
     to its manner of existence. And it has its own peculiar destiny. It
     goes back to God, to be judged as to its conduct when its earthly
     career terminates.

     "And the Spiritual Life of which we are speaking has powers or
     faculties necessary to the maintenance of its existence, and to the
     discharge of the duties appropriate to the sphere in which it
     moves. For instance: it has powers to draw from God the nourishment
     it requires; it has powers to see or discern spiritual things; it
     has powers to distinguish holy people; it has powers to love truth,
     and to hate falsehood; it has powers to suffer and sacrifice for
     the good of others. It has powers to know, and love, and glorify
     its Maker.

     "Those possessed of this Spiritual Life, like all other beings, act
     according to their nature.

     "For instance: the tree grows in the woods, and bears leaves and
     fruit after its own nature. The bird flies in the air, builds its
     nest, and sings its song after its own nature. The wild beasts roam
     through the forest, and rage and devour according to their own
     nature. If you are to make these or any other creatures act
     differently, you must give them a different nature. By distorting
     the tree, or training the animal, or clipping the wings of the
     bird, you may make some trifling and temporary alteration in the
     condition or conduct of these creatures; but when you have done
     this, left to themselves, they will soon revert to their original
     nature.

     "By way of illustration. A menagerie recently paid a visit to a
     northern town. Amongst the exhibits was a cage labelled 'The Happy
     Family,' containing a lion, a tiger, a wolf, and a lamb. When the
     keeper was asked confidentially how long a time these animals had
     lived thus peacefully together, he answered, 'About ten months.
     But,' said he, with a twinkle in his eye, 'the lamb has to be
     renewed occasionally.'

     "As with these forms of life, so with men and women and children.
     The only way to secure conduct of a lasting character different
     from its nature is by effecting a change in that nature. Make them
     new creatures in Christ Jesus and you will have a Christlike life.

     "The presence of the powers natural to Spiritual Life constitutes
     the only true and sufficient evidence of its possession.

     "The absence of these powers shows conclusively the absence of the
     life. If a man does not love God and walk humbly with Him; if he
     does not long after Holiness, love his comrades, and care for
     souls, it will be satisfying evidence that he has gone back to the
     old nature--that is, to spiritual death.

     "All Spiritual Life is not only imparted by Jesus Christ, but
     sustained by direct union with Him.

     "'I am the Vine,' He says, 'ye are the branches; he that abideth in
     Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without
     Me ye can do nothing' (John xv. 6).

     "Nothing will make up for the lack of this life.

     "This, indeed, applies to every kind of existence. You cannot find
     a substitute for life in the vegetable kingdom. Try the trees in
     the garden. Look at that dead apple-tree. As you see it there, it
     is useless, ugly, fruitless. What will make up for the absence of
     life? Will the digging, or the manuring of the ground around it do
     this? No! That will be all in vain. If it is dead, there is only
     one remedy, and that is to give it life--new life.

     "Take the animal world. What can you do to make up for the lack of
     life in a dog? I read the other day of a lady who had a pet dog.
     She loved it to distraction. It died. Whatever could she do with it
     to make up for its loss of life? Well, she might have preserved it,
     stuffed it, jewelled its eyes, and painted its skin. But had she
     done so, these things would have been a disappointing substitute.
     So she buried it, and committed suicide in her grief, and was
     buried by its side.

     "Take the loss of human life. What is the use of a dead man? Go to
     the death-chamber. Look at that corpse. The loved ones are
     distracted. What can they do? They may dress it, adorn it, appeal
     to it. But all that human skill and effort can conceive will be in
     vain. All that the broken hearts can say or do must soon terminate,
     as did Abraham's mourning for Sarah, when he said, 'Give me a piece
     of land that I may bury my dead out of my sight.' Nothing can make
     up for the lack of life.

     "But this is specially true of the Spiritual Life of which we are
     speaking. Take this in its application to a Corps. If you want an
     active, generous, fighting, dare-devil Corps, able and willing to
     drive Hell before it, that Corps must be possessed, and that fully,
     by this spirit of life. Nothing else can effectively take its
     place. No education, learning, Bible knowledge, theology, social
     amusements, or anything of the kind will be a satisfactory
     substitute. The Corps that seeks to put any of these things in the
     place of life will find them a mockery, a delusion, and a snare;
     will find them to be only the wraps and trappings of death itself.

     "And if it is so in the Corps, it is so ten thousand times more in
     the Officer who commands that Corps--in you!

     "Spiritual Life is the essential root of every other qualification
     required by a Salvation Army Officer.

     "With it he will be of unspeakable interest.

     "He will be a pleasure to himself. There is an unspeakable joy in
     having healthy, exuberant life.

     "He will be of interest to those about him. Who cares about dead
     things? Dead flowers--throw them out. Dead animals--eat them. Dead
     men--bury them. Dead and dying Officers--take them away. Give them
     another Corps.

     "If he is living he will be of interest to all about him. Men with
     humble abilities, if full of this Spiritual Life, will be a charm
     and a blessing wherever they go. Look at the lives and writings of
     such humble men as Billy Bray, Carvosso, and Hodgson Casson. Their
     memory is an ointment poured forth to-day after long years have
     passed away.

     "Without this life an Officer will be of no manner of use. No
     matter how he may be educated or talented, without life is to be
     without love; and to be without love, the Apostle tells us, is to
     be only as 'a sounding brass.' But it is not that of which I want
     to speak just now.

     "Spiritual Life is essential to the preservation of life.

     "The first thing life does for its possessor is to lead him to look
     after its own protection. When the principle of life is strong, you
     will have health and longevity. When it is weak, you have disease.
     When it is extinct, you have decay and rottenness.

     "Only vigorous Spiritual Life will enable a Salvation Army Officer
     to effectually discharge the duties connected with his position.

     "Life is favorable to activity. It is so with all life. Go into the
     tropical forests, and see the exuberant growth of everything there.
     Look at the foliage, the blossom, the fruit. Look at the reptiles
     crawling at your feet, and take care they do not sting you. Look at
     the birds chattering and fluttering on the trees, and they will
     charm you. Look at the animals roving through the woods, and take
     care they do not devour you.

     "Contrast all this movement with the empty, barren, silent, Polar
     regions, or the dreary, treeless sands of the African desert.

     "Go and look at the overflowing, tirelss activity of the children.
     Why are they never still? It is the life that is in them. Go to the
     man at work. With what glee, and for what a trifling remuneration,
     he sweats, and lifts and carries the ponderous weights. Go to the
     soldier in the military war. How he shouts and sings as he marches
     to deprivations, and wounds, and death.

     "Even so with Spiritual Life. It never rests; it never tires; it
     always sees something great to do, and is always ready to undertake
     it. What is the explanation? How can we account for it? The answer
     is, Life--abundant life.

     "It is only by the possession of Life that The Salvation Army
     Officer can spread this life.

     "That is, reproduce himself, multiply himself, or his kind. This
     reproduction or multiplication of itself is a characteristic of all
     life.

     "Take the vegetable kingdom. Every living plant has life-producing
     seed, or some method of reproducing itself. The thistle: who can
     count the number of plants that one thistle can produce in a year?
     One hundred strawberry plants can be made in ten years to produce
     more than a thousand million other strawberry plants!

     "Take the animal kingdom. Here each living creature has this
     reproductive power. They say that a pair of sparrows would in ten
     years, if all their progeny could be preserved, produce as many
     birds as there are people on the earth--that is, 1,500,000,000. 'Ye
     are of more value than many sparrows.'

     "Just so, this Spiritual Life is intended to spread itself through
     the world.

     "It is to this end it is given to you. God's command to Adam was,
     'Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.' How much more
     does this command apply to you and to me! You are to be progenitors
     of a world of men and women possessed of Spiritual Life; the
     parents of a race of angels. How this is to be done is another
     question. About that I shall have something to say as we go along.
     For the moment, I am simply occupied with the fact that you have to
     call this world of holy beings into existence by spreading this
     life.

     "Every Officer here is located in a world of death. Sometimes we
     style it a dying world, and so it is on its human side, but on its
     spiritual side it is past dying; it is dead. By that I do not mean
     that the spiritual nature, that is the soul, ever ceases to be in
     any man. That will never come to pass. Perhaps nothing once created
     will ever cease to be. Anyway, man is immortal. The soul can never
     die. Neither do I mean that there is no Spiritual Life.

     "By spiritual death we mean that the soul is--Separated from God;
     no union with Him. In a blind man the organ may be perfect, but not
     connected.

     "Inactive. No love for the things God loves. No hatred for the
     things He hates. Dead to His interests, His kingdom; dead to Him.

     "Corrupt, bad, devilish, etc. What a valley of dry bones the world
     appears to the man whose eyes have been opened to see the truth of
     things. Verily, verily, it is one great cemetery crowded with men,
     women, and children dead in trespasses and sin. Look for a moment
     at this graveyard, in which the men around you may be said to lie
     with their hearts all dead and cold to Christ, and all that
     concerns their Salvation. Look at it. The men and women and
     children in your town are buried there. The men and women in your
     city, in your street. Nay, the very people who come to your Hall to
     hear you talk on a Sunday night are there. There they lie. Let us
     read the inscriptions on some of their tombs:--


     "_Here lies Tom Jones_

     "He had a beautiful nature, and a young, virtuous wife, and some
     beautiful children. All starved and wretched through their father's
     selfish ways. He can't help himself. He says so. He has proved it.
     He is dead in drunkenness.


     "_Here lies Harry Please-Yourself_

     "Mad on footballing, theatres, music-halls, dances, and the like.
     Nothing else morning, noon, or night seems to interest him. There
     he is, dead in pleasure.


     "_Here lies James Haughtiness_

     "Full of high notions about his abilities, or his knowledge, or his
     family, or his house, or his fortune, or his business, or his dogs,
     or something. There he is, dead in pride.


     "_Here lies Jane Featherhead_

     "Absorbed in her hats, and gowns, and ribbons, and companions, and
     attainments. There she is, dead in vanity.


     "_Here lies Miser Graspall_

     "Taken up with his money--sovereigns, dollars, francs, kroner,
     much or little. 'Let me have more and more' is his dream, and his
     cry, and his aim, by night and day. There he is, dead in
     covetousness.


     "_Here lies Sceptical Doubtall_

     "Hunting through the world of nature, and revolution, and
     providence, and specially through the dirty world of his own dark
     little heart, for arguments against God and Christ and Heaven.
     There he is, dead in infidelity.


     "_Here lies Jeremiah Make-Believe_

     "With his Bible Class and Singing Choir, and Sunday religion, and
     heartless indifference to the Salvation or damnation of the
     perishing crowds at his door. There he is, dead in formality.


     "_Here lies Surly Badblood_

     "Packed full of suspicions and utter disregards for the happiness
     and feelings of his wife, family, neighbours, or friends. There he
     is, dead in bad tempers.


     "_Here lies Dives Enjoy-Yourself_

     "Look at his marble tomb, and golden coffin, and embroidered
     shroud, and ermine robes. This is a man whose every earthly want is
     supplied--Carriages, music, friends. There he is, dead in luxury.


     "_Here lies Dick Never-Fear_

     "His mouth is filled with laughter, and his heart with contempt
     when you speak to him about his soul. He has no anxiety, not he.
     He'll come off all right, never fear. Is not God merciful? And did
     not Christ die? And did not his mother pray? Don't be alarmed, God
     won't hurt him. There he is, dead in presumption,


     "_Here lies Judas Renegade_

     "His grave has a desolate look. The thorns and thistles grow over
     it. The occupant has money and worldly friends, and many other
     things, but altogether he gets no satisfaction out of them; he is
     uneasy all the time. There he is, dead in apostacy.

     "There are any number of other graves. It is interesting, although
     painful, to wander amongst them. All, or nearly all, their
     occupants are held down by a heavy weight of ignorance, a sense of
     utter helplessness. And all are bound hand and foot with chains of
     lust, or passion, or procrastination, of their own forging. In the
     midst of these graves you live, and move, and have your being.

     "What is your duty here? Oh, that you realised your true business
     in this region of death! Having eyes, Oh! that you could see.
     Having ears, Oh! that you could hear. Having hearts, Oh! that you
     could feel. What are you going to do with this graveyard? Walk
     about it in heartless unconcern, or with no higher feeling than
     gratitude for having been made alive yourselves? Or will you
     content yourselves with strolling through it, taxing its poor
     occupants for your living while leaving them quietly in their tombs
     as hopeless as you found them? Heaven forbid! Well, then, what do
     you propose? What will you do?

     "Look after their bodies, and feed and nourish them, making the
     graveyard as comfortable a resting-place as you can? That is good,
     so far as it goes, but that is not very far. Will that content you?
     Decorate their graves with flowers and evergreens, and wreaths of
     pleasant things? Will that content you? Amuse them with your music,
     or the singing of your songs, or the letting off of your oratorical
     fireworks among their rotting corpses? Will that content you?
     Instruct them in doctrines, and rescues, and Salvations in which
     they have no share? Will that content you? No! No! No! A thousand
     times no! You won't be content with all that. God has sent you into
     this dark valley for nothing less than to raise these doom-struck
     creatures from the dead. That is your mission. To stop short of
     this will be a disastrous and everlasting calamity.

     "What do you say? It cannot be done? That is false. God would never
     have set you an impossible task. You cannot do it? That is false
     again, for you have done it before again and again. There is not an
     Officer here who has not called some souls from the dead. Not one.
     How many thousands--how many tens of thousands, in the aggregate,
     have the Officers present at this Congress raised from the graves
     of iniquity? Who can tell?

     "Go, and do it again. Go, and look at them. Go, and compassionate
     them. Go, and represent Jesus Christ to them. Go, and prophesy to
     them. Go, and believe for them. And then shall bone come to bone,
     and there shall be a great noise, and a great Army shall stand up
     to live, and fight, and die for the living God.



     "THE SPIRIT OF PURITY


     "And now we come to the consideration of the message of the second
     Spirit. Let us recall his words: 'O Officers, Officers, the Great
     Father has sent me to tell you that if you would be successful in
     your campaign against wickedness, selfishness, and fiends, you must
     yourselves be holy.'

     "I come now to the task of showing, as far as I am able, what the
     plan of life is which God has formed for a Salvation Army Officer.

     "What must an Officer be and do who wants satisfactorily to fill up
     the plan God has formed for him? Of course, there will in some
     respects be certain striking differences in that plan. But in the
     main there will be remarkable resemblances.

     "The first thing that God asks is, that the Officer shall possess
     the character He approves.

     "You might say the character that He admires. The very essence of
     that character is expressed in one word--_Holiness_.

     "In the list of qualifications for effective leadership in this
     warfare, The Salvation Army has ever placed Holiness in the first
     rank. The Army has said, and says to-day, that no other qualities
     or abilities can take its place. No learning, or knowledge, or
     talking, or singing, or scheming, or any other gift will make up
     for the absence of this. You must be good if you are to be a
     successful Officer in The Salvation Army.

     "Let us suppose that a comrade were to present himself before us
     this morning, and say, 'I am a Salvationist. I want to be an
     Officer amongst you, and I want to be an Officer after God's own
     Heart; but I am ignorant of the qualifications needed.' If I were
     to ask you what I should say to this brother, I know what your
     answer would be. You would say, with one voice, 'Tell him that,
     before all else, he must be a holy man.'

     "Suppose, further, that I appeared before you myself for the first
     time at this Congress, and were to say to you: 'My comrades, I have
     come to be your Leader. What is the first, the foundation quality I
     require for your leadership?' I know the answer you would give me.
     You would say, 'O General, you must be a holy man.'

     "If there were gathered before me, in some mighty building, the
     choicest spirits now fighting in The Salvation Army the world
     over--Commissioners and Staff Officers, Field Officers and Local
     Officers, together with Soldiers of every grade and class; and
     suppose, further, that standing out before that crowd, I was to
     propose the question: 'In what position in our qualifications shall
     I place the blessing of Holiness?' you know what the answer would
     be. With a voice that would be heard among the multitudes in Heaven
     the crowd would answer: 'Holiness must be in the first rank.'

     "If this morning I had the privilege of ascending to the Celestial
     City, and asking the assembled angels in that mighty temple where,
     day and night, they worship the Great Jehovah: 'What position ought
     Holiness to occupy in the qualifications needed by Salvation Army
     Officers in their fight on earth?' you know that angels and
     archangels, cherubim and seraphim, would join with the Seven
     Spirits that are before the Throne with one united shout, loud
     enough to make the ears of Gabriel tingle, and would answer, 'Place
     it first.'

     "If I could have the still greater privilege of kneeling before the
     intercessory Throne of my dear, my precious, my glorified Saviour,
     and of asking Him what position this truth should hold in the
     hearts and efforts of Salvation Army Officers, you know that He
     would answer: 'Blessed are the pure in heart.' Holiness comes
     first.

     "If, further still, borne on a burning seraph's wings I could rise
     to the Heaven of Heavens, and, like its holy inhabitants, be
     allowed to enter the Holy of Holies, where Jehovah especially
     manifests His glory; and if, prostrate before that Throne, with all
     reverence I should ask the question: 'What is the first and most
     important qualification a Salvation Army Officer must possess in
     order to do Your Blessed Will?' you have His answer already. You
     know that He would reply: 'Be ye holy, for I am holy.'

     "What, then, is that Holiness which constitutes the first
     qualification of an Officer, and which is asked for by that Blessed
     Spirit of Purity coming from the Throne of God?

     "In replying to this question I cannot hope to do more than put you
     in remembrance of what you must already know.

     "I will, however, to begin with, take the broad ground that
     Holiness, in the sense in which The Salvation Army uses the word,
     means entire deliverance from sin. I shall explain myself as I go
     along. But I begin with the assertion that holy souls are saved
     from sin.

     "You all know what sin is. And it is important that you should, and
     that you should be able to define it at a moment's notice to
     whomsoever may inquire. John says: 'All unrighteousness is sin,'
     That is, everything that a man sees to be actually wrong, that to
     him is sin. Whether the wrong be an outward act, or an inward
     thought, or a secret purpose does not affect its character. If the
     act, or thought, or purpose is wrong to that particular soul it is
     sin. Whether the wrong be done in public and blazoned abroad before
     the world as such, or whether it be committed in darkness and
     secrecy, where no human eye can follow it, matters not; it is sin.

     "To be holy, I say, is to be delivered from the commission of sin.
     Is not that blessed?

     "To be holy is to be delivered from the penalty of sin. 'The wages
     of sin is death.' Holy men are fully and freely forgiven. One of
     the evidences of the possession of Holiness is the full assurance
     of that deliverance. Salvation from doubt as to this. Is not that
     blessed?

     "Holiness includes deliverance from the guilt of sin.

     "Sin has a retributive power. At the moment of commission it
     implants a sting in the conscience which, in the impenitent man,
     lights a flame, which, without the application of the Precious
     Blood, is never extinguished. In Holiness the sting is extracted,
     and the fire is quenched. Is not that blessed?

     "Holiness supposes deliverance from the defilement of sin.

     "Sin pollutes the imagination, defiles the memory, and is a
     filth-creating leaven, which, unless purged away, ultimately
     corrupts and rots the whole being.

     "In Holiness all the filth is cleansed away. The soul is washed in
     the Blood of the Lamb. This is the reason for so much being said in
     the Bible, and in the experience of entirely sanctified people,
     about purity of heart. Is not that blessed?

     "Holiness means complete deliverance from the bondage of sin.

     "Every time a sin is committed, the inclination to do the same
     again is encouraged, and those habits which belong to the evil
     nature are strengthened until they assume the mastery of the soul,
     and the soul comes more and more under the tyranny of evil.

     "In conversion the chains that bind men to sin are broken, but the
     tendency to evil still lingers behind. In Holiness the bondage is
     not only entirely destroyed, and the soul completely delivered from
     these evil tendencies, but is free to do the will of God, so far as
     it is known, as really as it is done in Heaven. Is not that
     blessed?

     "Holiness supposes the deliverance of the soul from the rule and
     reign of selfishness.

     "The essence of sin is selfishness; that is, the unreasoning,
     improper love of self. The essence of Holiness is benevolence. Holy
     souls are mastered by love, filled with love. Is not that blessed?

     "It will be seen, then, that the Officer who enjoys this experience
     of Holiness will have received power from God to live a life
     consciously separated from sin.

     "A man cannot be living in a God-pleasing state if he is knowingly
     living in sin, or consenting to it, which amounts to the same
     thing. Let us look a little more closely at this.

     "Holiness will mean a present separation from all that is openly or
     secretly untrue.

     "Any one pretending to be doing the will of God, while acting
     untruthfully or deceitfully in his dealings with those around him,
     is not only guilty of falsehood, but of hypocrisy.

     "To be holy is to be sincere.

     "Holiness means separation from all open and secret dishonesty.
     This applies to everything like defrauding another of that which is
     his just and lawful due.

     "Holiness also means separation from all that is unjust.

     "Doing unto others as you would that they should do to you, may be
     truly described as one of the lovely flowers and fruits of Purity.

     "Holiness means Salvation from all neglect of duty to God and man.

     "All pretensions to Holiness are vain while the soul is living in
     the conscious neglect of duty. A holy Officer will do his duty to
     his Maker. He will love God with all his heart--such a heart as he
     has, big or little. He will love and worship Him, and strive to
     please Him in all that he does. A holy Officer will love his
     neighbour as himself. The law of love will govern his dealings with
     his family, comrades, neighbours--body and soul.

     "That is a beautiful experience which I am describing, is it not,
     my comrades? And you cannot be surprised that the Spirit of Purity
     should bring you the message that it is God's plan of life for you.

     "Upon it let me make a few further remarks.

     "Holiness is a distinct definite state; a man can be in it or out
     of it.

     "Holiness is enjoyed partially or entirely by all converted people.
     It can be enjoyed partially. No one would say that every converted
     man was a holy man, and no one would say that every man who was not
     perfectly holy was not converted. But I should say, and so would
     you, that every truly converted man is the master of sin, although
     he may not be entirely delivered from it.

     "Then, again, Holiness is a continued growth in sincere souls. With
     faith, watchfulness, prayer, and obedience, the power of sin
     diminishes as the days pass along, and the strength of Holiness
     increases.

     "The line which separates a state of entire from a state of partial
     Holiness may be approached very gradually, but there is a moment
     when it is crossed.

     "The approach of death is often all but imperceptible, but there is
     a moment when the last breath is drawn. Just so there is a moment
     when the body of sin is destroyed, however gradual the process may
     have been by which that state has been reached. There is a moment
     when the soul becomes entirely holy--entirely God's.

     "By perseverance in the sanctified life spiritual manhood is
     reached, and the soul is perfected in love; that is maturity.

     "Let me illustrate the doctrine of Holiness, in its varied aspects,
     by comparing its attainment to the ascent of a lofty mountain.

     "Come with me. Yonder is the sacred mount, towering far above the
     clouds and fogs of sin and selfishness. Around its base, stretching
     into the distance, as far as eye can reach, lies a flat, dismal,
     swampy country. The district is thickly populated by a people who,
     while professing the enjoyment of religion, are swallowed up in
     unreality about everything that appertains to Salvation. They talk,
     and sing, and pray, and write, and read about it, but they are all
     more or less in doubt whether they have any individual part or lot
     in the matter. Sometimes they think they have a hope of Heaven, but
     more frequently they are afraid that their very hopes are a
     delusion.

     "The land is haunted by troubling spirits continually coming and
     going, that point to past misdoings and coming penalties. Such
     venomous creatures as hatreds, revenges, lusts, and other evil
     passions are rife in every direction; while the demons of doubt and
     despair seem to come and go of their own free will, leading men and
     women on the one hand to indifference, worldliness, and infidelity,
     and on the other to darkness and despair. This wild, dismal
     territory we will style 'The Land of Uncertainty.'

     "In the centre of this unlovable and undesirable country the
     mountain of which I want to speak lifts its lofty head. Call it
     'Mount Pisgah' or 'Mount Beulah,' or, if you will, call it 'Mount
     Purity'--I like that term the best. But whatever you name it, there
     it is, rising up above the clouds and fogs of sin and selfishness,
     and doubt and fear and condemnation that ever overhang the swampy
     Land of Uncertainty, of which I have given you a glimpse.

     "Look at it. There are some monster mountains in the natural world,
     but they are mere molehills alongside this giant height. Look at it
     again. Is it not an entrancing sight? Its lofty brow, crowned with
     a halo of glorious light, reaches far upwards towards the gates of
     endless day, those living on its summit having glorious glimpses of
     the towers and palaces of the Celestial City. The atmosphere is
     eminently promotive of vigorous health and lively spirits. But its
     chief claim is the purity of heart, the constant faith, the loving
     nature, and the consecrated, self-sacrificing devotion of those who
     are privileged to dwell there. It must be a charming place. The
     multitudes whose feet have ever been permitted to tread its blessed
     heights think so.

     "But while gazing on the entrancing sight, the question
     spontaneously arises: 'How can I get there?' There is evidently no
     mountain railway nor elevator on which, while reclining on pillows
     of ease, and serenaded by music and song, you can be rapidly and
     smoothly lifted up to the blessed summit. Those who reach that
     heavenly height must climb what the Bible calls the 'Highway of
     Holiness.' And they will usually find it a rugged, difficult
     journey, often having to fight every inch of the way. But, once on
     the celestial summit, the travellers will feel amply repaid for
     every atom of trouble and toil involved in the ascent.

     "The road to this glorious height passes through various plateaux
     or stages which run all round the sides of the mountain, each
     different from the other, and each higher than the one that
     preceded it. Travellers to the summit have to pass through each of
     these stages. Let me enumerate some of the chief among them.

     "To begin with, there is the awakening stage, where the climbers
     obtain their first fair view of this holy hill.

     "It is here that the desire to make the ascent first breaks out.
     This longing is often awakened by reading various guide-books or
     Holiness advertisements, such as _The War Cry_, or _Perfect Love_,
     which set forth the blessedness experienced by those who make the
     heavenly ascent. Sometimes the desire to ascend the holy hill is
     awakened by the pure light which every now and then shines from the
     summit direct into the travellers' hearts. Or, it may be their
     souls are set on fire with a holy longing to be emptied of sin and
     filled with love by the burning testimonies of some of the people
     who live up there, but who come down into the valley every now and
     then to persuade their comrades to make the ascent. Anyway, it
     almost always happens when those who read these guide-books and
     listen to these testimonies begin to search their Bibles and cry to
     God for guidance, that a spirit of hunger and thirst sets in which
     gives them no rest until they themselves resolve to take the
     journey up the side of this wonderful mountain.

     "A little higher up, and you reach the starting stage.

     "Here those who fully resolve upon seeking holiness of heart first
     enter their names in the 'Travellers' Book.' On this plateau I
     observe that there is a great deal of prayer. You can hear the
     earnest petitions going up to Heaven, whichever way you turn. And,
     much prayer as there is, you can hear much singing also. One of the
     favourite songs  commences:--

        "O glorious hope of perfect love!
        It lifts me up to things above,
          It bears on eagles' wings;
        It gives my ravished soul a taste,
        And makes me for some moments feast
          With Jesus' priests and kings.

     "There is another favourite song which  begins:--

        "O joyful sound of Gospel grace!
          Christ shall in me appear;
        I, even I, shall see His face,
          I shall be holy here.

     "But, still ascending, we come to the wrestling stage.

     "Here the travellers are met by numerous enemies, who are in dead
     opposition to their ever reaching the summit.

     "I observe that the enemies attack those travellers with doubts as
     to the possibility of ever reaching the mountain's top, and with
     scores of questions about apparently conflicting passages of
     Scripture, and contradictory experiences of Christian people; and,
     alas! with only too frequent success, for the whole plateau seems
     to be strewn with the records of broken resolutions relating to the
     renouncements of evil habits, tempting companions, and deluding
     indulgences.

     "And I observe that lying about are many unfulfilled consecrations
     relating to friends, and money, and children, and time, and other
     things; in fact, this stage seems to be a strange mixture of faith
     and unbelief; so much so that it is difficult to believe that we
     are on the slopes of Mount Purity at all.

     "Here you will find posted on the sides of the rocks in all
     directions placards bearing the words: 'The things I would do those
     I do not, and the things I would not do those I do, and there is no
     spiritual health in me.' And up and down you will also see
     notice-boards warning would-be travellers not to climb any higher
     for fear they should fall again.

     "But, thank God, while many chicken-hearted souls lie down in
     despair on this plateau, or retrace their steps to the dreary
     regions below, others declare that there is no necessity for
     failure. These push forward in the upward ascent, singing as they
     go:--

        "Though earth and hell the world gainsay,
          The word of God can never fail;
        The Lamb shall take my sins away,
          'Tis certain, though impossible;
        The thing impossible shall be,
        All things are possible to me.

     "So, persevering with our journey, higher up, very much higher up,
     we come to the sin-mastering stage.

     "This is a glorious plateau. All who enter it do so by the narrow
     passage of repentance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus
     Christ; receiving in their souls, as they pass the threshold, the
     delightful assurance of full and free forgiveness through the Blood
     of the Lamb.

     "Here men and women walk with heads erect in holy confidence, and
     hearts glad with living faith, and mouths full of joyous song, and
     eyes steadily fixed on the holy light that streams from the summit
     of the mount above them. That holy beacon guide is ever calling on
     them to continue their journey, and ever directing them on the way.

     "Those who have reached this stage have already made great and
     encouraging progress; for God has made them conquerors over their
     inward foes. The rule and reign of pride and malice, envy and lust,
     covetousness and sensuality, and every other evil thing have come
     to an end.

     "They triumph on that account, but the conflict is not yet ended.
     Sometimes the battling is very severe; but with patient, plodding
     faith they persevere in the ascent, singing as they  go:--

        "Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
          And looks to that alone;
        Laughs at impossibilities,
          And cries, 'It shall be done!'

     "And now, close at hand, is the stage of deliverance, where the
     triumph is begun.

     "And now, ten thousand Hallelujahs! let it be known to all the
     world around, that once on this plateau the separation from sin is
     entire; the heart is fully cleansed from evil; the promise is
     proved to be true, 'They that hunger and thirst after righteousness
     shall be filled.'

     "At a great Christian Conference the other day an eminent divine
     said that The Salvation Army believed in a 'perfect sinner,' but
     that he believed in a 'perfect Saviour.' This, I contend, was a
     separation of what God has joined together and which never ought to
     be put asunder. For, glory be to the Father, glory be to the Son,
     and glory be to the Holy Ghost, The Salvation Army believes, with
     its Lord, that a perfect Saviour can make a poor sinner into a
     perfect saint. That is, He can enable him to fulfil His own
     command, in which He says: 'Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
     Father which is in Heaven is perfect.' (_Matthew_ v. 48.)

     "But there is one plateau higher still which, like a tableland,
     covers the entire summit of the mountain, and that the maturity
     stage.

     "Here the graces of the Spirit have been perfected experience, and
     faith, and obedience, and the soul does the will of God as it is
     done in Heaven, united in the eternal companionship of that lovely
     being--the Spirit of Purity.

     "What do you say to my holy mountain, my comrades?

     "Are you living up there? Have you climbed as near to Heaven as
     that represents? If not, I want to make a declaration which you
     have often heard before, but which it will do you no harm to hear
     again, namely, that it is the will of God that you should not only
     reach the very summit, but that you should abide there.

     "Do you ask why God wills that you should reach and abide on this
     holy mountain?

     "I reply it is the will of God that you and I, and every other
     Officer in this blessed Army, should be holy for His own
     satisfaction.

     "God finds pleasure in holy men and holy women. We know what it is
     to find pleasure in kindred companions. It is to like to be near
     them. To want to live with them, or have them to live with us. It
     is to be willing to travel any distance, or put ourselves to any
     inconvenience to reach them. According to the Bible, that is just
     how God feels towards His faithful people. He finds satisfaction in
     their doings, and praying, and worship, and song. But when there is
     unfaithfulness or sin of any kind this pleasure is sadly marred, if
     not altogether destroyed. In such cases the pleasure is turned to
     pain, the satisfaction to loathing, and the love to hatred.

     "Hear what He says of Israel: 'In all their affliction He was
     afflicted, and the angel of His presence saved them; in His love
     and in His pity He bare them, and carried them all the days of
     old.' If for no other reason than the pleasure it will give to God,
     don't you think every Officer should, with all his might, seek for
     Holiness of heart and life?

     "Another reason why God wants you to live on that blessed mountain
     is the interest He feels in your welfare.

     "He loves you. He has told you so again and again. He has proved
     His love by His deeds. Love compels the being entertaining the
     affection to seek the good of its object. He knows that sin is the
     enemy of your peace, and must mean misery here and hereafter. For
     this reason among others, He wants to deliver you from it.

     "You will remember that by the lips of Peter God told the Jews that
     He had raised up His Son Jesus, and sent Him to bless them by
     turning every one of them away from his iniquities. That applies
     to you, my comrades. You have heard it before; I tell it you again.
     Holiness is the royal road to peace, contentment, and joy for you.
     The love God bears you, therefore, makes Him ceaselessly long after
     your Holiness of heart and life. Will you not let Him have His way?
     Will you not do His Will?

     "God wants every Officer to be holy, in order that through him He
     may be able to pour His Holy Spirit upon the people to whom that
     Officer ministers.

     "The men and women around you are in the dark. Oh, how ignorant
     they are of God and everlasting things! They cannot see the vile
     nature of the evil, and the foul character of the fiends that tempt
     and rule them. They do not see the black ruin that lies before
     them. So on they go, the blind leading the blind, till over the
     precipice they fall together. God wants their eyes to be opened.
     The Spirit can do the work, and through you He wants to pour the
     light.

     "The men and women around you are weak. They cannot stand up
     against their own perverted appetites, the charms of the world, or
     the devices of the Devil. God wants to pour the Spirit of Power
     upon this helpless crowd. But He wants holy people through whom He
     can convey that strength. He works His miracles by clean people.
     That is His rule.

     "There is nothing in the work of the early Apostles more wonderful
     than the miraculous manner in which they went about breathing the
     Spirit of Life and Light and Power on the people. But they were
     fully consecrated, Blood-and-Fire men and women.

     "What do you say, my comrades? Will you be holy mediums? Do you not
     answer, 'Thy will be done'?

     "God wants you to be holy, in order that you may reveal Him to the
     world by your example.

     "Men do not believe in God--that is, the real God--the God of the
     Bible; and they do not believe in Him, because they do not know
     Him.

     "He seeks to reveal Himself to men in various ways. He reveals
     Himself through the marvels of the natural world; and many say they
     can see God in the sun, and stars, and seas, and trees. He reveals
     Himself by speaking to men in their own hearts, and many hear His
     whisperings there. He reveals Himself in His own Book, and some
     read and ascertain what is His mind there.

     "But, alas! the great multitude are like children. They require to
     see and hear God revealed before their very eyes in visible and
     practical form before they will believe. And to reach these crowds,
     God wants men and women to walk about the world so that those
     around, believers and unbelievers alike, shall see the form and
     hear the voice of the living God; people who shall be so like Him
     in spirit, and life, and character as to make the crowds feel as
     though the very shadow of God had crossed their path. Will you be a
     shadow of God?

     "God wants you to be holy, in order that you may know what His mind
     is about the world, and about your work in it.

     "He entertains certain opinions and feelings with respect to it. He
     has His own plan for saving it. He wants to reveal to you what
     those opinions and feelings are, and to do this so far as it will
     be good for you and those about you. He wants you to know how you
     can best fight devils, convict sinners, save souls, and bless the
     world.

     "You can have this wonderful knowledge. Paul had it. He said 'We,'
     that is, I, 'have the mind of Christ.' God is no respecter of
     persons. He is as willing to reveal His mind to you, so far as you
     need it, as He was to reveal it to Paul.

     "But to possess this knowledge you must be holy. Sin darkens the
     understanding, and hinders the perception of truth. A grain of sand
     in the eye will prevent you seeing the most beautiful landscape in
     the universe, or the dearest friends you have. It is with the heart
     that men see divine things, and an atom of sin will darken the
     brightest vision that can come before you. With a pure heart you
     can not only see God's truth, but God Himself. Oh, God wants to
     reveal Himself to you. Will you let Him? But if He is to do so, you
     must have a clean heart.

     "It is God's will that you should be holy, because He wants you to
     be men and women of courage.

     "Courage is the most valuable quality in this War. There are few
     gifts of greater importance. Only think what it has enabled the
     Prophets, the Apostles, and the Salvation leaders of modern times
     to accomplish! How it covered Moses, and Joshua, and David, and
     Daniel, and Paul, and a crowd of others with glory, and enabled
     them to conquer men, and devils, and difficulties of all kinds. I
     shall have something more to say about this before I have done.

     "Courage and Holiness are linked closely together. You cannot have
     one without the other. Sin is the very essence of weakness. A
     little selfishness, a little insincerity, a little of anything that
     is evil means condemnation, and loss of courage, which means
     cowardice and failure.

     "'The wicked flee when no man pursueth.' Double-minded people are
     uncertain, fickle, unreliable in all their ways. 'The righteous are
     bold as a lion.' Remember Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego.

     "God wants you to be holy, in order that He may do mighty works
     through your instrumentality.

     "I verily believe that His arm is held back from working wonders
     through the agency of many Officers, because He sees that such
     success would be their ruin. The spirit of Nebuchadnezzar is in
     them. He cannot build Babylon, or London, or New York, or anything
     else by their instrumentality, because He sees it would create the
     spirit of vainglory and boasting, or of ambition; make them
     dissatisfied with their position; or otherwise curse them and those
     about them. Look at Saul. What a lesson his history has in it for
     us all. 'When thou wast little in thine own sight wast thou not
     made the head of the Tribes of Israel? and the Lord anointed thee
     king over Israel.'

     "Now, I may be asked whether some Officers do not fail to reach the
     higher ranges of the experience I have here described, and the
     reasons for this.

     "To this question I reply that I am afraid that it is only too true
     that some Officers are to be found who are willing to dwell in the
     land of uncertainty and feebleness. They are the slaves of habits
     they condemn in others. Their example is marred, their powers are
     weakened for their work, and, instead of going onward and upward to
     the victory they believe so gloriously possible, they are a
     disappointment to themselves, to God, and to their leaders.

     "If I am asked to name the reasons for their neglect of this
     glorious privilege, I would say:--

     "They have doubts about the possibility of living this life of
     Holiness.

     "They think there is some fatal necessity laid upon them to sin--at
     least a little, or just now and then. They think that God cannot,
     or that He will not, or that He has not arranged to save them
     altogether from their inward evils. They know that the Bible says,
     over and over again, in a thousand different ways, that the Blood
     of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin; and they read God's promise
     again and again, that He will pour out His Spirit upon them, to
     save them from all their idols and filthiness; but they doubt
     whether it is strictly true, or anyway, whether it applies to them.
     And so, tossed to and fro by doubts about this holy experience, no
     wonder that they do not seek to realise it in their own hearts.

     "Other Officers are kept back from climbing this mountain by the
     idea that the experience is not possible for them.

     "They say, 'Oh, yes, it is good, it is beautiful. I wish I lived up
     there. How delightful it must be to have peace flow like a river,
     and righteousness abound as the waves of the sea, and to be filled
     with the Spirit! But such a life is not for me.' They admit the
     possibility of Holiness in those about them, and occasionally they
     push it on their acceptance; but they fancy that there is something
     about their own case that makes it impossible, or, at least,
     overwhelmingly difficult, for them to attain it.

     "They imagine that there is something in their nature that makes it
     peculiarly difficult for them to be holy. Some peculiar twist in
     their minds. Some disagreeable disposition. Some bad, awkward
     temper. Some unbelieving tendency. Or, they are hindered by
     something that they suppose to be specially unfavourable in their
     circumstances--their family. Or, there is something in their
     history that they think is opposed to their living pure lives--they
     have failed in their past efforts, etc.

     "Anyway, there is, they imagine, some insurmountable obstacle to
     their walking with Christ in white, and, instead of striking out
     for the summit of the Holy Mountain in desperate and determined
     search, relying on God's word that all things are possible to him
     that believeth, they give up, and settle down to the notion that
     Holiness of heart and life is not for them.

     "Then, other Officers do not reach this experience because they do
     not seek it; that is, they do not seek it with all their hearts.

     "They do not climb.

     "They know that their Bible most emphatically asserts that those
     who seek heavenly blessings shall find them. No passage is more
     familiar to their minds or much more frequently on their lips, than
     the one spoken by Jesus Christ: 'Seek, and ye shall find.' And they
     condemn the poor sinner who lies rotting in the sins which will
     carry him to Hell, because he won't put forth a little effort to
     find deliverance. And yet, do not some Officers act very much after
     the same fashion with respect to this blessing?

     "In their efforts they are truly sincere, but they are not much
     more forward for them. They say 'It is not for me,' and settle down
     as they were.

     "The reason for this is not that the promise is not to them. But it
     is because they have not been thorough in their surrender; or
     because they have been wanting in their belief; or because they do
     not persevere; or because they have been mistaken in some past
     experience:--

     "Another reason why Officers do not find the blessing is the simple
     fact that they will not pay the price.

     "There is something they will not do; or there is something they
     will do; or there is something they will not part with; there is
     some doubtful thing that they will not give up. The sacrifice is
     too great. They think they would not be happy, or some one else
     would not be happy, or something would not be satisfactory; and so
     they look and look at the mountain, and long and long, but that is
     all. They would like to be there, but the price is too great.

     "Another reason why Officers fail is neither more nor less than
     their want of faith.

     "This, with sincere souls, is by far the most common hindrance. I
     have something to say about faith further on.

     "And, doubtless, the reason that some Officers fail to reach the
     upper levels of Mount Purity arises out of their mistaken views as
     to the nature of this experience.

     "You have so often heard me dwell on this view of the subject that
     I despair of saying anything fresh that will help you. But, knowing
     that I am on ground where truly sincere souls are often hindered, I
     will make one or two remarks:--

     "I have no doubt that many fail here by confounding temptation with
     sin.

     "They pray--they consecrate--they believe that they receive, and
     they rejoice. But by and by, when bad thoughts are suggested to
     their minds, they say to themselves, 'Oh, I can't be saved from
     sin, or I would not have all those wicked thoughts and suggestions
     streaming through my soul."

     "They confound temptation with sin. Whatever they may say about it,
     they do not see the difference existing between temptation and sin.

     "Some Officers are hindered in the fight for Holiness by supposing
     that purity will deliver them from serious depression, low spirits,
     and the like.

     "With many sincere souls I have no doubt that one of the most
     serious hindrances in this strife is the confounding of Holiness
     with happiness, and thinking that if they are holy they will be
     happy all the time; whereas the Master Himself was a Man of
     Sorrows, and lived, more or less, a life of grief.

     "Then there comes the last reason I shall notice, and that is the
     want of perseverance. There are some Officers who have been up the
     mountain--part of the way, at any rate, if not to the top. But
     through disobedience, or want of faith, they have no longer the
     experience they once enjoyed.

     "The condition. You say to sinners that they are never to give up.
     I do, at least. So with those who are seeking Holiness. They must
     persevere or they will never find it."




Chapter XXVIII

The General as a Writer



None of us have yet any idea how voluminous a writer The General was,
because so much of his writing was in the form of contributions to our
many publications, or of letters to Officers.

We can only insert here a few, specimens of what he wrote at various
dates, and remark that in private letters there was always the very same
flow of happy earnest life, the same high ideal as finds expression in
the following extracts. In his _Orders and Regulations for Field
Officers_ he says:--

     "It must always be remembered by the Field Officer, and by every
     one who is desirous of producing any great moral or spiritual
     changes in men, that the example of the individual attempting this
     task will be much more powerful than the doctrines they set forth,
     or any particular methods they adopt for teaching those doctrines,
     however impressive these may be.

     "The correctness of this statement has been proved over and over
     again in this Salvation War. Everywhere the people measure the
     truth and importance of what the Field Officer says by their
     estimate of his character. If he produces the impression in their
     minds that he is a mere talker or performer, they may listen to his
     message, and--if he has more than ordinary ability--treat him with
     a degree of respect; but if this be all, he will be next to
     powerless in effecting any great change in their hearts and lives.
     On the other hand, where the life of the Field Officer convinces
     his Soldiers that he is himself what he wants them to be, truly
     devoted to God, it will be found that he will possess a marvellous
     mastery over their hearts and characters. In other words, if he
     makes his Soldiers feel that he is real and consecrated, he will be
     able to lead them almost at will; they will follow him to the
     death.

     "The same shot, with the same charge of gunpowder, from a rifled
     cannon, will produce ten times a greater effect than from one with
     a smooth bore. The make of the gun gives the extra force to the
     shot. Just in the same way the truth from the lips of a man whom
     his hearers believe to be holy and true will strike with a
     hundredfold more force than the same message will from another who
     has not so commended himself. The character of the man gives the
     extra force to the truth.

     "The Field Officer, by virtue of his position, stands out before
     his Soldiers more prominently than any other man. To them he is the
     Ambassador and Representative of God. He is their Captain, their
     Brother, and Friend. Their eyes are on him night and day. They
     regard him as the pattern expressly set for them to copy, the
     leader who at all times it is their bounden duty to follow.

     "How important it is, therefore, that every Officer should be
     careful to perfect his character to the utmost in order that he may
     be useful to the fullest extent.

     "The Field Officer must lead his Soldiers on to the full
     realisation of the baptism of the Holy Ghost; he must make them
     Blood and Fire. The work of the Spirit is to fill the soul with
     burning zeal for the Salvation of the world. Christ's work must be
     finished. He has left that task to His people; it can only be
     continued and carried on to completion by His Spirit working in the
     hearts and through the lives of His people. The Holy Ghost was
     promised for this end. This is what His people have, therefore, a
     right to expect, and without it they are powerless for the War.

     "In order that his Soldiers may be effective, the Field Officer
     must not only act for the purification of his Soldiers, but to have
     them filled with the Spirit of Christ, in order that they may be
     competent for the mighty work they have to accomplish.

     "This will make them wise. They will understand how to fight, what
     to say, what to sing, how to pray, and how to talk to the
     consciences and hearts of men. The Spirit of God will lead them
     into right methods of action, will show them how to make
     opportunities, and how to put these opportunities to the best use,
     when they are made.

     "The Holy Spirit will give them perseverance, keeping them going on
     in the face of difficulty.

     "The Holy Spirit will give them power, making them not only
     willing to endure the Cross, but to glory in it.

     "The Holy Spirit will give them the fire of love, the seraphic
     spirit, the live coal from off the altar, making them both burn and
     shine. With this they will come to Knee-Drill, to the Open-Air, to
     face mocking crowds, and to endure the scorn, and hatred, and
     persecution of men; not merely from a sense of duty, dragging
     themselves to it, because it is the will of God; or for the good of
     The Army; or as an example to their comrades; or even for the
     Salvation of souls; but because they love it, and cannot stay away.

     "This baptism will be a fire in their bones, which must have vent.
     It will be a spirit that must have a voice. It will be a love, a
     burning love in the heart, which all the waters that earth and Hell
     can pour upon it, cannot quench a love with which no other love can
     compare. It will be the Saviour again loving a dying world through
     His people. It will be Christ indeed come again in the flesh.

     "The Soldiers must be baptised with fire. It will give them the
     Soldier's spirit; and, with that, all a Soldier needs in the way of
     drill, and duty, and sacrifice will inevitably follow."

In his _Letter to his Officers on his Eightieth Birthday_, he wrote:--

     "On the coming 10th of April, in many lands and in many ways, the
     Officers, Soldiers, and Friends of The Salvation Army will be
     celebrating my Eightieth Birthday.

     "The occasion is one which inspires in me many deep emotions; and,
     next to the gratitude I feel to Almighty God for the unmeasured
     blessings He has been pleased to vouchsafe to me, I find the desire
     to write and tell you, my dear Officers, something of the love and
     sympathy ever welling up in my heart towards you.

     "The times and friends of long ago are sometimes said to have been
     brighter or better than those of to-day. This may have been the
     experience of some. It has not been mine. It is true that in the
     early years of my Salvation Warfare there were battlings and
     victories of deep interest and value, but no conflicts or triumphs
     in those far-back times exceeded, or indeed equalled, in value and
     interest the conflicts and triumphs of my later days.

     "It is true that from the beginning I have been associated with
     many remarkable men and women--men and women whose ability,
     affection, and devotion to God have been of the greatest service to
     me. But with, perhaps, one or two exceptions, I have had no
     co-workers who have excelled, or even equalled, in ability, in
     affection or devotion, the Comrades who at the present hour are
     struggling with me all over the world for the highest well-being of
     their fellows, and for the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord
     Jesus Christ.

     "Sixty-five years ago I chose the Salvation of men and the
     extension of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ as the supreme object for
     which I would live and labour.

     "Although that choice was made in my early youth, in much ignorance
     of the world, and of the religious needs of those about me, still,
     it was not arrived at without much thought and some information;
     and that purpose is still, and will be to the end, the object which
     has shaped and mastered the thoughts, ambitions, and activities of
     my whole life.

     "From the hour of my first Prayer Meetings in one of the cottage
     homes of my native town, down to the present moment, that object
     has been the governing principle of my life. The adornments and
     flowers and music and other pleasant things connected with
     religious service have all been secondary to efficiency in the
     search for that object and success in attaining it.

     "My hourly usage with regard to every effort I put forth has been
     to ask myself: What does this action contemplate? What will it
     achieve? Can it be improved upon? I believe I can say that every
     conversation and prayer and song and address and Meeting I have had
     a hand in have been valued in proportion to their ability to
     promote the realisation of that great purpose.

     "No greater mistake can be made with respect to The Salvation Army
     than to suppose that it is not a school for thought. Perhaps more
     theories have been produced and more schemes invented by us for
     gaining the highest ends of the Christian faith (bearing in mind
     our age and the extent of our work) than by any other religious
     movement in existence. Indeed, as I have often said in public, when
     we have so many thousands of hearts inflamed with the love of
     Christ for sinning, suffering, and dying men, and possessed with a
     passionate desire for their rescue, you must have the constant
     evolution of new plans and contrivances for that purpose.

     "But, while thus inventive, The Army does not content itself with
     hopes and theories merely; it seeks to put every fresh idea to the
     test of practical application, waiting for the issue, before it
     regards it of permanent value. At least, that has been my own
     usage, and the practical character of my mind and work has come to
     be generally allowed.

     "While, then, I glory in the fact that our religion is Divine in
     origin and manifestation, I equally maintain the necessity for
     human skill, human energy, and human enterprise, in the efforts put
     forth to establish and extend it; and, accordingly, I have only
     adopted any efforts so far as they have proved themselves effective
     in the school of experience.

     "So with this confidence in my convictions I proceed once more to
     push them upon your attention."

In the _Orders and Regulations for Soldiers_, perhaps the concisest
description of earnest living ever written, he says:--

     "The Salvation Soldier must have been converted or changed by the
     power of the Holy Spirit from the old, worldly, selfish, sinful
     nature, to the new, holy, heavenly, Divine nature; and not only
     must he thus have received a new heart, but he must have the Holy
     Spirit living in that heart, possessing it, and working through it,
     to will and to do the good pleasure of God.

     "This is the first and main condition of Soldiership. It is
     understood that every Soldier has come into the possession of this
     true Religion by passing through that change which is usually
     described in The Army as being 'saved.' There is nothing more
     common throughout our ranks than! the expression, 'I am glad I am
     saved!'

     "As it is impossible for a Salvation Soldier to perform the duties
     hereafter set forth with satisfaction to himself, and profit to
     others, unless this change has been experienced, it will be well to
     describe it rather particularly, so that every Soldier who reads
     these Regulations will be able to satisfy himself whether he has
     really undergone this change.

     "If on reading this description, any Soldier should have reason to
     believe that he has not experienced this change, and is still in
     his sins, or that he has been unfaithful since he did realise it,
     and is, therefore, a backslider, the first business of such an one
     will be to go to God and seek Salvation; otherwise it will be
     impossible for him to be a good Soldier.

     "Salvation implies the devotion of the whole life to the
     accomplishment of the purpose for which Christ lived and suffered
     and died. It means that the Soldier becomes His disciple.

     "Enlisting in His Army, the Soldier receives not only power to walk
     in His commandments for himself, but to subdue other men to the
     Lord.

     "His new nature now continually cries out, 'What wilt Thou have me
     to do?' and carries him forth with the feet of cheerful obedience
     in the service of his new Master, to weep and suffer, and, if
     necessary, to die, to bring others into the enjoyment of the
     Salvation which he himself has found. He lives the same kind of
     life and is actuated by the same purposes as God Himself."

In _Religion for Every Day_ he writes:--

     "I am always talking to you about what we call religious duties,
     such as praying and singing, making efforts to save your own soul
     and the souls of the people about you. In these letters I propose
     speaking of the things that men call secular, and which many people
     reckon have nothing to do with Religion. But I want to show you, if
     I can, that the Salvationist's conduct ought, in every particular,
     to be religious; every meal he partakes of should be a sacrament;
     and every thought and deed a service done to God. In doing this you
     will see that I shall have to deal with many quite commonplace
     subjects; and, in talking about them, I shall try to be as simple
     and as practical as I possibly can.

     "The first topic to which I shall call your attention is your daily
     employment, and by that I mean the method by which you earn your
     livelihood. Or, supposing that, having some independent means of
     support, you are not compelled to labour for your daily bread, then
     I shall point out that special form of work, the doing of which
     Providence has plainly made to be your duty. Because it is
     difficult to conceive of any Salvationist who has not some regular
     employment, for which he holds himself responsible to God

     "Work is a good thing, my comrades. To be unemployed is generally
     counted an evil--any way, it is so in the case of a poor man; but
     it seems to me that the obligation to be engaged in some
     honourable and useful kind of labour is as truly devolved upon the
     rich as upon the poor, perhaps more so. Work is necessary to the
     well-being of men and women of every class, everywhere. To be
     voluntarily idle, in any rank or condition of life, is to be a
     curse to others and to be accursed yourself.

     "You would utterly condemn me if you thought that I engaged in my
     work in The Army merely to make a good show, or for some personal
     profit, and did not care about what God thought of the matter. My
     comrades, there are not two different standards of work--one for
     you and one for me. You must, therefore, be under the same
     obligation to do your work in the house or in the mine or in the
     warehouse, or wherever the Providence of God has placed you" to
     please your Heavenly Master, as I am on the platform, in the
     council chamber, or wherever my duty may call me.

     "But here another question arises. Do you accept Jesus Christ as
     your Master in the affairs of your daily life? If not, of course,
     this part of my argument will be thrown away; but if you do, then
     it will be the most powerful of all.

     "At the commencement of His ministry, Jesus Christ announced that
     He was about to establish the Kingdom of Heaven on the earth. By
     the Kingdom of Heaven He meant a Kingdom consisting of heavenly
     government, heavenly laws, heavenly obedience, heavenly power,
     heavenly love, heavenly joy. These, taken together, constitute the
     chief characteristics of this Kingdom, and instead of being
     confined, as it had been hitherto, to a handful of people in
     Jerusalem and Judea, it was to cover the whole earth.

     "Now the subjects of that Kingdom must accept Jesus Christ as their
     Master and Lord. No one can either come into that Kingdom or remain
     in it without compliance with this law. You cannot be a son without
     being a servant.

     "But you have written yourselves down as His servants, and said you
     will 'no longer live unto yourselves,' nor to please the world, but
     to do the will of Him who has redeemed you; that is, to please Him.
     Now the Master's province, everybody knows, is, not only to choose
     the work of His servants, but to get it done, if possible, to His
     satisfaction.

     "He has appointed me my work. He has arranged that I should direct
     the movements of this great Army, preach Salvation, write Letters
     for you to read, save as many sinners as I can, and strive to get
     my Soldiers safely landed on the Celestial Shore. Before all else,
     I must do this Work, as nearly as I can, to satisfy my Lord--and
     nothing short of the best work I can produce will accomplish that.

     "And as with me so with you. He has chosen your work, if you have
     put your life into His hands, just as truly as He has chosen mine,
     although it may be of a different kind. I am writing this letter in
     the train. I am a poor writer at best. When I was a child my
     schoolmaster neglected to teach me to hold my pen properly. In this
     respect he did not do good work, and I have had to suffer for it
     ever since. Still, I am doing my work as well as I can, in order
     that it may profit you and please my Lord.

     "In settling how much work he will do, a man must have due regard
     to the claims of his own health. If he rushes at his work without
     due discretion, and does more than his strength will reasonably
     allow, he will probably break down, and so prevent his working
     altogether, or for a season, at least. Whereas, if he exhausts no
     more energy than he can recover by sleep and food and rest, at the
     time he can go steadily forward, and by doing so, accomplish a
     great deal more, in the long run, than he would by temporary
     extravagant exertion. When speaking on this subject, I sometimes
     say that I use my body as I should use a horse, if I had one--that
     is, I should not seek to get the most labour out of him for a week,
     regardless of the future, but I should feed and manage him with a
     view to getting the most I could get out of him all the year round.
     That is, doubtless, the way a man should use his body, and to do
     this he should take as much time for his food and daily rest as is
     necessary to replace the energies he has used up by his work.

     "In the leisure taken for this purpose, it will be necessary to
     have specified hours, as otherwise, those who are without principle
     will take advantage of the weak, and anything like system will be
     impossible.

     "Then, again, when the proper performance of a particular task
     depends upon the united labour of a number of individuals, who have
     agreed to work in co-operation, it will be necessary, in the
     interests of the whole, that each should conform to the regulations
     laid down, always supposing that such rules are in harmony with
     truth and righteousness.

     "The wishes and interests of employers have also to be taken into
     consideration. But, in every case, the principle is equally
     obligatory upon all.

     "These duties will demand, and must have devoted to them, a
     measure of the time at our control. What that amount of time shall
     be, must be determined by the relative importance of those duties.
     For instance:--

     "There is the work a man can do for his earthly employers, over and
     above the amount that is considered to be a strict and just return
     for his wages. Here, again, he must be guided by Jesus Christ's
     rule, and to do unto his master as he would that his master should
     do unto him.

     "There is the work that he ought to do for his family, apart and
     beyond the bare earnings of their daily bread. This is work which
     no one else can do so well, and which, if it be neglected by him,
     will probably not be done at all.

     "There is the effort that every workman should put forth for his
     own personal improvement. For instance, a youth of seventeen works,
     we will say, ten hours a day for his employer, who would very much
     like him to put in another hour at the same task, and would be
     willing to pay him extra for doing so. This, we will suppose, the
     youth could do without any injurious effect to his health. But
     then, by reading his Bible, or cultivating his mind, he might
     qualify himself to become an Officer, or to fill some other
     important position, in either case fitting himself for a field of
     greater usefulness, in the future, than the one he already
     occupies. Under such circumstances, it must be the duty of that
     youth to take that hour for his own improvement, rather than to use
     it to enrich his master or increase his earnings.

     "Then, every Soldier of Jesus Christ must duly consider and obey
     the claims of the Salvation War. That is, he must strive to take
     his fair share in that conflict. Whether he is his own master,
     having the direct control of his time, or whether he works for an
     employer, who only allows him many hours for leisure, he must
     conscientiously devote much of that time as he can to saving his
     fellow-men, settling this question, he must use his common sense,
     and claim the promised direction of the Holy Spirit. God will guide
     him.

     "What I protest against here is the notion, born of indolence and
     selfishness, which affirms that we should do little, rather than as
     much, work as is consistent with the maintenance of health, and
     with the claims arising out of the relations in which we stand to
     those about us.

[Illustration: {Handwriting}

Soldiers. God and a sinning suffering world cal you to rise up and meet
your great opportunity. Do it and do it with your might.

For the present I must say farewell; but always think of ****

Your affectionate General
Williams S. Booth

Cape Town,
_October 12, 1908_

AN AUTOGRAPH MESSAGE FROM THE GENERAL]

     "However, circumstances will transpire, during the earthly career
     of every one of us, calling for self-sacrificing work that must be
     performed, regardless of consequences to health or any other
     interest.

     "Supposing, by way of illustration, a ship has sprung a leak,
     through which the water is rushing rapidly in, endangering the
     lives of both the passengers and crew. Under such conditions, would
     not every man on board be justified in working night and day to
     prevent the threatened calamity? Nay, further, would not the laws
     of humanity call upon every one concerned to do so at the risk of
     crippling themselves, or even sacrificing life itself, in order to
     gain the greater good of saving the vessel from destruction, and
     rescuing a number of their fellows from a watery grave?

     "My contention then, is, that whether in the shop or on the ship,
     in the parlour or in the kitchen, in the factory or in the field,
     on the Salvation platform or in the coal mine, whether Officers or
     Soldiers, we are all alike, as servants of God, under the
     obligation to do all we possibly can in the service of men; and to
     do it with the holy motive of pleasing our Heavenly Master.

     "Here let me review my warrant for requiring from you the kind of
     loving labour that I advocate.

     "The Bible enjoins it. We have already quoted Paul's words to the
     Ephesians, in which he says that our work is to be done, 'Not with
     eye-service as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
     the will of God from the heart; with goodwill doing service, as to
     the Lord, and not to men.' That is all I ask for.

     "It is enjoined by the doctrine of brotherly love. I cannot
     understand how any one can suppose, for a moment, that he is living
     a life acceptable to God unless he is striving, with all his might,
     to fulfil the Divine command, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
     thyself.' Your master, or whoever has a claim upon your service,
     must be included in the term 'neighbour'; and to comply with the
     command of the Saviour, you must work for that master, or mistress,
     as the case may be, from the voluntary principle of love rather
     than the earthly and selfish principle of gain.

     "Is not the disinterested method I am urging upon you in keeping
     with the loftiest ideals the world possesses with respect to work?
     About whom does it write its poetry? Whom does it laud to the
     heavens in the pulpit, on the platform, and in the Press? Whose
     names does it describe the highest in its Temples of Fame, or hand
     down to posterity as examples for rich and poor, old and young
     alike, to follow? Is it the man who makes his own ease and
     enrichment his only aim in life, and who toils and spins for
     nothing higher than his own gratification? Nothing of the kind. It
     is the generous, self-sacrificing, disinterested being who uses
     himself up for the benefit of his fellows.

     "Nay, at whom does that same world ceaselessly sneer, and whom does
     it most pitilessly despise? Is it not the mean and narrow spirit
     whose conduct is governed by selfish greed and sensual indulgences?
     Whatever may be its practice, in this respect, the sentiment of the
     world is in the right direction. It asks for benevolence evidenced
     by unselfish labour, and admires it when it finds it.

     "A paragraph went the round of the newspaper world, a little time
     back, describing how an American millionaire had decided to spend
     the rest of his days on a Leper Island in the Pacific Ocean, in
     order to labour for the amelioration of the miseries of its
     unfortunate inhabitants. Wonder and admiration everywhere greeted
     the announcement.

     "Shall we go back on all this spirit of self-sacrifice? Shall this
     kind of thing die out, or only have an existence in poetry books,
     platform quotations, or anecdote collections? Shall we change over
     to the 'pound-of-flesh' principle, and hire out the work of our
     hands, the thoughts of our minds, and the burning passions of our
     souls, for the largest amount of filthy lucre, and the greatest
     measure of earthly comfort, that we can obtain for them; so
     justifying the lying libel on humanity, long since spoken, and
     still often sneeringly quoted, that every man has his price? Or
     shall we say that love--the love of God and man--is the highest and
     divinest motive of labour--a motive possible not only to the sons
     and daughters of genius, but accessible to the plainest, humblest
     man or woman who suffers and toils on the lowest round of the
     ladder of life.

     "I argue in favour of this doctrine on the ground of its
     profitableness to the worker. My readers will probably have asked
     long before this, How far do these propositions harmonise with the
     interests of the servant? Ought he not to take his own well-being
     into account? Certainly. He must have just as true a regard for his
     own welfare and the welfare of those dependent upon him, as he has
     for that of others. The command, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
     thyself,' can only be rightly interpreted by another, like unto
     it, which reads: 'Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you do
     ye even so to them.' Therefore, he must ask, that others should do
     unto him as he would do unto them, supposing they occupied changed
     positions. This must mean that, while righteously concerned for the
     interests of others, he must be reasonably concerned for his own.

     "But here a little difficulty comes into our argument, arising out
     of the play of the higher motives of affection. What does love care
     for gain in its calculations of service? The husband who loves his
     wife as Christ loved the Church, does not stop to consider the
     claims of duty, or the advantages following its discharge in
     toiling for her welfare. He will be willing to die for her, as
     Christ died for the Church.

     "He does not say, 'I will toil for my delicate wife, and deny
     myself pleasant things, in order to obtain for her the necessaries
     and comforts she requires, because she would do the same for me, if
     I were in her place and she in mine.' Nothing of the kind! The wife
     I spoke of, who told me the other day that she had not had her
     clothes off for seventeen days and nights in nursing her husband
     did not make it appear that she thought she was doing anything
     extraordinary, or that she rendered this service to her companion
     in life because she felt sure that had he been the wife and she the
     husband, he would have gladly done the same for her.

     "Had the newspapers thought that the American millionaire was going
     to the Leper Island, with his gold, to make something out of it for
     himself and family, or to make a name in the world, instead of his
     being greeted with a chorus of admiration, there would have been a
     universal chorus of execration at his selfishness. It was because
     they believed that he was going to make the sacrifice of his own
     gain, if not of his own self, for the benefit of the poor
     sufferers, that they praised him.

     "Supposing, however, that we come down to the low level of
     self-interest, we insist then, that those who work from the motive
     of love, rather than the motive of gain, will not necessarily be
     sufferers in consequence, so far as this world goes. But it may be
     asked, 'Will not unprincipled masters or mistresses be likely to
     take advantage of this docile and unselfish spirit?' Perhaps, nay,
     doubtless, in many cases, they will. The Salvation Army has been
     taken advantage of all through its past history, and so have all
     the true saints of God, because they have submitted to wrong, and
     have not fought the injustice and false representations and
     persecutions inflicted upon them from the beginning. It will
     possibly be so to the end, but that does not affect the principle
     for which I argue, which is, that we _must_ do good work, and as
     much of it as we can, regardless of what the world may give us in
     return.

     "But, I think, I have sufficiently shown, as I have gone along,
     that this class of service is not without its earthly rewards, and
     that every interest of human nature--selfish and otherwise
     alike--testify to the probability of its proving profitable to
     those who practise it.

     "If, however, the reward does not come in the form of money, or
     houses, or lands, there will be gain in that which is far more
     valuable than money and houses and lands, and which money and
     houses and lands cannot buy. There will be the gain in peace, in
     satisfaction, and in joy in the Holy Ghost in this life, to say
     nothing of the gain in the world to come. But, on this point, I
     shall have more to say another time.

     "I remember hearing a gentleman relate the following incident in a
     large meeting: 'Some time back,' he said, 'I was passing through
     the streets of Liverpool. It was a cold, raw, wintry day. The
     streets were ankle-deep in an unpleasant mixture of mud and ice,
     and battling through it all, the came along a little procession of
     ragged, haggard, hungry looking boys. Splash, splash, on they went,
     through freezing slush, at every step making the onlookers
     shudddered as they stood by in their warm, comfortable coats and
     furs." In the front rank was a little fellow, who was scarcely more
     than a bag of bones, half-naked, barefooted, his whole frame
     shivering every time he put his foot down on the melting snow.

     "'All at once, a big boy came forward, and, stooping down, bade the
     lad put his arms round his neck, and, lifting him up on his back,
     took his perished feet one in each hand and jogged along with his
     burden.

     "'I was moved,' said the speaker, 'at the sight; and going up to
     the boy, commended him for his kindness. In his Lancashire brogue
     the lad replied, "Aye, aye, sir; two feet in the cold slush are
     not so bad as four." After a while,' said the speaker, 'I offered
     to carry the little chap myself" but the honest fellow shook his
     head, and said, "Nay, nay,' Mister; I winna part with him. I can
     carry him; and he's a-warming o' my back."'

     "And so, if seeking the good of others may not bring as much
     worldly gain as a selfish course of action, it does ensure that
     joyful warmth of heart which all loving service brings, and which
     is among the most valuable of all the treasures of earth or Heaven.
     Every man who acts on this principle is adding to the general sum
     of human happiness. What is the sum of celestial happiness, the
     happiness of God, the happiness of the angels, the happiness of the
     Blood-washed spirits who are safely landed there? In what does this
     happiness chiefly consist?

     "I reply, Not in the golden streets, the unfading flowers, the
     marvellous music, nor all the other wonders of the Celestial Land
     put together, but in Love. Love is the essence of the bliss of
     Heaven, for 'Love is Heaven, and Heaven is Love.' This happiness we
     can have below. It is not the love others bear to us that makes our
     felicity, but the love we bear to them; and, thank God, we can as
     truly love on earth as we can in Heaven.

     "And then, as I have been saying all along, acting on this
     principle constitutes true religion. As labour done from selfish,
     fleshly motives is of the earth, and as the results which follow it
     will perish with the earth, even so labour done to bless mankind
     and to please God is Divine, and the results flowing out of it must
     be everlasting honour and joy. Where this principle is carried into
     effect, every part of human conduct becomes religious--nay, a
     positive act of Divine worship, and an acceptable song of praise."




Important Events Connected With The General's Life And Work


1827.  Jan. 17th  Catherine Mumford--afterwards Mrs Booth--born at
                  Ashbourne, Derbyshire

       Apr. 10th  William Booth born at Nottingham.

1844.             Conversion of Catherine Mumford and William Booth.

1852.  Apr. 10th  William Booth entered the Methodist Ministry.

1855.  June 16th  Marriage of William Booth and Catherine Mumford.

1856.  March 8th  Birth of William Bramwell (now General) Booth.

1859.             Mrs. Booth's first pamphlet "Female Ministry" published.

1861.             Commenced to travel as Revivalist.

1865.  July 5th   Commenced Mission Work in East of London.

                  First Headquarters opened in Whitechapel Road.

1868.             Christian Mission commenced work in Scotland.

1870.             Publication of "How to reach the Masses" by the Rev. W.
                  Booth.

1875.             Publication of the first volume of music.

1878.             First Deed Poll, signed legally, constituting The
                  Christian Mission.

 "     Xmas.      The name of the Christian Mission altered to The
                  Salvation Army, and the Rev. William Booth assume the
                  title of General.

                  First Corps flag presented by Mrs. Booth.

                  "Practical Christianity" by Mrs. Booth published.

1879.  Dec. 29th  Publication of the first number of the "War Cry."

                  Formation of the first Salvation Army Band at Consett.

1880.             Headquarters removed to Queen Victoria Street.

                  Opening of the work in the United States and Australia.

                  Opening of first Training College.

                  Publication of first "Orders and Regulations."

                  "Godliness," by Mrs. Booth, published.

1881.             Work extended to France.

                  First number of the "Little Soldier" issued.

1882.             Opening of the Congress Hall and International Training
                  College at Clapton.

                  Marriage of W. Bramwell Booth and Captain Florence
                  Soper.

                  Work extended to Switzerland, Canada, Sweden and India.

                  Publication of "Life and Death" by Mrs. Booth.

                  First Prison-Gate Home opened in London.

1883.             Work extended to South Africa and New Zealand.

1884.             "The Training of Children," by the General, published.

                  First Band Journal issued.

                  First Rescue Home opened.

1885.             "All the World" first published.

                  Criminal Law Amendment Act passed.

                  Trial and acquittal of W. Bramwell Booth.

1886.             Death of The Army's first French Martyr.

                  The General paid his first visit to France, the United
                  States and Canada.

                  First International Congress held in London.

                  Work extended to Germany.

                  "Musical Salvationist" published.

                  Self-Denial Week established.

                  First "Orders and Regulations for Field Officers"
                  published, and first "Orders and Regulations for Staff
                  Officers" published.

1887.             Thousand British Corps established.

                  First Slum Settlement established.

                  Work extended to Holland, Denmark and Zululand.

                  First Crystal Palace Anniversary Demonstration.

                  Auxiliary League founded.

                  General paid his first visit to Denmark, Sweden and
                  Norway.

                  "Popular Christianity," by Mrs. Booth, published.

1888.             First Food Depot opened at Limehouse.

                  Work extended to Norway, Argentine, Finland and Belgium.

 "    June 21st.  Mrs. Booth gave her last public address.

1889.             The Petition for the Sunday Closing of Public-houses,
                  with 436,500 signatures, presented to the House of
                  Commons by the General.

                  Publication of "The Deliverer."

                  General visited Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and France.

1890.             25th Anniversary of The Army celebrated at the Crystal
                  Palace.

        Oct. 4th. Mrs. Booth's Death.

 "       "  13th. Funeral Service at Olympia--36,000 present.

 "       "  14th. Funeral at Abney Park.

                  Publication of "In Darkest England" by the General.

1891.             Work extended to Italy and Uruguay.

                  General first visited South Africa, Australia, New
                  Zealand and India.

                  L1,000. 0. 0. subscribed for "Darkest England" Scheme.

                  General signed "Darkest England" Trust Deed.

                  Opening of Industrial and Land Colony at Hadleigh, Essex.

                  Publication of "Social Gazette."

1892.             General visited Denmark, Germany and Switzerland.

                  Publication of "Life of Catherine Booth."

1892.             Work extended to West Indies.

1893.             General visited Denmark, Sweden, Belgium, Holland and
                  Norway.

1894.             International Congress, in connection with the General's
                  Jubilee, held in London.

                  General visited America and South European Countries.

                  Work extended to Java.

1895.             General visited South Africa, Australia and various
                  European Countries.

                  Work extended to Japan and British Guiana.

                  Naval and Military League established.

1896.             General visited Germany, Sweden, Switzerland and Denmark.
                  Preached to 12,000 in Kings Gardens, Copenhagen.

                  First Salvation Army Exhibition--Agricultural Hall,
                  London.

                  Work extended to Malta.

1897.             General inspected work in European countries.

1898.             General visited United States, Canada and European
                  countries.

                  "Orders and Regulations for Social Officers" published.

1899.             Second Salvation Army Exhibition--Agricultural Hall.

                  Visited Australia, New Zealand, Ceylon and European
                  countries.

                  Officers sent to the front to work amongst both sides in
                  the South African War.

1900.             General visited European countries.

1901.             General visited European countries.

                  Opening of first Inebriates' Home at Hadleigh.

1902.             General visited United States, Canada and European
                  countries.

                  Publication of "Religion for Everyday" by the General.

1903.             General visited America, Canada and European countries.

                  Received by President Roosevelt.

1904.  June 24th. The General received by His Majesty, King Edward the
                  Seventh, at Buckingham Palace.

 "     June 25th. International Congress opened by the General in London.

 "     July 23rd. General received by Her Majesty, Queen Alexandra, at
                  Buckingham Palace.

          August. Commenced his Motor Campaign.

                  Work extended to Panama.

                  General visited various European countries.

1905.             General visited Palestine, Australia and various
                  European countries.

                  First Emigration Ship sails from Liverpool for Canada
                  with 1,000 emigrants.

                  The General created Honorary D.C.L., Oxford.

                  General received Freedom Cities of London and
                  Nottingham.

1906              Establishment of Anti-Suicide Bureau.

                  General conducted lengthy Campaigns Continental
                  countries.

1907.             General visited Japan, America, Canada etc.

                  General received by Kings of Denmark and Norway, and
                  Queen of Sweden, and Emperor of Japan.

1908.             Work extended to Korea.

                  General visited South Africa.

1909.             General visited Russia, Finland and other European
                  countries.

                  General received by Kings of Norway and Sweden.

                  General received by Prince and Princess of Wales, now
                  King and Queen of England.

                  General received by Queen Alexandra and the Dowager
                  Empress of Russia.

                  80th Birthday Celebration at Albert Hall, London.

                  Met with accident involving loss of sight of one eye.

1910.             General visited various European countries.

1911.             General visited Italy and other European countries.

                  General conducted International Social Council in
                  London attended by Officers from all over the world.

1912.             General visited North European Staff Council in Norway.

 "   May 23rd.    Operation on remaining eye, followed by complete loss
                  of sight.

 "   Aug. 20th.   The General laid down his Sword.




Footnotes



A. The general tendency towards indifference quite as much as the better
impulses of our age have produced such a toning down of the teachings of
Calvin, both in and out of Switzerland, that it may be startling to some
to be reminded that, except the Lutheran and Methodist, every Church
still has in its list of Doctrines those of Election and Predestination.
If it were true that every human being was predestined, before birth,
either to a good or a bad life, there would, of course, be no meaning in
a Saviour or a Gospel; and we can understand the indignation of this
honest lad, when he was asked to undertake to teach such things. He
never learned how to reconcile the profession of a set of doctrines one
does not believe with any religion. The recollection of this incident
helped him in limiting to the utmost possible extent, the Doctrinal
Declarations of The Army. But whatever he asked any one to subscribe to
he expected them truly to believe and earnestly to teach.


1. Transcriber's note: In the original, the words "in the United States
and Denmark, yet it will only make" were repeated. The entire paragraph,
with original linebreaks preserved, read:

    This may possibly seem specially and curiously unfair
    in the United States and Denmark, yet it will only make
    in the United States and Denmark, yet it will only make
    the principle of this omission from The General's own
    records and ours the more clear.

The repeated line has been removed since this is clearly a printer's
error.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Authoritative Life of General
William Booth, by George Scott Railton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENERAL WILLIAM BOOTH ***

***** This file should be named 13958.txt or 13958.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/9/5/13958/

Produced by PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
