The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifty-Two Story Talks To Boys And Girls
by Howard J. Chidley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Fifty-Two Story Talks To Boys And Girls

Author: Howard J. Chidley

Release Date: November 28, 2004 [EBook #14188]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALKS TO BOYS AND GIRLS ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Fifty-Two Story Talks

TO BOYS AND GIRLS


BY

REV. HOWARD J. CHIDLEY, B.D.

PASTOR TRINITY CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,

EAST ORANGE, NEW JERSEY



GARDEN CITY, NEW YORK

DOUBLEDAY, DORAN & COMPANY, INC.



Copyright, 1914 by

GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




TO

MY DAUGHTER

Elizabeth




FOREWORD


No department of Christian literature is of more importance for the
future of the Church than that which seeks to enlist the children in the
service of Christ. Mr. Chidley, by his gifts and experience as a pastor
and a teacher of the young, is eminently fitted to contribute towards
this most vital phase of Christian activity. His successful career in
the Central Congregational Church of Brooklyn, where I shared the
privilege of his valuable co-operation, and in the Trinity Church of
East Orange, New Jersey, of which he is now the beloved and honored
pastor, bespeak the merits of this series of addresses to Boys and
Girls. They are at once an efficient protest against the Protestant
neglect of the young and a remedy for that neglect. Parents,
instructors, and guardians of the juvenile members of our Churches will
be wise to read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest the teachings and
exhortations presented here. It is a book of absorbing interest, and
the little folks and those of older years can not fail to be both
profited and delighted by it. The revolution in Christian thought
concerning the relation of children to the Church and the Kingdom of God
is apparent on every page. Dr. Martineau averred that children do not
require to be led so much as not to be misled, and in these "Fifty-two
Stories" we have a model application of his weighty aphorism. The
receptive and expansive hours of child nature are admirably considered,
and what is here written has a direct bearing upon its spiritual
development and welfare.

S. PARKES CADMAN.

      _The Parish House,_
_Central Congregational Church,_
  _Brooklyn, N.Y., March 2, 1914._




CONTENTS

                                      PAGE
INTRODUCTION                          xiii
A BIBLE RIDDLE                           3
CLOSED GATES                             6
HIRING A COACHMAN                        9
THE FIERCEST THING IN THE BIBLE         11
SACRIFICE HITS                          13
THE LIBERTY OF OBEDIENCE                15
CUTTING CORNERS                         18
HABITS                                  20
A LESSON IN COURTESY                    23
LITTLE FOXES                            25
A TRICKY OX                             28
"SHINE INSIDE"                          30
THE STORM KING EAGLE                    33
A DOG WHICH ATE THE BIBLE               35
STEAM AND SAILS                         37
A FISH-STORY                            39
OPPORTUNITY                             41
GOD IS NOW HERE                         43
DAVID LIVINGSTONE'S FAITH               45
THE HAPPY MAN                           47
A SERMON FOR THE BOYS                   49
TIRE-TROUBLE                            51
WATCHING FOR IDLE BOYS                  53
CHRIST AND THE DOG                      55
THE BOY WHO WAS TO BE MANAGER           58
A TALE ABOUT WORDS                      61
SUFFOCATED TREES                        64
ULYSSES AND THE SIRENS                  66
POISON-LABELS                           68
LIES THAT WALK                          71
WELLINGTON AND THE SOLDIER              73
ABRAHAM'S GUEST                         75
ABOUT GENEROSITY                        78
SUN AND WIND                            80
THE BOY AND THE TURTLE                  82
THE BOY AND THE NICKEL                  84
THE THREE FATES                         86
THE INCH-WORM AND THE MOUNTAIN          88
THE FRENCH DRUMMER-BOY                  91
A KING IN THE STUFF                     93
BREAD AND WINE                          96
THE FIRST CHRISTMAS CAROL               98
A HINT FROM A CARIBOU                  100
THE REPENTANCE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON       103
EASTER                                 105
THE WHISPERING GALLERY                 108
THE HE-SAID GIRL                       111
ON DECK                                113
THE TERROR BY NIGHT                    116
THE BRAMBLE BUSH KING                  119
WHERE IS HEAVEN?                       122
THE CHRISTIAN ARMY                     124




INTRODUCTION


In a certain Western university the president receives a salary of ten
thousand dollars a year for training young men and young women, while
not many miles distant from that university is a stock-farm the
superintendent of which receives a salary of twelve thousand dollars for
training high-bred colts. That colt-trainer is at hand when the colt is
foaled, and before it rises to its feet has rubbed down its head and put
a halter upon it, so that from birth it shall be accustomed to the
feeling of the halter.

From that time the training of the colt is not suspended for a moment.
If in training it to travel in harness a piece of paper should blow
across the training-course, causing the colt to shy, an assistant holds
the paper on the opposite side of the road, so that the animal shall
have the kink taken out of its nervous system and its tendency to shy
again in the same direction be at once corrected.

The old method was to allow a colt to run wild until two or three years
of age, then "break it in." The result was apt to be either a "cowed"
animal or a nervous horse.

Would that we were manifesting as much wisdom in the religious training
of our children as that horse-trainer. But unfortunately we are pursuing
largely the old method, allowing our children to get full of all sorts
of mental kinks up through those first plastic three or four years, and
then handing them over to the church kindergarten-teacher for one hour a
week, expecting her to straighten out all these aberrations and give
back to the parents a normally religious child.

Many parents seem to assume that the child's brain is lying dormant
during those first few years, when, as a matter of fact, the child's
mind during these years is most receptive, and expanding at a rate never
after equalled. The nervous system is receiving impressions which,
though in after-years the child has no _conscious_ memory of it, are yet
indelibly chiselled there for good or ill.

It is high time that parents and religious teachers took more
cognizance than they do of this fact.

There are other parents who deliberately refuse to give their children
any religious training during this period for fear of "unduly
influencing" them from the religious standpoint. This point of view is
stated, whether seriously or not, in the following quotation from a
recent writer: "I think it is a bad thing to be what is known as
'brought up,' don't you? Why should we--poor, helpless little children,
all soft and resistless--be squeezed and jammed into the iron bands of
parental points of view? Why should we have points of view at all? Why
not for those few divine years when we are still so near God, leave us
just to wonder? We are not given a chance. On our pulpy little minds our
parents carve their opinions, and the mass slowly hardens, and all those
deep, narrow, up-and-down strokes harden with it, and the first thing
the best of us have to do on growing up is to waste precious time
beating at the things, to try to get them out. Surely the child of the
most admirable and wise parents is richer with his own faulty but
original point of view than he would be fitted out with the choicest
selections of maxims and conclusions that he did not have to think out
for himself. I could never be a schoolmistress. I should be afraid to
teach the children. They know more than I do. They know how to be happy,
how to live from day to day, in godlike indifference to what may come
next. And is not trying to be happy the secret we spend our lives trying
to guess? Why, then, should I, by forcing them to look through my stale
eyes, show them, as through a dreadful magnifying-glass, the terrific
possibilities, the cruel explosiveness of what they had been lightly
tossing across the daisies, and thinking they were only toys?"

All of which sounds very pretty, but when simmered down, the wisdom, if
wisdom it be, of a statement like that can be compressed into the old
adage, "Where ignorance is bliss 'tis folly to be wise." But the point
is that the world has pretty generally come to the conclusion that
bliss is not necessarily the most healthful thing, either for adults or
children. "Soft and resistless!" Precisely, there is the crux. If these
"soft and resistless" minds do not receive good impressions they will
receive bad ones, and it is the part of wisdom to get the good in first.
Where a mind is "to let," some sort of tenant is sure to occupy.

Coleridge put the case in a nutshell when an English deist inveighed
bitterly against the rigid instruction of Christian homes. The deist
said: "Consider the helplessness of a little child. Before it has wisdom
or judgment to decide for itself, it is prejudiced in favour of
Christianity. How selfish is the parent who stamps his religious ideas
into a child's receptive nature, as a moulder stamps the hot iron with
his model! I shall prejudice my children neither for Christianity nor
for Buddhism, nor for Atheism, but allow them to wait for their mature
years. Then they can open the question and decide for themselves." Later
Coleridge led his friend into the garden, and then whimsically
exclaimed: "How selfish is the gardener to ruthlessly stamp his
prejudice in favour of roses, violets and strawberries into a receptive
garden-bed. The time was when in April I pulled up the young weeds,--the
parsley, the thistles,--and planted the garden-beds out with vegetables
and flowers. Now I have decided to permit the garden to go until
September. Then the black clods can choose for themselves between
cockleburrs, currants and strawberries." The deist saw the point.

Another weakness in our system of religious training for children is
manifest at the adolescence-period of the child. We have been in the
habit of allowing the child to consider the Bible-school as his church.
We send him to the Bible-school in his very early years, but make no
demands upon him as far as specific church-attendance is concerned. And
at the kindergarten-period we are probably wise in this; for after the
child has attended kindergarten for an hour, it is too great a tax upon
him to require him to sit through an hour's church-service. But after
the kindergarten-period it seems to me the plain duty of parents to
encourage the child to attend church, though not necessarily for the
entire service; for if the child does not establish a church-going
_habit_ during these plastic years, the probability is that he will
never form it. This partially explains why there is such a leakage
between the Bible-school and the church. When the child gets "too old
for Bible-school," not having formed the church-going habit, he is
stranded

  "Between two worlds,
  One dead, the other powerless to be born."

And the result is he drifts away from the Church.

In the endeavour to remedy this situation in his own Church it has been
the custom of the writer to have all children from seven to twelve years
of age in the Bible-school, which meets on Sunday morning before church,
attend the morning worship for the first fifteen minutes. During this
time they hear the Call to Worship, the Invocation, the Lord's Prayer,
the Children's Sermon, and the Anthem by the choir. At the close of the
anthem the children file out with their teachers as the adult
congregation rises for the Responsive Lesson. In this way the children
are establishing a church-going habit, with the result that they early
begin to feel that something is wrong on Sunday if they have not been to
church.

A word as to the content of the sermons preached. I believe that a
child's religion ought to be largely of the motor type. That is, it
should be concerned with getting religion into the child's hands and
feet. In other words, it should seek to establish in him a habit of
right-doing. For this reason his religion should be of the most
practical sort, leaving the theory to come later. He should have
sufficient theological pegs to hang his morality on, but he should be
troubled little with dogma. For this reason his religion will probably
have largely to do with the here and now. He cannot be much interested
in an other-worldly religion. The normal child at this period will not
sing with any great enthusiasm "I want to be an angel." For this world
is to him just then a very interesting and fascinating place. He is for
that reason ready also to admire men of action, and is wide open for
the influences of hero-worship. And while he cannot be argued into being
a Christian, for he is not sufficiently awake to logic; and while he
cannot be coerced, for he possesses the dynamic of a locomotive combined
with the resistance of a mule, he can be magnetized into being a
Christian if there is set as his teacher and example a virile, magnetic
man. The boy will open his soul to him as he does his windows to welcome
the breath of May. Such considerations as these have determined the
content of these sermons.

The author makes no claim to originality for much of the material
presented, but he has given a new setting to old truths, a setting which
experience has proved to be interesting to the children of his own
congregation.

It may seem that the wording of some of these sermons is beyond the
grasp of the children for whom it was intended. Two things are to be
noted in this connection. First, a child resents being talked down to.
He soon detects a condescending smile and mock affability in a speaker.
And when he detects these he closes the door of his heart against the
message. Second, it is better to give the child something to grow to,
provided it is not too far beyond his grasp. But here again experience
is the best criterion. The children who have heard these sermons have
enjoyed them, and have carried their substance and lessons home with
them to repeat to older ears.

They are offered to the public, therefore, in the hope that they may
suggest a method, add a little to the scant supply of material for
children's sermons, and serve to interest other children as well.

H.J.C.

_Orange, New Jersey._




A BIBLE-RIDDLE


Boys and girls are all fond of riddles, and I am sure you will be
surprised to know that there is one of the best riddles of all in the
Bible, one that is very hard to guess, and yet one that has a fine
lesson in it when I tell you the answer.

This riddle was told by Samson on his wedding-day, and nobody would ever
have guessed it if his wife had not let the secret out.

But first I must tell where Samson got his riddle. Well, one day with
his father and mother he was walking down the road to the land where the
Philistines lived. And according to the story, a young lion rushed out
at him from behind some bushes, and Samson, being a very strong man,
broke its jaws and killed it, and left its carcass behind some bushes by
the roadside.

Some time afterward he was going down that road again, and he turned
aside to see what had become of the carcass. And what do you think he
found there? This: a swarm of wild bees had made their nest in that
carcass. Now, Samson was fond of honey, and he took the comb of honey
with him and ate it as he walked along the road. And as he walked he
made up this riddle: "Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the
strong came forth sweetness." That means that out of this lion which
would have eaten him up he got something to eat, and out of this strong
beast he got something sweet.

I suppose you will wonder what sort of lesson for boys and girls anyone
can draw from that. You say you will never meet a lion on the roadside.

I am not so sure of that. I think boys and girls meet things every day
that are very much like lions. Of course, in these days we call them
temptations. But, then, they jump out at you very suddenly and
unexpectedly sometimes. And they would devour your souls just as this
lion would have eaten up Samson had he not killed it. And when you kill
a temptation by not giving way to it you can make a riddle just like
Samson, and you can say, too, "Out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness." For just like Samson, every time
you come to the place where you have overcome a temptation,--it may be
to say unkind things, or to be quick-tempered, or to be hateful,--you
will find that you will be stronger to overcome it next time. And the
remembrance of how you were able to overcome your feelings will be
sweet, just as that honey was to Samson. God says that if we trust Him,
"the young lion shall ye trample under foot."




CLOSED GATES


If any of you boys and girls, while riding through a great city on an
express train, ever chance to put your head out of the car-window and
look forward along the tracks, you will see several blocks ahead of the
train people in carriages, on foot, and in street-cars crossing the
railway-tracks in great numbers, and it seems as if the train would have
to stop, or else it would run over somebody. But the train never
slackens speed. The engineer keeps on blowing the whistle, and the train
thunders along at the usual rate.

Then you will notice when you get near those crossings that all the
gates are down and the railway-tracks are perfectly clear.

That is the way with many of the difficulties we face in life. We set
out to do the thing our conscience tells us to do, and it seems as if
the road were full of obstructions. But you just go straight ahead,
determined to do your duty, and lo, the hindrances disappear. When an
earnest man goes right ahead, the crowd usually opens up to let him
through.

As you get older and face the world you will find it looks like a great,
fierce giant. But really its fierce look is caused by a false-face that
it wears to frighten faint-hearted people. You go boldly up and take
hold of his beard, as David faced the giant, and you will be surprised
to find that not only the beard but the whole mask comes off in your
hands, and there is a kindly countenance behind. For the world would
rather see you succeed than fail.

I heard of a young man the other day who went into an office in Chicago
to sell a bill of goods. The man behind the desk was very brusque and
fierce-looking, and snapped out, "Well, what do you want here?"

The young man promptly replied, "I want first to be treated as a
gentleman, and then I may talk business to you."

The other man dropped his fierce manner at once, and the young man sold
him a large bill of goods. The man behind the desk told him when he was
leaving that he greeted strangers fiercely to try their mettle, and if
they ran away he concluded they weren't worth troubling with anyhow.

And so I say to you, boys and girls, be sure in your own minds that you
are doing right, then go boldly ahead, and you will find the gates down
and the tracks clear. Let this be your motto:

  "Silken-handed stroke a nettle,
    And it stings you for your pains.
  Grasp it like a man of mettle,
    And it soft as silk remains."




HIRING A COACHMAN


There is a story that tells of a man who advertised for a coachman, and
three men answered the advertisement. They all made a good appearance,
and the man was at a loss to know which one to choose.

Finally he hit upon this scheme. There was a road near his house that
ran along the edge of a precipice. The man asked each one of these
coachmen in turn how close he could drive to the cliff without going
over. The first said he could drive within six inches of it; the second
said he could drive within two inches of it. When the third man was
asked he said, "I should keep away from it as far as possible."

The man said, "You are the coachman I want."

The way that last coachman felt about the precipice is the way for boys
and girls to feel about temptation. Some things that are wrong are like
thin ice: they tempt you to see how far you can go, and the first thing
you know you are in. A boy, especially, is tempted to be what is known
as a "daredevil;" that is, one who is not afraid of anything. But there
is nothing in it, boys. That sort of thing is not courage: it is
rashness, which is just another name for foolishness.

Shakespeare once said:

  "I dare do all that may become a man,
  Who dares do more is none."

The really brave boy is not the one that blusters and brags: the brave
boy is usually quiet, but, as we say, "all there" when the pinch really
comes.

Christ was one of the bravest men the world ever knew, and yet He told
us to be afraid, actually afraid, of things that hurt our souls.

Do not see how near the fire you can go without getting scorched; don't
see how near sin you can go without getting caught. It is poor business.
Take this as your motto when you are inclined to tamper with wrong: "Who
eats with the devil needs a long-handled spoon." The farther you keep
away from him, the better.




THE FIERCEST THING IN THE BIBLE


I suppose if I should ask you which is the fiercest animal mentioned in
the Bible, I should get many different answers. Some of you would say
the lion; some, the bear; some the panther; some, the wolf; and so on.
But none of these is right, and I will tell you why. All of these
animals can be tamed, more or less; but there is one fiercer thing than
all these, and it cannot be tamed, so one of the apostles says.

It is kept behind two red doors and more than twenty white bars, and its
name is spelled as follows: T-O-N-G-U-E. Yes, that is it, the tongue.
James says, "The tongue can no man tame."

It is not only one of the fiercest things mentioned in the Bible, but it
is also one of the crudest. I suppose you never thought that you could
kill a person with your tongue, did you? And yet I have known some
people say such mean things about others that those people were killed
as far as living in their town was concerned, and had to move away, for
all their influence was dead.

A pretty safe way when you are tempted to say anything unkind about
another boy or girl, who is not present, is to ask yourself if it is
fair play, since the other cannot defend himself; for I know that you
all want to play fair. That is the basis of all true sport.

And then remember also that when once you have said an unkind thing you
cannot take it back, for it lives on in spite of you.

Perhaps you recollect the interesting idea which the old Hebrews had of
the separate existence of words as soon as they were spoken. A curse
once uttered could not be recalled because it now existed independently
of the speaker. You remember the story of the blessing of Jacob by
Isaac. Isaac could not give it to Esau, because it had passed beyond his
control.

  "Boys flying kites, haul in their white-winged birds;
  You can't do that way when you're flying words,
  Things that we think may sometimes fall back dead,
  But God Himself can't kill them when they're said."




SACRIFICE HITS


I hope that all you boys play baseball, and that many of you are on
baseball teams. If you are, I suppose you know what is meant by a
sacrifice hit.

It is called a "sacrifice hit" when the score is close and a player
comes to the bat, and, although he would like to make a run,
nevertheless, for the sake of the man on the base, he makes a "bunt," so
that, while the pitcher or shortstop runs up to get the ball and put him
out on first base, the man on the bases may make another base.

You see, then, that instead of making what is called a "grand-stand
play" he just gives up his own glory for the sake of his team.

Did you ever think that your parents are constantly making "sacrifice
hits" for you? Whenever your mother goes without a new dress in order
that you may have a better suit of clothes; whenever your father gives
up some pleasure to keep you in school, they are making a sacrifice hit
for you.

And after all, boys and girls, that is about the only way the world has
ever moved very far ahead. Socrates, an old Greek, made a sacrifice hit
when he was put to death in prison with poison, because he wanted to
make the young men of Athens wiser. Martin Luther made a sacrifice hit
when he went to Worms, although he feared the Pope would kill him. But
he was determined to get liberty for the people.

But the biggest sacrifice hit that was ever made was made by Christ when
He was crucified on Calvary, in order that the world might know that God
was a Father and loved His children.

And every boy and girl who would follow in the footsteps of Christ, and
would be strong and noble, must be prepared to make sacrifice hits,--to
forget themselves and do things for the sake of others. Jesus said, "I
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister." And a minister is one
who serves, one who makes sacrifice hits.




THE LIBERTY OF OBEDIENCE


I know it would seem strange if I told you that every boy and girl has
to be tied to something in order that he may be free. And yet that is
the exact truth.

The majority of you no doubt know what the multiplication-table is, and
I am sure you have thought it a pretty disagreeable thing. Perhaps you
have wondered why seven times eight is always fifty-six, and why your
teacher insists that it shall be that every time. You don't see why it
can't be fifty-five just once, or possibly fifty-seven. But, no, sir; it
is _always_ fifty-six.

When you get farther along in life I believe you will be glad to know
that seven times eight is _always_ fifty-six, whether you meet it in the
grocery-store, or in the bank, or in New York, or in Philadelphia, or in
China; for it will be a comfort to know that the multiplication-table
does not change, like many other things, as you go from place to place.
Whenever or wherever you meet it, it is always the same. Now, because
you were tied to that table as a boy or girl, you will be free to go
where you like with it in after-life.

The same is true about riding a bicycle. You know that in order to be
free to ride a bicycle you must obey the rules of riding it; that is,
when you are in danger of falling to the right you must turn the front
wheel to the right. If you do not, you will fall off.

Here again, you see, you must be tied in order to be free.

You will find that a rule all through life. That is why your parents and
teachers lay down so many rules for you. It is not because they want to
hedge you in and torment you, but that you may be free men and women
later.

Boys and girls who are never tied up, sooner or later find that as men
and women they are not free. Marie Antoinette, Queen of France, would
not be tied up to any rules as a girl. She was wilful and wild, so in
later life she caused the death of her husband and herself.

That same rule is even true of stars. Comets are tramp stars. They
refuse to be tied up, and they ramble about all over the sky. So they
never have trees and flowers on them. Our earth, on the other hand, is
tied up to the sun and goes round it like a horse round a racetrack, and
so it is bound by seasons and brings forth beautiful trees and flowers.

Among other disadvantages of being a comet is that comets are in danger
of losing a great part of their substance every time they approach the
sun. Halley's comet, which used to be such a wonderful sight, has
dwindled away to a very great extent. When it came a few years ago
scarcely any one saw it.

So it is always: to be really free and to grow you must be tied; and I
hope that none of you children will ever be fretful when your parents
and teachers make rules that you do not see the meaning of, but which
are for your good.




CUTTING CORNERS


Have you boys and girls ever noticed how all the curbings at the corners
of the streets in the city are worn smooth by drivers of carts and
wagons trying to cut the corners as closely as possible?

But the principal thing to notice about those curbs is that you will
often find on them the paint, sometimes red and sometimes black or
yellow, scratched off the wheels of these carriages that are so anxious
to cut corners. And the wheels that cut corners soon get to looking
shabby from lack of paint.

That is the way it nearly always happens with people who try to cut
corners. I know boys and girls who try it in school.

They try to skim through by doing just as little work as possible. They
cut the corners as closely as possible with their lessons, so that they
can have time for play. They do that with the work in subtraction, and
then, when they get into multiplication or division, they have all
sorts of trouble. And soon their arithmetic looks very shabby indeed.

Other boys and girls try to cut corners with the truth. They see just
how near a lie they can come, and yet keep within the bounds of truth.
Something inside tells them it is not quite fair. And again, when that
happens, they have rubbed some of the bright, beautiful paint, so to
speak, off their consciences. And before long their consciences get to
be quite shabby, and not at all new, and people begin to say that they
don't quite trust that boy or girl.

And so I say to you, boys and girls, it does not pay to cut corners.
Give yourselves plenty of room. Be open and fair and industrious. For
one who cuts close corners as a boy or girl, usually grows up into a
very small sort of man or woman.




HABITS


I wonder if I can make plain to you what a habit is. Have you ever seen
men laying concrete sidewalks here in the city, and they put boards
across to keep people from walking on the pavements before they were
thoroughly dry? I am sure you have. These men keep people off the walk
while it is soft because, if any one steps on it, then his footprints
harden into the walk as it dries, and will always remain there.

Now, boys' and girls' minds are just like those cement walks when they
are wet and soft; and if you do a thing over and over again as a boy or
girl, you will make such a deep mark in your brains that when you grow
up you cannot get the mark out, and you just keep on doing it, whether
you want to or not.

When once you do a thing, it is easier to do it again. Even cloth and
paper find it easier to do a thing a second time than the first. The
sleeves of your dresses and coats fall into the same wrinkles and
creases every time you put them on. That is what we call the "hang" of a
dress or coat. And if you fold a piece of paper once, it quickly gets
the habit of folding along the same crease again.

And so you see that it is very important for you to get good habits as
boys and girls, for first you make the habits, and then the habits make
you.

You have often seen a little brook running along between its banks and
over its pebbly bed. Well, once there was no brook-bed there, but
gradually, years ago, a little stream began to trickle through, and
finally it wore out a bed for itself. Now it cannot leave the bed if it
wishes to. That is just what you do when you make a habit: you make a
course which you will follow later in life.

First you take the train, then the train takes you. First the stream
makes the bed, then the bed guides the stream.

They tell us that after we are thirty years of age we are little more
than a bundle of habits. I suppose thirty years seems a long way off
for you boys and girls, but you will reach it if you live. And there
will be men living somewhere who will hear the name that you boys now
have, and you are deciding now by the habits you make what sort of man
he is going to be. If you want him to be a good, honorable, strong man,
be sure you form good habits now.




A LESSON IN COURTESY


I read a story recently of how a young man got his start in life through
being courteous. This young man was an assistant doorkeeper in the
capitol at Washington. His work was to direct people where they wanted
to go in that great building.

One day he overheard a stranger ask one of the other doorkeepers for
help in finding one of the senators from California. The doorkeeper
answered in a very discourteous way that it was none of his business
where the senators were.

"But can't you help me?" the stranger said. "I was sent over here
because he was seen to come this way."

"No, I can't," the doorkeeper answered. "I have trouble enough looking
after the representatives."

The stranger was about to turn away when an assistant, who had overheard
the conversation, said: "If you are from California, you have come a
long way, I will try to help you." Then he asked him to take a seat, and
hurried off in search of the senator.

He soon brought him to the stranger, who then gave his card to the
doorkeeper and asked him to call at his hotel that evening.

That stranger was Collis P. Huntington, who was a great railroad
official in those days.

When the doorkeeper called upon him that night, Mr. Huntington offered
him a position at nearly twice the salary he was then receiving. He
accepted the new position and was rapidly promoted from that time on.

The lesson I would have you learn from this is that you never know when
a good deed is going to return to you. I don't mean that you should be
courteous, expecting that you are going to be paid for it each time, for
the greatest pay for kindness is just the feeling that you have helped
someone. As the old saying goes, "Civility costs nothing," and on the
other hand, you never gain anything by getting the ill-will of anybody
or anything, even of a dog. Be courteous: it is the mark of a gentleman,
of a lady, and it is often the passport to success.




LITTLE FOXES


In far-off Syria, a country lying northeast of Palestine, the land in
which Jesus was born, the farmers who keep vineyards are very much
troubled with foxes and bears, which destroy their crops at night. And
so, to protect their vineyards, they build high stone-walls about them,
and put broken bottles on the top to keep these animals out, much as
some people in this country who have orchards do, in order to keep out
small boys.

These fences keep out the bears, because they cut themselves on the
glass in trying to climb over, and they also keep out some of the foxes.
But after all, when the grapes are nearly ripe, the owners of the
vineyards and their men are obliged to build platforms up above the
trellises, and stay there all night, in order to guard their crops.
These watchers manage very well with all the other wild animals
excepting the little foxes. They can see the big foxes and drive them
off, but the little ones they cannot see, and so these destroy the
vines. I suppose that it was an experience something like that which led
one of the Bible-writers to say that the little foxes destroy the vines.

It seems to me that this is very true with sins, too; it is the little
sins that destroy us. When a big sin like stealing, lying or cheating
comes along we can see that easily enough, and we will not let it over
the fence into our lives. We drive it away, and are soon rid of it. But
when the little sins come, like little foxes, we do not see them, and so
they get in and destroy our character.

What are some of these little foxes? I think one is pride, which makes
you so conceited, because you live in a big house or have an automobile
or fine clothes, that you will not speak to or play with other boys and
girls who have not quite such fine things, although they may be just as
bright and just as good as you. Pride is a little fox that kills the
vine of brotherliness which Christ planted in our hearts.

Then another little fox is sulkiness. Sulkiness makes you frown and go
away in a corner. It sucks up all the sunlight there is, and makes the
world very gray and dull, like a day in November. This fox kills the
vine called "peace" which Christ planted.

One more little fox is jealousy. This makes boys and girls dislike
others who get higher marks than they in school, or who have more
friends, or better toys. It is one of the most destructive little foxes
there is, for it kills the best vine of all that Christ planted: that
is, love.

Be careful, then, boys and girls, of these little foxes, for they are
worse than bears and big foxes, because they look so small and harmless,
and slip by when you are not paying attention, but which destroy your
character as readily as the others.




A TRICKY OX


I want to tell you to-day about a tricky ox I once read about. I suppose
you will at once think that this ox was in a circus. But he wasn't. Far
from it! It would have been better for some other cattle if he had been.

This ox is kept in the stockyards at Chicago. In those stockyards they
kill thousands of cattle every year to give us beef to eat. When the
cattle come to these stockyards they are not tame cattle like the cows
we see out in our pastures, but they are cattle that have pastured out
on the great broad prairies, and they have seen very few people. And for
that reason they are very timid and hard to get close to. So it is
difficult to get them near the pens where they want them.

Here is where the tricky ox comes in. In one of those yards they keep a
black, short-tailed ox known as "Bob," and he just walks along in an
unconcerned way toward the pens, and he looks so calm and unafraid that
the other cattle just take confidence and follow along after him. And
then, before they know it, they are in a trap and can never get out. But
in the meanwhile Bob has slipped away, to play the same trick on other
cattle.

There are some boys and girls just like that ox. They are always urging
other boys and girls on to do wrong things, telling them that they are
cowards if they don't take the "dare" and do it, and showing how brave
they are. But when they have got you into a scrape, and the real
business of punishment begins, they can't be found anywhere: they have
slipped out like old Bob.

You must be on the lookout for boys like that. Don't be afraid to be
called a coward by them. Don't let them "dare" you to do things which
your conscience tells you are foolish or wrong. You will be a bigger
coward if you do these things because you are ashamed not to take the
dare.




"SHINE INSIDE"


As I was passing along the street the other day I saw on the window of a
bootblack's parlour the words, "Shine Inside."

I want to turn these words around and make a motto of them for you boys
and girls. For I think that if every boy and girl would shine inside,
our homes, and the world in general, would be a much happier place.

Of course there are some boys and girls who shine only on the _outside_.
A little while ago I read a story about Byron, a great poet, of whom you
will learn later in school. A man said to Sir Walter Scott that he
wished he might have seen Byron when he was alive. He said he had only
seen a photograph of him. Scott said, "Yes, the luster is there [in the
photograph], but it is not lighted up." Now, there are some boys' and
girls' faces that have a luster, but it is not lighted up.

Or their faces are like a mirror that shines brightly only when there
is sunlight or some other light falling upon it. The mirror only shines
outside. The luster is not always lighted up. I know boys and girls who
shine outside only when other boys and girls play the game which they
want them to play, or when they get the clothes they want to wear or the
food they want to eat, or when they are out in pleasant company. But
when they don't have their own way, then their faces are very cloudy.

But the boy or girl who shines _inside_ is one who "irons out his
wrinkles with a smile" even though things do not exactly please him, and
he thinks of other people instead of himself.

Now, how can boys and girls shine inside so that they will always shine
outside whether they have their own way or not? Well, you remember that
the Bible says that when Moses came down from the mountain his face
shone, because he had been talking with God. That is the secret, boys
and girls. When a man or a woman or a boy or a girl talks often enough
with God in prayer and asks to be made like Christ, then a light is
lighted within him which causes his face to shine. You remember Christ
said, "I am the Light." Let Him into your heart, and you will shine
inside.

  "The man worth while is the man with a smile
    When everything goes dead wrong."




THE STORM-KING EAGLE


If you have been up the Hudson River from New York to Albany by the
day-boat, you will probably have noticed a high mountain on the
right-hand side of the river by the name of Storm King.

I want to tell you about an eagle that used to live there. He could be
seen there almost any day soaring high above the mountain-peak. And many
a hunter had tried to shoot him. But he avoided them all. And how do you
think he did it? Did he hide from them? No. Just by flying so high that
the bullets could not reach him, or, if some chance bullet did reach
him, he was so far away that it just kissed his plumage and fell back to
earth without doing him any harm.

I wish that every boy and girl were as wise as that old eagle. That is
always the way to avoid being wounded by sins: just keep high up above
them. I mean by that, when you are tempted to do anything that is
wrong, not to stop and argue with yourself whether you will get caught
if you do it, or whether you will be happier if you do not do it, or any
of these things by which you lose time. But just get right away from it:
put it out of your mind.

I suppose you will wonder how you can do that. I will tell you. You have
often heard about "wishing-caps," and how the people in fairy-stories
put them on and just wish themselves wherever they want to be, and quick
as a flash they are there. Well, there is a wishing-cap that every boy
and girl can put on when he is tempted; it is this prayer, "O God, help
me not to do this thing which is wrong!" And if you say that prayer, and
believe God will help you, it will take you high out of reach of the
sin, just as that old eagle flew high above reach of the bullets. For
God says that they who ask Him for help shall "mount up on wings as
eagles."




A DOG WHICH ATE THE BIBLE


I heard an amusing story sometime ago about a savage in Africa who came
to a missionary very much excited and told him that his dog had been
completely spoiled as a watch-dog because he had chewed up and eaten a
small New Testament he had happened to get hold of. He said that the dog
would never be of any more use because the New Testament which he had
swallowed would take all the fight out of him, and he could no longer
keep wild animals away from the sheep.

That seems a strange notion for a grown-up man to get into his head,
doesn't it? And yet, boys and girls, I run across some young people even
here in America that think if they let Christ into their hearts it will
make them sort of "wishy-washy" and "goody-goody," and not strong and
rugged people.

It is true that to be a Christian does take some of the fight out of a
person, but it is the quarrelsome kind of fighting that has neither
beauty nor strength in it which it takes out of one. But when you come
to read history you will find that some of our bravest soldiers were
Christians. John Havelock, a British general who fought in India for the
sake of his country, was called "The Christian Warrior." Sir Oliver
Cromwell, who had to lead an army in England against the king, who was
ill-treating the people, had a body of soldiers under him who were
Christians, and they were such good soldiers and so hard to defeat that
they were called "Cromwell's Ironsides." Sometimes just before battle
these soldiers used to sing hymns and then pray on the battlefields. And
because they were Christians it made better and braver soldiers of them.

And so the truest kind of courage that any boy or girl can have is the
kind that Christ gives. Paul tells all of us Christians to be "good
soldiers." The Bible takes the wrong kind of fight out of you and puts
the right kind of fight into you, the fight for noble things.




STEAM AND SAILS


All the vessels on the oceans can be divided into two classes:
steamships and sailing vessels. The sailing vessels, as you know, set
their broad white sails like wings to catch the favouring winds, and
then they go scudding across the seas like birds to their distant
harbours. But when there is no wind these vessels must sometimes lie
becalmed, and do not move for days or sometimes weeks. The steamships,
on the other hand, do not depend upon the wind to drive them ahead.
Their power comes from great engines away down in the heart of the
vessel. Even if the wind blows right in the face of the ship, it only
makes the boiler-fires burn faster and brighter, and she plunges ahead
in spite of wind or tide.

Boys and girls also can be divided into two classes, like ships. Some
depend upon other boys and girls to make them go; others have the "go"
in themselves. These people with the "go" in themselves we call
"go-ahead" sort of people. They are the boys and girls who become
leaders. The others are followers.

What the world most needs is these "go-ahead" people. There are plenty
of people who go like a sailing vessel when there is something from the
outside to send them along. I heard a man say the other day that another
man was like "a chip in a pan of milk;" that is, he went only where he
was pushed.

If you want to have "go" in yourselves, try to think things out for
yourselves. Don't do things just because somebody else does them. Don't
wear things just because somebody else wears them. Don't say things just
because somebody else says them. Paul says that people who are blown
about by every wind do not amount to much. I am sure of this, at least,
that I should rather be a steamship than a sailing vessel, that only
goes when a wind blows.




A FISH-STORY


A recent writer tells in one of his books of an experience he had as a
boy when he went on a fishing-trip with his father.

They were wading along in brooks with their rubber-boots on. But
sometimes the water was too deep for him, and he was in danger of
getting his feet wet by the water running in over the tops of his boots.
When, however, they came to places like these, his father would take him
pig-a-back and carry him along, and then the boy would fish with his rod
resting on his father's shoulder, and his line dangling in front. And
this writer says that he used to catch many fish in this way. Then he
adds, "How many of our best catches in life are made over someone's else
shoulder?"

I think that fathers and mothers are always allowing their children to
fish over their shoulders, don't you? When they send you to school to
get an education, so that in later life you may enjoy good books, you
are catching fish over their shoulders. When they give you money to
travel, so that you may know what a big, beautiful place the world is,
you are fishing over their shoulders. When they give you beautiful
homes, so that you shall have good friends and grow up thoughtful,
well-mannered men and women, you are fishing over their shoulders.

In fact, it seems to me that we should not catch many fish at all if it
were not for our loving, painstaking, unselfish parents.

And don't you think we ought to be obedient and thoughtful of them when
they carry us along so uncomplainingly and rejoice in seeing us take in
such beautiful catches from life?




OPPORTUNITY


Have you ever heard of a picture that was called "Opportunity?" It
represents a person with a great deal of hair on her forehead, but none
on the back of her head. The meaning of the picture is this: When you
catch an opportunity as it _comes_, it is easy to hold; but once you let
it get by you, it is very difficult to catch it again. It is something
like trying to catch a train that has just pulled out of the station.

I used to live near a boy in Canada who did not like to go to school,
and when the snow was deep and the weather was frosty he would find some
excuse by which he got his mother to let him stay at home. When he grew
up he found out what he had missed by not getting an education, and he
tried to make it up, but he could not. He was running after the train.
He soon got discouraged and gave up, and tried to get his living in some
other way than by hard work. The last I heard of him he had just been
arrested for stealing.

I have known other boys and girls who thought of joining the Church,
but they just kept putting it off and putting it off, thinking that any
time would do well enough. And then, as they got older, they felt that
they weren't good enough, or that some of their friends might not
approve, and so they have grown up and have not yet joined, and each
year it keeps growing harder.

The two opportunities that you boys and girls ought to take "by the
forelock," as we say, are, first: in getting all the schooling you can
while you have the chance. You will never have such a good opportunity
again, and if you let it slip you may never, never catch up. And second:
in making as fine a start as you can in your Christian life by learning
all you can about the Bible and by getting Christ's example into your
hearts.




GOD IS NOW HERE


In a sermon which Dean Stanley, an English minister, preached to
children in Westminster Abbey, he told the following story: "There was a
little girl living with her grandfather. She was a good child, but he
was not a very good man; and one day, when she came back from school, he
had put in writing over her bed, 'God is nowhere,' for he did not
believe in the good God, and he tried to make the little girl believe
the same as he.

"What did the little girl do? She had no eyes to see, no ears to hear
what her grandfather tried to teach her. She was very small. She could
only read words of one syllable at a time; she rose above the bad
meaning which he had tried to put into her mind, because her little mind
could not do otherwise, and she read the words not 'God is nowhere,' but
'God is now here.'"

And she was right. She was wiser than her gray-haired grandfather. For
God is now here. He is everywhere. And whenever even the smallest child
speaks to Him in the simplest prayer He hears the child's voice. God is
now here. That is a good motto for us to take with us to school, to keep
us honest; to play, to keep us sweet; to our homes, to keep us
unselfish.




DAVID LIVINGSTONE'S FAITH


No doubt you have all heard of David Livingstone, the great missionary
to Africa. I wish to tell you a story of his faith in Christ.

He was trying to cross one of the rivers of Africa one day with his
little company of men, when the savages in that locality tried to
prevent him. They gathered in large numbers with their spears and
poisoned arrows and war-clubs, and blocked his way to the river.
Livingstone and his little company were no match for these hostile
warriors, and it looked as if he and his men would be killed.

Then he thought of a scheme of waiting till nightfall and of crossing
over under cover of the darkness. But later that seemed to him a
cowardly thing to do, and he tells us how the verse in the Bible came
back to him in which Jesus says: "All power is given unto Me in heaven
and on earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations ... and lo! I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world."

The great missionary said of this verse: "It is the word of a Gentleman
of the most sacred and strictest honour, and there is an end on't. I
feel quite calm now, thank God."

Next morning he crossed the river without any difficulty, although the
bank was lined with savages armed to the teeth.

I think that is always the way when we trust in Christ. He has promised
never to leave us nor forsake us, and we can rely upon His word.




THE HAPPY MAN


Once upon a time there was a king who was very rich, but very unhappy.
He had a beautiful marble palace, with extensive parks and grounds, fine
horses and carriages, but he was not happy.

So one day he called together his court-messengers, and sent them out
into the world, telling them to travel far and wide until they found a
man who was happy beyond all others, and when they found him, to take
off his shirt and bring it to him. For he thought that perhaps by
wearing this shirt he might gain the happiness he sought.

The messengers went forth, and after a long search finally found a man
who seemed happier than all his fellows. And as he sat singing in the
sunshine the king's messengers pounced upon him to take away his shirt;
but lo, when they took his coat off they found he had no shirt!

The story means this, that happiness does not depend upon what you have
or have not. It comes from within, and not from without. If you have the
right spirit you will have a song, riches or not. But if you have not
the right spirit you will not be happy, no matter what you have.




A SERMON FOR THE BOYS


A teacher said the other day that ninety boys out of every hundred who
fail in grammar schools and high-schools smoke tobacco. He says also
that boys who smoke are nearly all unruly and disobedient in school. And
he says again, that boys who get their lessons well and stand high in
grammar-schools take lower marks in high-school if they begin to smoke
in high-school. This ought to be enough to make any boy stop and think
before he begins to smoke, for it shows that it not only hurts a boy's
mind, but his morals also.

I think the reason most boys take up smoking is not because they like
it, but because their schoolmates do it, and they want to be one of "the
crowd." When you boil that down it means either that a boy wants to be
smart, or else he has not courage enough to stand alone; that is, he is
a coward.

You would not think much of a boy who was about to enter a race and,
just before he entered it, hurt his foot on purpose, so that he could
not run his best, would you? Well, that is just what every boy does who
smokes: it hinders him in the race of life. You ought not to smoke
before you are twenty-one years old, because your body is not strong
enough to stand it. The safest way is not to smoke at all, but at least
don't smoke until you get your growth.




TIRE-TROUBLE


People who own automobiles have a great deal to say about
"tire-trouble." There are a great many kinds of tire-trouble. In the
first place, a tire often gets punctured by a nail running into it. Then
there are "blow-outs" caused by the inner tube giving way. Then there
are leaky valves, by which the air slowly leaks out. There are also
sand-blisters, caused by little particles of sand getting into the tire
and making a swelling in it, which soon gives way. And finally tires may
get rim-cut, which means that the steel rim which fastens them on wears
them through by rubbing. The result of these things is what is known as
a flat tire with all the air gone out, and the automobile bumps on the
hard rim.

Boys and girls have tire-troubles, too. I have seen boys and girls get
so vexed about things that they just exploded in a burst of temper like
a blow-out in a tire. I have known them to run up against something
sharp and difficult which took all the buoyancy out of them, just like a
nail causing a puncture in a tire. I have known them to tell a lie,
although nobody else knew it, and it bothered them so inside that it was
like sand on the inside of the tire causing a sand-blister. I have known
them to fret about things so that all their enthusiasm leaked away just
as the tire that had a leaky valve. And finally I have known them to be
rim-cut by associating with some sharp-tongued boy or girl. The result
of all this was a flat tire, and these boys and girls just went bumping
along without any happiness or lightness of heart. They couldn't get
anywhere with their work or their play.

The only cure that I know of for a boy or girl with a flat tire is more
of God's uplifting strength.

God says that they who trust in Him shall run, and not be weary.




WATCHING FOR IDLE BOYS


Probably all boys and girls whisper in school if they think the teacher
will not catch them. Some teachers set boys and girls to watch one
another and to tell on one another when they see anyone whispering. I do
not think that is a fair thing to do, for it makes tell-tales of boys
and girls. And tell-tales are never attractive.

The story I am going to relate to you is about a teacher who set the
pupils in a room to watch each other, and to tell if they caught anyone
idle. One boy had a grudge against another, and he thought that now
would be the time to get even with him. So he watched carefully, and as
soon as he found the other boy idling he called the teacher's attention
to it. Of course every boy and girl waited anxiously to see what the
teacher would do. And then something unexpected happened. The teacher
said to the tell-tale: "So you saw this boy idling, did you?"

"Yes, sir," quickly answered the boy.

"Then," said the teacher, "what were you doing when you found him
idling?" The boy blushed, and hung his head. He not only had been caught
idling himself, but playing a mean trick. That was a lesson for him: he
never watched for idle boys again. And it ought to be a lesson for us,
too, when instead of attending to our own work, we neglect it, and try
to get other people into trouble.




CHRIST AND THE DOG


My children's sermon to-day has to do with a legend. A legend is a story
that has come down to us from the olden times, but which cannot be
proved to be true. This legend is about Christ.

It tells of how one day He was walking down a street in Jerusalem and
saw a company of people gathered about a dead dog in the street. Now,
city dogs in the land where Christ lived are not petted as they are in
our own country. They act as scavengers, and live on whatever they can
pick up. They are shaggy and dirty and yellow. The people stone them and
kick them, and do not call them by kind names.

So the people who had gathered about this dog were making unkind remarks
about it, saying how ugly it was, when Christ came up, and looking at
the dog, He said, "But do you see what beautiful, even, white teeth he
has?" Then, it is said, the people knew this must be Christ, who could
find something to praise even in a dog like that.

But that was the way Christ always dealt with people. He always saw
something good in them. And when people knew that Christ saw something
good in them, they tried to live up to what He saw, and to be good.

You remember how Zaccheus, the little, short man who had been robbing
the people by collecting too much tax-money, climbed up into a sycamore
tree to see Christ pass by. Christ told him that He was going to take
dinner with him. And when Christ dined with him, Zaccheus felt that
Christ thought he was better than he was, and he became so ashamed of
what he had been doing that he went and gave the money back.

And Christ's rule is a good rule for us to follow. If we wish people to
be good, we must look for the good things in them. If we _expect_ them
to be good, they will _try_ to be good. There is a jailer in Chicago
who, when a man has served his term in jail, gives him a letter of
recommendation so that he can get a job. And the men who get these
letters are ashamed to do wrong and to get into jail again, because of
the disappointment they will cause the jailer who believes in them.

A girl once said to her mother, who was always finding something good
instead of bad to say of people, "Mother, I believe you would have
something good to say of the devil."

"Well," said her mother, "we might all admire his perseverance."

Try to see how many good things you can see in people. It's the best
game of all to play.




THE BOY WHO WAS TO BE MANAGER


A boy recently answered an advertisement of a certain firm in New York
which wanted an office-boy. He went to the office, and as he was a
bright, neat-looking boy, he made a good impression upon the manager.
The manager liked him and told him to report for work the following
morning.

The boy was about to leave the office in great glee, when the manager
called him back and asked him to write his name, in order that he might
see whether or no he was a good writer. The boy wrote his name in such a
miserable scrawl that the manager could hardly read it, and he told the
boy that he was very sorry, but he would be obliged to cancel his
agreement, and could not take him on.

He then advised the boy to take lessons in penmanship, in order to
improve his writing.

"But," the boy said, "why do I need to be a good penman? I'm going to be
a manager some day, and I'll have a stenographer to do my writing for
me."

"Yes," said the man, "that may be true. But before you get to be a
manager anywhere you will have to work up to it through a great many
years of lower positions, and you must learn to write." The boy could
not see why, and went to find work elsewhere, before improving his
writing.

There are a great many people just like that boy. They expect to be
managers, superintendents, presidents, but they don't see that they must
work up to it, and every step must be faithfully and patiently taken.

Some boys expect to be good at long division, and they do not take any
pains to learn subtraction thoroughly. Or they expect to be good in
English, and will not study grammar. They are like the boy in this
story.

Some girls expect to appear like ladies, but they pay no attention to
what their mothers say about neatness,--such as keeping their hair in
order and their shoes clean. These girls are also like the boy of the
story.

Most things worth while in life have to be worked for, and as you
cannot well get upstairs at one jump, but must take the steps between
one by one, so the good things of life come by patiently filling in each
task with care and faithfulness. Then the big things will take care of
themselves.




A TALE ABOUT WORDS


Boys and girls like fairy-tales. So my sermon to-day is to be in that
form. This fairy-tale comes from France, and it is told by Katherine
Pyle in her book, "Fairy-Tales from Many Lands."

A widow had two daughters. One was coarse and slovenly, with an ugly
disposition, but because she resembled her mother the woman loved her
and thought her beautiful. The other daughter had hair like gold and a
complexion like a pink rose, while her eyes were as blue as the sky. She
was sweet-tempered and kind, but her mother hated her, and gave her all
the hardest work to do and the poorest food to eat.

One day she gave her a heavy jug and sent her into the forest to bring
water for her sister. When the girl reached the spring she was tired and
sad, and sat weeping on the stone. Presently a voice behind her asked
for a drink, and she turned and saw a withered old woman sitting there.
So she gently raised the jug to the woman's lips, and then refilled it
and started home.

But the old woman called her back and said: "Daughter, you have helped
one who is able to repay you for your kindness. Every word you speak
shall be a pearl or a rose." The girl hastened home. Her mother met her
with scolding words, asking her why she had been so long. And when her
daughter explained to her, lo! every word she spoke was a pearl or a
rose. The greedy old woman snatched up the pearls and left the roses.

Then she called her other daughter,--the ugly one,--told her what had
happened, and said: "Hasten, daughter! Take the silver pitcher and run
to the fountain. If the fairy has given these for a drink from a jug,
what will she give for a drink from a silver pitcher!"

The girl sulked off to the fountain swinging the pitcher and loitering
along the way. When she reached there no old woman was in sight, but
beside the spring was a tall, beautiful young woman who asked her for a
drink. The ugly one replied, "There is the pitcher, draw the water for
yourself."

When she was about to go, the young woman said sharply: "Stop! the words
that fall from your lips are evil things, and they shall look like the
things they are. Every word you speak shall be a spider or a snake,
until you learn to speak kindly."

The girl trudged off home scarcely thinking about what the woman said,
little knowing that it was the same fairy who had spoken to her sister.
But when she began to answer her mother, spiders and snakes dropped from
her lips, and she was very much frightened.

I wonder whether our words would be pearls or spiders if we could see
them? Let us make them pearls.




SUFFOCATED TREES


We sometimes hear of people being suffocated by gas, but it is not often
we hear of trees being suffocated.

But the other day I was walking down the street, and noticed that all
the trees on one side of the avenue for several blocks were dead. They
looked as if they had been fine, strong, healthy trees, and I could not
understand why they had all died, until I was told that a gas-pipe
beneath their roots had leaked, and that the escaping gas had killed the
trees.

I am sure you and I know people who are like those dead trees: they have
become discouraged and wilted, and if you and I could dig down into
their lives we should probably find something like that poisonous gas
which has ruined them.

Sin is the most poisonous thing that gets into one's life.

If a boy or girl has done wrong and is hiding it from his father and
his mother, and his conscience is pricking him all the time, then he
cannot be sunny and healthy like a growing tree. He becomes cross and
easily provoked, and is sulky and wilted.

If you have done something wrong, which you ought to tell your parents
about, do not go to sleep until you have told them. If you do, you will
wake in the morning with dread, and you will go around all day with a
dull ache which will spoil all the sunshine. Moreover, if you begin
keeping secrets from your parents in this way you will have no one to
check you in your misdeeds. Your parents may punish you, but they are
the best friends you have. And besides, there is no punishment like
hiding a feeling of guilt. The next best thing after keeping from doing
wrong is to own up to it in an honest way when you have done wrong. Many
a boy and girl would have been saved untold trouble if they had only
been frank with their parents. One of the saddest days in any boy's or
girl's life is when they first keep a guilty secret from their parents.




ULYSSES AND THE SIRENS


When you boys and girls get older and further along in school, you will
probably learn of a famous Greek whose name was Ulysses. He was noted as
a heroic seaman, who travelled over dangerous seas and into unknown
lands.

In one of the seas where Ulysses sailed was an island known as the Isle
of the Sirens. The sirens would attract sailors to their shores by
beautiful music. But when the sailors drew near the land they would
irresistibly cast themselves into the sea, to their destruction.

Now Ulysses had heard of the sirens through Circe, and he wanted to hear
the maidens sing, but he did not want to come within their power. So
this is the way he managed it. One day he put wax in the ears of all his
sailors, so that they could not hear the music, and then had himself
strapped to the mast. Then he ordered the sailors to row near enough to
the island for him to hear the music. In this way he heard the singing,
but did not get caught.

That was a clever way of getting tempted, and yet not getting caught,
was it not? But someone has said in a joke it would have been better if
Ulysses had had an orchestra on board which would have made better music
than the sirens. Then neither Ulysses nor the sailors would have been
tempted to go too near the dangerous isle.

That is a pretty good way of dealing with all kinds of temptation,--not
by trying to keep temptation out, but by putting something more
attractive in its place. If you are tempted to go to the moving
pictures, when you were told not to, do not simply stand around outside
the place with nothing else to do. Go off and play something which will
be more attractive than moving pictures. If you are told that you must
not go fishing, don't sulk around wishing that you could go. Just go at
baseball or something else, and soon you will have forgotten about the
other thing.

Always put something else in the place of the thing you are not to do,
and it will help you to overcome temptation.




POISON-LABELS


You have all seen bottles of poison, and you know when your father or
mother buys poison from the druggist there is a label on the bottle
marked "POISON" in large letters, and on the label is a picture of a
skull and crossbones. This is done to warn people from drinking the
poison.

Now, if a druggist were to put clear, pure water into a bottle, and put
a label marked "Poison" on it, no one would drink the water if he were
choking, for fear of being poisoned.

And there are boys and girls just like that good, pure, fresh water with
the poison-label on it. They are good at heart. They are kind and
unselfish and obedient, but nobody will have anything to do with them
because they put such terrible poison-labels upon themselves.

I will tell you what some of these poison-labels are which frighten
people away from boys and girls. One of them is slang. Now, of course,
some girls and boys who are inwardly little ladies and gentlemen use
slang, but usually slang is used by low-bred people who have not words
enough to say what they want to. And consequently when you use slang, if
people do not know that you are well-bred boys and girls, they think
that you are coarse and vulgar, and they will have nothing to do with
you.

Another poison-label that boys sometimes stick on is swearing. And of
course that is always bad-mannered. Another is smoking. Another is bad
company. I knew a boy who was really good at heart, but who persisted in
going with bad boys, and no business man in town would take him into his
business because of that terrible label.

Girls sometimes wear such poison-labels as forwardness; that is, they
are always making themselves heard and seen. Others are proud. Others
chew gum.

I have not time to mention all of these different labels. You can think
of them for yourselves. What I want to say is that it is too bad for
such good, useful, well-intentioned and wholesome boys and girls to put
on labels which lead people to think less of them than they should
think. For by these things they spoil their chances of getting into the
company of well-bred people.




LIES THAT WALK


We usually think of a lie as a thing that is spoken. But there are other
kinds of lies. Some girls that I once knew went to an office in New York
and bought some labels with the pictures and names of hotels in Europe
printed on them. They pasted these on their suit-cases.

Now, as you probably know, when people go to Europe some of the hotels
paste labels on your suit-cases and trunks when they take your baggage
to the station. Some people come home with their baggage quite covered
over with these slips of paper, and one can easily see by these labels
what a long distance the owners of the luggage have traveled.

These girls who bought those labels in New York, but had never been to
Europe, were trying to make people believe that they, too, had traveled
in foreign countries.

Of course you know what that sort of deception means: it is telling a
lie without speaking it.

So you see these lies went with the suit-cases. And wherever those
girls carried their bags, the lies walked along with them, and said to
everyone who looked at them, "Our owners have been to Europe."

Of course, no self-respecting boy or girl would do such a thing. But you
must also be careful not to act falsehoods by pretending things in
school, or acting at home as if you don't know about things when you do.
Don't try to fool _yourselves_, then you will not try to fool other
people.




WELLINGTON AND THE SOLDIER


No boy likes to be called a coward, and some boys do things that are
dangerous for fear that their friends will think they have no courage.
Sometimes it is more cowardly to do a dangerous thing like that than not
to do it.

Do not think that you are a coward because you are afraid of dangerous
things. Some of the bravest men the world ever saw have been afraid, but
in spite of their fear they went firmly on.

A story is told of Lord Wellington, a great English general, who saw a
young man in his army who was white with fear just before a battle, and
yet did not run away. Lord Wellington said: "There is a brave man. He
knows the danger, and yet he faces it." Another story is told of a
soldier who was making fun of a second who was badly frightened just
before battle. The frightened soldier said to the other one: "Yes, I am
afraid. And if you were half as much afraid as I am, you would run
away."

The lesson I want to draw is this, that it is not cowardly to be afraid
of things which have danger in them. It is cowardly to run away if you
ought to face them. And if you ought not to face them it is cowardly to
go headlong into them, just because of some other boy's foolish dare.

I remember a playmate who used to bite the heads off the fish he caught,
just because another boy dared him to. It used to make him terribly
sick, but he was too much of a coward not to do it. Some boys take up
smoking and drinking and swearing for the same reason. Any boy who does
that sort of thing is a coward.




ABRAHAM'S GUEST


You have all heard of Abraham, who went out from his home in Ur of the
Chaldees to find God. And you remember how he dwelt in tents, and had
hundreds of cattle. And you know how good he was to his nephew, Lot.

There is a story told about Abraham which you will not find in the
Bible. Abraham received into his tent one day an aged traveler. After he
had invited the traveler to dine with him at his sunset meal, Abraham
went out to offer up his evening sacrifice to God. But the traveler
would not join him in prayer and thanksgiving. Abraham was angry because
of the old man's lack of religion, and drove him from his tent.

Later in the evening the angel of the Lord appeared to Abraham and asked
him why he had driven out the old man. Abraham replied:

"Lord, he refused to acknowledge Thee!"

The Lord replied: "What! I have borne with this old man for eighty
years, and you could not bear with him for two days!" After that, so the
story goes, Abraham helped everyone who came along, no matter what his
religious belief might be.

That is a good story for boys and girls to remember when they feel that
they cannot forgive someone who has done them a wrong. What would become
of you if God never forgave you when _you_ did wrong? It is this spirit
of forgiveness that Christ means to teach us when He says in the Lord's
Prayer, "Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors." If, then, you
say that prayer and refuse to forgive anyone who has done you a wrong,
you mean that you want to have God act just as unforgiving with you as
you are with your enemies. That would be terrible,--to ask God not to
forgive you. None of us would dare pray like that.

You remember Peter came to Christ once and asked how often we were to
forgive people. Peter thought seven times was enough. But Christ said,
"No, you must forgive until seventy times seven." That would be four
hundred and ninety times. Christ did not mean exactly that many times.
But He meant more times than you can think. That is, if you are a
follower of Christ you are to forgive a person as often as he is sorry
for having done you a wrong, and comes to you and asks your forgiveness.




ABOUT GENEROSITY


When we speak of a person as being generous we usually think of someone
who gives his money, or whatever belongs to him, freely to others. But
did you ever think that people can be generous with their thoughts, too?

Let me show you what I mean by that. There were once two boys who went
to visit at a farm where they kept Shetland ponies, and of course both
boys wanted to ride them. So one day they persuaded the man in charge of
the ponies to put the saddle on a handsome black one and lead him out
into the yard for them to mount. But when it came to actually getting on
the pony's back, the younger boy was afraid. Although the older boy
urged him, he would not take a ride. Finally the other boy mounted and
rode gaily off, and came back beaming with delight. But instead of being
proud, and thinking the other boy cowardly, he went over to the younger
lad and said: "Now you get on. I know you can ride him." And when at
last the other did ride off, the older boy's eyes danced with delight,
and he clapped his hands to encourage the younger boy. That is one of
the best forms of generosity.

Another illustration of it is when you are on a baseball or football
team, or in a contest of any sort, to be able to say when you are
honestly beaten that you were beaten by a better team. When you can say
that, it takes half the sting out of defeat and makes those who win
admire you more than ever.

Don't be stingy with your thoughts about people. Always think the best
about others, and believe the best, and you will grow to be
open-hearted, friendly, lovable and big.




SUN AND WIND


Once upon a time, according to an old fable, the sun and the northwind
had a contest to see which could take a man's coat off the more quickly.

The northwind tried first. It gathered together all its forces in its
own corner of the earth, and then rushed forth upon this man who was
walking along a country-road. The wind blew and blew, and it seemed as
if the traveller's coat would be blown from his back or torn to tatters.
But the harder the northwind blew the tighter the man drew his coat
about him, and the wind could not get it off his back. After it had
spent all its force it gave up in despair.

Then the sun had its turn. It came out without noise or violence like
the northwind. It did not whistle in the treetops nor bluster through
the bushes. It did not buffet nor struggle with the man. It just went on
pouring forth its heat. And it seemed as if it could never win, any
more than the northwind. But soon the traveller took out his
handkerchief and wiped the perspiration from his face. Then, before
long, he took off his hat. Soon he unbuttoned his coat, and finally he
took it off of his own accord. The sun had won the contest against the
northwind!

Now, a fable is meant to teach a lesson. The lesson of this fable is
that gentleness wins where only strength and rudeness fail. If some one
has done you a wrong, the way to deal with him is not to try to "get
even" with him, as we say. Nor is the best way to get angry with him and
scold him. The Bible tells us that the way to overcome your enemy is to
do good for evil, for it says by so doing you will "heap coals of fire
upon his head."

Usually it is the weak people who bluster like the northwind, and storm
and brag. Strong people are usually quiet. There is an old saying that
"if you are right you can afford to keep your temper, and if you are
wrong you cannot afford to lose it." Be gentle. You will win more that
way than by getting angry.




THE BOY AND THE TURTLE


Theodore Parker was one of the greatest preachers America ever had, and
this story is told of him as a boy. One day, as he was going across the
fields, he came to a pond where he saw a small turtle sunning itself
upon a stone which rose out of the water. The boy picked up a stick, and
was about to strike the turtle, when a voice within him said, "Stop!"
His arm paused in midair and, startled, he ran home to ask his mother
what the voice meant. Tears came into his mother's eyes as she took the
boy in her arms and told him that it was his conscience which had cried
"Stop!" Then she told him that his conscience was the voice of God, and
that his moral safety depended upon his heeding that inner voice.

The same thing is true of all boys and girls. If you obey that inner
voice in questions of right and wrong, it will speak to you clearly.

But if you neglect it, it will grow silent, and you will be left in
darkness and in doubt as to what is right and wrong.

Some people call this voice the "inner light," and that is a very good
name for it. Every time you walk by the light you put fresh oil in the
lamp, and the light grows stronger and the way clearer.

Whenever that inner voice speaks to you and tells you that a thing is
wrong, don't argue with the voice and give reasons for doing the thing
that is wrong. Obey the voice at once, as Parker did, and it will save
you endless trouble.




THE BOY AND THE NICKEL


A man once found a boy crying on the street, and asked the little chap
what he was crying about. The child told him he had just lost a nickel.
The stranger gave him another, and then the boy began to cry again. This
greatly astonished the man, and he asked him why he was crying again.
The little chap said, "Because, if I hadn't lost that other nickel, I'd
have two now."

That was, of course, a very foolish way to look at it, but that is the
way a great many people look at things. This is what is called
covetousness. Covetous people always want something they have not, and
so they are usually unhappy.

The way to be happy is to think of the things you have, and not of the
things you have not. A man was once told that Caesar was going to cause
him great unhappiness, and he replied that if Caesar could blot out the
sun with a blanket he might make him unhappy. But if he had the sun to
shine upon him, he would still be happy. We all have the sun to shine
upon us, and other things a-plenty to be happy over, if we will just
count them up. Let us not be like the little boy crying about the nickel
he did not have.




THE THREE FATES


Boys and girls in ancient Greece believed that there were three fates,
in the form of three women seated above the clouds, who spun the thread
of everyone's life, and cut it off with shears when death came.

We no longer believe in such things, but we still speak of fate. Boys
and girls sometimes say that they are fated to fail in examinations, and
so think they cannot help failing. But that is no more true than the
belief about the three women which the Grecian boys and girls held. As a
matter of fact, nothing outside of us makes evil things happen to us. We
make our own fates. Or shall I say, we _are_ our own fates? Someone has
said, "Our fates lie asleep along the roadside until we waken them."
That is very true, as I think I can show you by a story.

Not long ago I was riding on a train up through Vermont. A boy came into
the car selling papers, books, candy, fruit, and other things. There
was a boy opposite me in the smoking-car who wanted to appear very smart
and manly. He was smoking a cigar and looking very much traveled. The
trainboy offered him a book which had a bad title and worse pictures in
it. But in front of this young chap sat two bright-faced,
innocent-looking boys who did not pretend to be anything but what they
were. The trainboy offered them salted peanuts. In front of those boys
sat a fine, clean-looking, well-bred man. The trainboy offered him a
good, wholesome book.

Now, three fates were in that car in the form of that trainboy, and each
person invited his own kind of fate by what he was in himself. That is
true all through life. Be true, and you attract truth. Be evil, and you
attract evil. Your fate is what you are.




THE INCH-WORM AND THE MOUNTAIN


Out in the state of California there is a great valley known as the
Yosemite Valley, and here once lived a tribe of Indians who tried to
explain how the wonderful streams and trees and rocks came to be.

The story of one of the highest peaks, El Capitan, is very interesting.
One day some Indian boys went fishing in a beautiful lake in the
Yosemite, and after they had grown tired they lay down in the sun upon a
rock beside the lake. They soon fell fast asleep. How long they slept
they did not know, but when they awoke they found that during their
sleep the rock on which they lay had been stood on end, so that they
were now nearly a mile high in the air and had no means of getting down.
They were in a bad plight.

But the animals in the valley which were friendly to mountaineers saw
their misfortune and held a conference as to how to help the boys get
down. They decided that the only thing to do was to try to climb up the
face of the cliff. But the rock, was too steep, and so they tried to
jump up. First the raccoon tried it, then the bear, then the squirrel,
then the fox, and finally the mountain-goat. It was all to no avail,
however, and they gave up in discouragement, and were about to leave the
boys to perish, when the inch-worm came along and offered her services.
The animals laughed her to scorn. What could she do, with her
snail-pace, when they all, who were so fleet of foot, had to give it up!

But she would not be laughed out of her purpose, and she began to climb
up the cliff. Slowly, inch by inch, she crawled up, so slowly that it
seemed as if she would take a thousand years to get there. But as she
passed crag after crag the animals below ceased making fun of her and
began to shout encouragement. At last she reached the top. And then the
Great Spirit turned her into a huge butterfly so strong that she flew
down, with the boys on her back, to safety.

There is a verse in the Old Testament which says that the race is not
always to the swift, which means that it is not always the strongest who
win. It is the one who keeps at it. Many a bright boy fails in school
because the lessons come so easily he does not work. Many a dull boy
wins because he sticks to it and plods away.

If you are tempted to trust too much to your brightness, remember the
animals who made fun of the inch-worm. If you are dull, remember the
inch-worm, take courage, and plod away. You will get there sometime.




THE FRENCH DRUMMER-BOY


I want to tell you to-day of one of the bravest deeds ever done by a
boy.

It happened this way. Back in the year 1793, when the French people were
having trouble with their king and queen, and finally put them to death,
the rulers called in soldiers from other nations to help them against
their own people. The foreign soldiers met the French troops before a
town called Maubeuge, and there a fierce battle was fought.

The fiercest part of the fighting was carried on against Hungarian
Grenadiers, who held the market-place of the town. During this charge a
drummer-boy in the French army saw that his countrymen were having a
hard time of it, so he slipped around back of these Hungarian soldiers
to the other side of the market-place, right in the thick of the enemy,
and there drummed the charge, in order to make his comrades think that
some of the French soldiers had already pushed through the enemy's
ranks, and so encourage the others to push on.

Many years after, in digging up the ground about the market-place, the
little bones of that drummer-boy were found buried alongside the bones
of the tall Hungarian men amongst whom he had fallen. The French people
have put up a statue to his memory in the town of Avesnes, and he is
shown still beating the charge on his drum, and looking out toward the
frontier whence the enemy of his people came.




A KING IN THE STUFF


In the early days of the history of the children of Israel the people
were ruled by judges, and it was not until they saw the nations round
about them under the leadership of kings that they desired a king of
their own. In spite of the warnings of the old prophet Samuel, they
demanded a king, and Samuel chose a young man, afterwards King Saul, to
be their ruler.

But when the people came together to make Saul King they could not find
him. They searched a long while, and finally God told them that Saul had
hidden himself amongst the baggage. There they looked, and sure enough,
as the old story says, there was a king "hid in the stuff."

That was many hundreds of years ago, and kings are no longer made in
that way. But the story has a meaning still for every boy. There is
still a king hid in the stuff that goes to make up every boy. A great
many things about a boy in which he hides his kingship seem no better
than the worthless stuff in which Saul hid. There are mistakes,
outbursts of temper, laziness, selfishness, impatience, deceit, and
cruelty. But hidden beneath all that, God would have you remember that
there is still a king hid in the stuff.

A story is told of the son of Louis XVI of France, whose father and
mother were put to death by the people. He was thus left an orphan, and
was sent to live with a wicked man and woman who tried to teach him all
manner of wrongdoing. But when they tried to persuade him to do wrong,
he would refuse, and say that he was a king's son, and would some day be
king himself, therefore he could not stoop so low.

I wish every boy, when he is tempted to do some unmanly thing, would
remember his kingship, too. You are not the son of an earthly king, but
you are each the son of a Heavenly King, and you, too, have the making
of a king in you. You are too great to do mean things. There is an old
hymn which runs like this:

"My Father is rich in houses and lands,
He holdeth the wealth of the world in His hands;
Of rubies and diamonds, of silver and gold
He has gone to prepare us a mansion untold.
I'm the child of a King, the child of a King,
With Jesus my Saviour, I'm the child of a King."

And when you would do a mean thing, ask yourself if that is worthy of
your kingship. Remember also that only those who live Kingly lives are
worthy to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.




BREAD AND WINE


This is Communion Sunday, when the Church celebrates what is known as
"the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper." You remember that on the night
before Christ was crucified He gathered His twelve disciples together
that He might have a quiet meal and talk with them. And it is that Last
Supper, as it is known, which we call to mind when we observe Communion
Sunday.

The first Christians did not have communion on Sunday. They used to have
a common meal together on weekdays, and at a neighbour's house. At these
meals they would recall the sayings of Jesus and His loving deeds.

But Christ not only had the Last Supper with His disciples, and taught
them to remember Him in the breaking of the bread: He also gave them the
lesson about the bread and the wine by which to remember Him.

You know how bread is made. Grains of wheat are put in the ground by the
farmer, and these grains give up their lives in order that other grains
may grow on the stalk at harvest-time. Then these grains are gathered
in, and finally ground into flour. Christ also gave up His life just as
those first grains of wheat in the ground. And He meant to tell us by
the bread at communion that if we are to help other people we must be
willing to give up our own selfish desires for their sake.

By the wine at communion Christ meant to teach us that just as the
branch of a grapevine must be attached to the stalk before there can be
grapes, so you and I must keep close to Christ in order to be able to
live the life of unselfishness which shows that we are His followers. He
says: "I am the vine, ye are the branches. Without me ye can do
nothing."

After Christ's death, whenever the disciples took their meal together,
they would think of Christ, and they would forgive one another and
become more gentle and loving. Whenever we see the communion-table
prepared, we also must think of Christ, forgive those who have wronged
us, and try still harder to be unselfish and kind.




THE FIRST CHRISTMAS CAROL


In England on Christmas eve boys and girls and men and women go about
the streets singing Christmas carols, or songs, at the doors of people's
houses, and the people for whom they sing give them tokens of their
good-will. The first verse of one of the oldest and best Christmas
carols is as follows:

"God rest you merry, gentlemen;
  Let nothing you dismay,
For Christ was born of Mary
  Upon a Christmas Day."

That is a very beautiful carol, but there is one still more beautiful.
It is the one the angels sang the night that Christ was born:

"Glory to God in the highest,
Peace on earth to men of good-will."

This means that people who have good-will in their hearts toward other
people will have peace on earth. And how very true that is! People
generally act toward us the same way in which we act toward them. If we
are cross, others are cross; but if we are warmhearted and loving, then
people are warmhearted toward us. It is just like seeing your face in a
looking-glass. If you frown, the face in the mirror will frown. If your
face is smiling, the one in the mirror will be smiling. That is another
way of saying that you get what you give.

Christ came into the world to teach us how to have good-will to men, and
from our good-will to get happiness. Any boy or girl who faithfully
tries to be like Christ, and to do as he believes Jesus would do if He
were in his place, will grow to have this good-will in his heart. Then
some day he will sing as the angels did, "Glory to God in the highest,"
for he will know God's peace. Christ said, "Blessed are the
peace-makers."

Here is a verse for you to take as a motto:

"Where are you going? Never mind.
Just follow the road that says, 'Be kind,'
And do the duty that nearest you lies,
For that is the road to Paradise."




A HINT FROM A CARIBOU


This is an animal-story. It is about a caribou. A caribou is a kind of
reindeer, and lives in Canada.

One day a man was out in a stumpy pasture-field beside a woods in
Canada, and he saw a mother caribou and her little calf feeding quietly
down in a valley nearby.

He was on a little hill some distance away, but the wind was blowing in
the direction of the caribou. Presently the mother caribou raised her
head, sniffed the air, and looked in the direction where the man was
hidden behind a stump. She had caught the scent of a human being. That
meant danger to her calf. Soon the mother caribou, leaving her calf in
the valley, started in the direction of the man. He slipped from his
hiding-place to another stump. On came the caribou till she reached the
very stump behind which the man had first hidden. There she smelled the
ground, and then a strange thing happened. She called her calf to her,
had it smell the ground, too, so as to get the scent of the man. When
that was done, she got behind that little caribou and butted it down the
valley as fast as it could go. Why did she do that? It was to teach her
calf that whenever it got that scent on the air, there was danger, and
it must get away as quickly as possible.

Ever after that, even before the calf knew that this scent belonged to a
man, or had seen a man, it would run away from it.

Your parents are constantly doing for you what that mother caribou did
for her little one. When they tell you that such and such a thing is
wrong, and you must not do it; when again they tell you there is danger
in going to a certain place, or in chumming with a particular boy or
girl, they are again doing the same thing for you. And when they punish
you, as that mother caribou did her calf, it is because they know the
danger far better than you, and they know that your safety depends upon
keeping away from such things.

Then, bye and bye, perhaps, as you grow older, you will begin to see
for yourself what the danger meant, just as the little caribou might
some day see a hunter for itself. And then you will no longer think your
parents cruel or strict; you will be thankful that they were so wise and
kind.




THE REPENTANCE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON


When you begin to study English literature you will hear a great deal
about Samuel Johnson, who wrote one of the first English dictionaries,
and was a great scholar. Johnson's father was a bookseller, who used to
have a little shop in the market-place, where he sold books on
market-days. One day, when Johnson was a boy, his father took sick and
asked Samuel to go to the market-place and sell books for him. Johnson
was ashamed of such work, and refused to go.

But many years afterward, when he had become an old man and was back on
a visit to his native village, he was missed from breakfast one morning
by the friends with whom he was staying. On his return at supper-time he
told his friends how he had spent the day. It was fifty years ago that
day when he had refused to help his father. He says: "To do away with
the sin of this disobedience, I this day went in a post-chaise to
Uttoxeter, and going into the market at the time of high business,
uncovered my head and stood with it bare an hour before the stall which
my father had formerly used, exposed to the sneers of standers-by and
the inclemency of the weather; a penance by which I trust I have
propitiated Heaven for this only instance, I believe, of contumacy to my
father."

That is a story worth remembering when you are ashamed of doing
something which your parents have asked you to do, perhaps to carry a
parcel on the street or to mow the lawn. You will see sometime, I hope,
that all honest work, if it is well done, is a thing to be proud of,
instead of to be ashamed of. But it may be too late then. Your parents
may have died, and you, like Johnson, will come back with deep sorrow to
think how you had disobeyed and forsaken them when they needed you. The
way to save yourselves such heartache is to be obedient to your parents
as long as they live.




EASTER


Once upon a time a Persian king was marching westward with a great army
to fight against Greece. In the evening, after the army had encamped for
the night, someone found the king looking over the host of people spread
out before him, and he was in tears. When he was asked the cause of his
sadness, he replied that he had been thinking that one hundred years
from that time not one of all these men in his army would be alive.

That was long before Christ lived, and had risen from the dead on Easter
morning. These people had no Easter. They did not believe in the sort of
everlasting life in which we believe. And even long after the
resurrection of Christ there were many people in Greece and Rome who had
not heard the wonderful news. Here is a letter that someone wrote over a
hundred years after that first Easter to a mother whose son had just
died:

     "I was much grieved, and shed as many tears over your son as I did
     over my own, and I did everything that was fitting, as so did my
     whole family.... But still there is nothing one can do in the face
     of such trouble. So I leave you to comfort yourselves. Good-bye."

If these people had known about our Easter they would not have felt so
hopeless and sad. For since Christ has risen from the dead, we know that
all who love Him and try to be like Him shall also rise from the dead,
and be with Him in a life beyond the grave.

He said to His disciples before He was crucified: "In my Father's house
are many mansions; if it were not so I would have told you; for I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you I will
come again and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be
also." When we know this, then to die is not so terrible as it was to
the Persians and Greeks. It is like going to sleep in our home, and
waking up in a place much more beautiful than we had ever dreamed of,
and being with Christ, the Friend of little children, forever. But we
must know Christ in this life if we are to enjoy His friendship in the
next.




THE WHISPERING GALLERY


If you ever go to London, one of the many buildings which will be
pointed out to you will be Saint Paul's Cathedral, which is capped by a
wonderful dome. And if you ask the guide, he will show you in that dome
a strange room known as the "Whispering Gallery." In this gallery your
lowest whisper can be heard on the other side of the room, a great
distance away. It would be hard to tell secrets in a room like that.

But there is a still more wonderful whispering gallery than that. It is
the one which each one of us carries about in his own soul. In that
gallery even things we _think_, whether we say them or not, are heard by
God, our Creator. No thought escapes Him. "In Him we live, and move, and
have our being." If we "take the wings of the morning, and fly to the
uttermost parts of the earth," even there God is still.

This would be a very terrible thing to realize if all our thoughts were
evil thoughts, unkind and unlovely. For then we should be like the man
who, when he was young, ill-treated his old father and mother. When he
grew up, this young man became very wealthy, and he used to carry candy
in his pocket as he walked in the parks to give to the children, because
he wanted their love. But the children would take his candy, then
scamper away like frightened squirrels, because something inside seemed
to tell them that the man was not really kind at heart. Older people
felt the same way about him, and a chill came over them when they were
with him. So they avoided him. It would be unbearable to think that only
our evil thoughts were open to God in that way.

But while God knows all the wickedness in our hearts, and we cannot hide
anything from Him, God also knows the good thoughts that are whispered
in the gallery of our soul. And when we wish ever so greatly that we
could do something to help somebody, but cannot do it; or when we would
like to be good, but are tripped up by some temptation, God knows then
how hard we try, and gives us credit for our effort, even though we fail
to do what we wanted to.

Let us remember the Whispering Gallery of the soul, then, and when we
think evil thoughts, even though we never tell them to our nearest
friend, let us be sure God knows them. And when we try hard to be good
and to do good, but fail, let us also remember that God sees it, even
though none else knows. Our prayer each morning ought to be like the
psalmist's: "Let the words of my mouth, and the _meditations of my
heart_ be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer."




THE HE-SAID GIRL


Sometimes, when I am walking along the street, I catch snatches of
conversation as I pass by a group of little girls. And often I hear the
phrase "He said" this, or "He said" that. There are girls who do not
seem to talk about much else but what this boy or that boy has said, and
these girls I call "he-said" girls.

Now, of course it is all right for girls to think about the boys. We
could not stop that if we would, and we would not stop it if we could.
The danger comes when a girl thinks of little else. The girl who begins
by devoting all her thought to boys is apt to end by being a very
unattractive and unpopular sort of woman. Every girl ought to get along
well with the girls of her own age as well as with the boys. There is
something wrong with the girl who cannot get along with her girl
friends. And so I say to you that if you do not want to be thoroughly
unhappy as a woman, try to win the friendship of girls as well as boys.

A good plan for the "he-said" girl is to take her father as her ideal,
and hero and lover. Then, as she grows to womanhood, she will not be
satisfied with any man who is not in some measure as good as her father.
In the meanwhile beware of being a "he-said" girl.




ON DECK


When I was a boy I belonged to a baseball team in the village where I
lived, and when we played games with a team from another village we had
a scorer who not only kept tally of the runs, but also told us who was
to be the next at the bat. He would say, "So-and-so is at the bat,
So-and-so is on deck." And when he told a boy he was "on deck," that boy
knew he was to be the next one at the bat.

Boys and girls are always on deck, whether they are playing ball or not,
for a boy or girl never knows when he is going to be called upon to play
some part in the game called Life. And the strange thing about it is,
there is no scorer who tells you that you are on deck. So you never get
any warning, and you may be on deck and not know it, and so miss your
chance.

Samuel, for instance, was a boy who used to close the curtains and put
out the candles at night in the temple away back hundreds of years
before Christ was born. One evening he had put out the lights and closed
the curtains, just the same as he had a hundred times before, and then
lay down to sleep. He little thought that this particular day he was on
deck, and was to be called into the game by God. But that night God
called him, and sent him on a very important errand that was to change
his whole life and the history of his people.

And things like that are happening in America to-day. I read a story the
other day of a young student who was overtaken by a rainstorm, and
borrowed an umbrella of a lawyer. He returned it a few days later with a
note of thanks. Not long afterward he received a letter from the lawyer
offering him a position in his office on account of his good
handwriting. The student took the position, kept on with his studies in
college, and after he graduated from college went right along in that
office till he became a man of influence. He didn't know what it meant
when he wrote that note. He was on deck.

The lesson that I want to draw is this: That you must be on the lookout
and do well the things that come to you each day, for who knows but you
may be on deck that very day, and be called to play some important part?
For only those are called who are on deck; that is, ready to play. The
boy or girl who does not do his work well day by day may miss his chance
of being called to take some larger place in life when the times comes.
Take this motto from the Old Testament: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do, do it with thy might."




THE TERROR BY NIGHT


In some parts of Canada, where the country is still thinly settled by
people, wild animals are quite numerous. In one of these communities
there once lived a boy who was in the village late one night. He had
been at the village-store, and had heard the men talking about a wildcat
that had been seen in that neighbourhood a short time before.

The boy was not a coward, but when he started for his home, three miles
away, in the country, he was nervous. Nothing happened, however, until
he was climbing over a set of bars at the end of a lane leading through
a piece of woods near his home. Then he heard the bushes moving and
twigs crackling under the feet of some animal the other side of the
lane-fence. He thought of the wildcat. He jumped to the ground, picked
up a heavy stick he had seen under a tree on his way through that day
and listened. Nearer and nearer came the rustling of the bushes, and
every little while he could hear an animal sniff the air. Finally it
came to the fence, clambered up opposite him. The boy raised his club
and waited, and when the animal jumped down beside him, its eyes shining
in the darkness, he struck with all his might. Off the beast went into
the darkness. All was silence again, and the boy stood listening and
trembling. Then from the top of a nearby hill he heard a dog howl with
pain. He found, next morning, that it was only a neighbour's dog that
had frightened him so.

That boy is not the only one who has seen things mistakenly, just
because he was afraid. If you are dreading something, you will think
that everything that happens brings the thing you dread. Usually nothing
happens at all. The trouble was only in the person's mind, just as that
wildcat was in the boy's mind, and so every noise he could not explain
was a wildcat.

I am sure David must have known something about that fear when, as a
boy, he watched his sheep out on the lonely hills at night. But David
learned that there was One who was able to protect him by night as well
as by day. It was God. And so he wrote of God: "He that keepeth thee
will not slumber. God is thy keeper. God is thy shade upon thy right
hand. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the
arrow that flieth by day; for the pestilence that walketh in
darkness.... It shall not come nigh thee."

Let us remember that no real harm can come to us unless it comes from
within ourselves. God is our protector. In His love we can trust by day,
and in His care we can lay us down to sleep at night without a fear.




THE BRAMBLE-BUSH KING


There is a story in the Old Testament which says that once upon a time
the trees gathered together to choose a king to rule over them.

First they invited the olive-tree; but the olive-tree said it was too
busy bearing fruit. Then they asked the fig-tree to be king; but the
fig-tree had its work to do, and also declined. Next they waited upon
the vine with an invitation; but, like the others, it did not wish to be
their king.

Finally the trees asked the bramble to accept the position, and the
bramble gladly agreed. The first order it gave was for all the trees to
take shelter under its branches or be burned with fire. That sounds just
like a prickly, thorny, little bramble, does it not?

That is usually the way of people who like to lord it over other people
when they have no ability for it. There are some who want to do so when
they are at a party. They want to be the hitching-post to which all the
people are tied when they talk. If the bramble takes the form of a boy,
he wants to be captain of his team, or he will not play. If it happens
to be a girl, she insists upon everybody playing the game she wants, or
she will go home in a sulk. These people cannot agree long with anybody.
They are quarrelsome and peevish.

Some boys and girls are like horses: they make good single-drivers, but
they will not work with anyone else. Some horses go well enough alone,
but when you hitch them with another horse they crowd, or bite, or kick
it. They cannot "go double," as we say. That is the bramble-nature
showing out in a horse.

This is a bad trait, whether you find it in a horse, a man or woman, a
boy or girl. Christ says: "You know the rulers of the Gentiles lord it
over them. Not so shall it be among you; but whosoever would become
great among you shall be your minister; and whosoever would be first
among you shall be your servant." Jesus also said, "I am meek and lowly
in heart." So must all His followers be.

If you are getting any of the bramble-nature, and want to lord it over
everybody, you had better give it up. Some of the unhappiest people in
the world are bramble-bush kings.




WHERE IS HEAVEN?


Our great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers used to talk much about
where heaven was. And some thought it was up above the clouds, and
others thought it would be here on earth, after all the wickedness and
selfishness were done away. Every one, however, used to think that the
New Jerusalem, with its pearly gates and golden streets, was a real
place like the cities of to-day.

But we think of heaven more as the feeling in our hearts when we are
happy from being with our friends, or when we have done right and
unselfish things. We know what it is, then, to have heaven on earth. And
when we have heaven on earth, we know pretty nearly what the real heaven
is like.

Let me show you what I mean. Not long ago a speaker in a rescue mission
asked the children if they could tell him where heaven was. Immediately
a boy from the poorest section of the city sprang up, raised his hand
and cried shrilly: "I know; I know." "Well, my boy, where is heaven?"
the astonished leader asked. "Back in our street since mother got
acquainted with Jesus," was the answer.

That boy was on the right track. Whenever Christ comes into the heart
there comes with Him love and thoughtfulness of others. And when we do
kind things for others, we find happiness for ourselves, and that is
heaven. Christ says, "If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will
come in to him and sup with him and he with me." That means, when we do
things that we believe Christ would like to have us do, then He comes in
to sup with us. And when we feel Christ as our Companion, then it is
heaven.

We may go to a beautiful place called heaven when we die, but it will be
Christ who will make the place full of joy and gladness. And if we are
to see Him in that land and enjoy that heaven, we must first make a
heaven here on earth for ourselves and others by trying to please Him
and to be like Him every day.




THE CHRISTIAN ARMY


Saint Paul, in writing to the Christians of his day, urges them to be
"good soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ." If every Christian is a
soldier, then the Church ought to be called "the Christian Army." And
this makes plainer to us what it means to join the Church.

Armies, as you know, are divided into regiments, and regiments into
companies. Every soldier in the army belongs to a certain company. If a
man said that he wanted to belong to the United States Army, but that he
did not want to join any particular regiment or company, but that he
intended to be a soldier "in general," people would laugh at him. He
would be like a man who took his gun and went out all alone to fight
against Spain when we were at war with her. Or it would be as if a man
in a city should say that he wanted to fight fire, but instead of
joining a fire company, he would snatch up his pail and run alone to put
out the fire every time there was an alarm.

Now, in the Christian army there are also regiments and companies. The
different denominations, like the Presbyterians, the Methodists, the
Baptists, the Congregationalists, and so on, are the regiments. The
Churches like this and other Churches are the companies in the army.

So, when anyone says he wants to make war on wickedness and to bring in
the reign of love and peace and good-will which Christ started His
Church to fight for, we ask him to join one of the companies of the
Christian army. That is, we ask him to join a Church.

You may ask if one cannot be a Christian outside of the Church. I
answer, Yes, he can. But he is very much like the man with his pail
running to put out the fire, or the lone soldier. He can do better work
if he works with others. Furthermore, Christ said, "He that confesseth
me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven,
and he that denieth me before men, him will I deny before my Father
which is in heaven." In joining the Church you confess Christ.

You may ask me too, how old one should be before he can join the
Christian army, known as the Church of God. I answer, there is no set
age. Some boys and girls are ready to join before others. One little
girl who was going to join the Church was told by some of the members of
her Sunday-school class that she wasn't old enough. She replied, "Anyone
who is old enough to know right from wrong is old enough to join the
Church." If you are trying honestly day by day to be like Christ and to
do His will, and you wish to be a better soldier of the cross, then you
are ready to join the Church.

In the Christian army there are old and young, rich and poor, wise and
simple, all under the one flag,--the banner of the Cross; all under the
one Captain,--even Jesus Christ. And the best thing about our Captain
is, He has never lost a battle yet, and never will. All those who enlist
under His flag are sure to win, and to hear God's "Well done."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifty-Two Story Talks To Boys And Girls
by Howard J. Chidley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALKS TO BOYS AND GIRLS ***

***** This file should be named 14188.txt or 14188.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/8/14188/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
