The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Book of Filipino Riddles, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Little Book of Filipino Riddles

Author: Various

Release Date: December 15, 2004 [EBook #14358]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK OF FILIPINO RIDDLES ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders
Team, from scans kindly made available by the University of Michigan.









                       Philippine Studies
                               I

               A Little Book of Filipino Riddles

                      Collected and Edited
                               by
                        Frederick Starr


                         World Book Co.
                       Yonkers, New York
                              1909




                Copyrighted 1909 by Frederick Starr
                The Torch Press Cedar Rapids, Iowa




                      This Little Book of
                        Filipino Riddles
                        Is Dedicated To
                        Gelacio Caburian
                       Casimiro Verceles
                         Rufino Dungan
                               of
                      Agoo, Union Province




INTRODUCTION


Although I had already inquired for them from Ilocano boys, my first
actual knowledge of Filipino riddles was due to Mr. George T. Shoens,
American teacher among the Bisayans. He had made a collection of some
fifty Bisayan riddles and presented a brief paper regarding them at
the Anthropological Conference held at Baguio, under my direction, on
May 12-14, 1908. My own collection was begun among Ilocano of Union
Province from whom about two hundred examples were secured. Others
were later secured from Pangasinan, Gaddang, Pampangan, Bisayan and
Tagal sources. My informants have chiefly been school-boys, who spoke
a little English; they wrote the text of riddle and answer in their
native tongue and then we went over them carefully together to make
an English translation and to get at the meaning. Many Filipinos
know how to read and write their native language, although few have
had actual instruction in doing so. There is no question that errors
and inconsistencies exist in the spelling of these riddles, due to
this lack of instruction and to the fact that the texts have been
written by many different persons. I am myself not acquainted with
any Malay language. I have tried to secure uniformity in spelling
within the limits of each language but have no doubt overlooked many
inconsistencies. The indulgence of competent critics is asked. It has
been our intention throughout to adhere to the _old_ orthography. Thus
the initial _qu_ and the final _ao_ have been preferred.

The _word_ for riddle varies with the population. In Ilocano it is
_burburtia_, in Pangasinan _boniqueo_, in Tagal _bugtong_, in Gaddang
----, in Pampangan _bugtong_, in Bisayan _tugmahanon_.

Riddles are common to all mankind. They delighted the old Aryans and
the ancient Greeks as they do the modern Hindu and the Bantu peoples
of darkest Africa. Many writers have defined the riddle. Friedreich
in his _Geschichte des Raethsels_, says: "The riddle is an indirect
presentation of an unknown object, in order that the ingenuity of the
hearer or reader may be exercised in finding it out.... Wolf has given
the following definition: the riddle is a play of wit, which endeavors
to so present an object, by stating its characteristic features and
peculiarities, as to adequately call it before the mind, without,
however, actually naming it."

The riddles of various Oriental peoples have already been collected
and more or less adequately discussed by authors. Hebrew riddles
occur in the Bible, the best known certainly being Samson's:


    "Out of the eater came forth meat,
    And out of the strong came forth sweetness."


Arabic riddles are many and have been considerably studied; Persian
riddles are well known; of Indian riddles at least one collection
has been printed separately under the name _Lakshminatha upasaru_,
a series of Kolarian riddles from Chota Nagpur has been printed as,
also, an interesting article upon Behar riddles; Sanskrit riddles are
numerous and have called for some attention from scholars; a few Gypsy
riddles are known; two recent papers deal with Corean riddles. We know
of but two references to Malayan riddles; one is Rizal, _Specimens
of Tagal Folk-Lore_, the other is Sibree's paper upon the _Oratory,
Songs, Legends, and Folk-Tales of the Malagasy_. This is no doubt
an incomplete bibliography but the field has been sadly neglected
and even to secure this list has demanded much labor. It suffices
to show how deeply the riddle is rooted in Oriental thought and
indicates the probability that riddles were used in Malaysia long
before European contact.

To what degree Filipino riddles are indigenous and original is an
interesting but difficult question. So far as they are of European
origin or influenced by European thought, they have come from or
been influenced by Spain. Whatever comparison is made should chiefly,
and primarily, be with Spanish riddles. But our available sources of
information regarding Spanish riddles are not numerous. We have only
Demofilo's _Collecion de enigmas y adivinanzas_, printed at Seville
in 1880, and a series of five chap-books from Mexico, entitled _Del
Pegueno Adivinadorcito_, and containing a total of three hundred and
seven riddles. Filipino riddles deal largely with animals, plants and
objects of local character; such must have been made in the Islands
even if influenced by Spanish models and ideas. Some depend upon purely
local customs and conditions--thus numbers 170, 237, etc., could only
originate locally. Some, to which the answers are such words as egg,
needle and thread, etc., (answers common to riddles in all European
lands), may be due to outside influence and may still have some local
or native touch or flavor, in their metaphors; thus No. 102 is actually
our "Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall;" the Mexican form runs:


    "Una arquita muy chiquita
    tan blanca como la cal
    todo lo saben abrir
    pero ninguno cerrar."


But the metaphor "the King's limebox" could only occur in a district
of betel-chewing and is a native touch. Many of the Filipino riddles
introduce the names of saints and, to that degree, evidence foreign
influence; but even in such cases there may be local coloring; thus,
calling rain-drops falling "rods," "St. Joseph's rods cannot be
counted," could hardly be found outside of the tropics. Religious
riddles, relating to beads, bells, church, crucifixes, are common
enough and are necessarily due to outside influence, but even such
sometimes show a non-European attitude of mind, metaphorical expression
or form of thought.

Everywhere riddles vary in quality and value. Many are stupid
things, crudely conceived and badly expressed. Only the exceptional
is fine. Examine any page of one of our own riddle books and you
may criticize almost every riddle upon it for view-point, or form,
or flavor. We must not demand more from Filipino riddles than from
our own. Some knowledge of local products, customs, conditions, is
necessary for the understanding of their meaning; when understood,
they are fully equal to ours in shrewdness, wit and expression. Krauss
emphasizes the fact that everywhere riddles tend to coarseness and
even to obscenity and discusses the reasons. What is true elsewhere
is true here; a considerable number of Filipino riddles are coarse;
we have introduced them but emphasize the fact that any scientifically
formed collection of German or English riddles would contain some
quite as bad.

Probably few of our readers have considered the taxonomy of
riddles. Friedreich offers a loose and unscientific classification
as follows:


    I.    The Question Riddle.
    II.   The Simple Word Riddle (with seven sub-divisions).
    III.  The Syllable Riddle or Charade.
    IV.   The Letter Riddle.
                1. With reference to sound.
                2. With reference to form.
    V.    Punctuation Riddles.
    VI.   The Rebus.
    VII.  Complex Riddles; combination of two or more simple types.
    VIII. Number Riddles.


Several of these forms occur in our collection.

More scientific than Friedreich's work is Petsch's _Studien ueber
das Volksraetsel_. His analysis and dissection of riddle forms best
enable us to test the indigenous content of our Filipino riddles. He
recognizes two fundamental riddle types. He says: "Two groups of
riddles have long been distinguished in the collections, the true
rhymed riddles and the short 'catch-questions' expressed in prose. The
difference is not only in form but in content. 'True riddles' have
as purpose the describing of an object in veiled, thought-arousing,
perhaps misleading, poetical clothing, which, from this presentation of
its appearance, its source, its utility, etc., shall be recognized by
the intelligence, i.e., can and shall be guessed. 'Catch-questions,'
on the contrary, are not to be guessed, the questioner intending
himself to give the solution; at their best they are intended to trick
the hearer, and since their solution is impossible to the uninitiated
are not 'true riddles' but false ones. Since I propose to divide the
total riddle material of each single nation between these two great
chief groups, may I not somewhat extend the scope of the latter,
including some things which are rejected from most collections as
having little to do with actual riddles--those questions which are
generally insoluble and such tests of wisdom as appeal not to wit
and understanding, but to knowledge--which are certainly not true
riddles. Thus, in the group here characterized as 'false' different
classes of things are brought together, the characteristics of which
I shall investigate later." It would be interesting to quote the
author's discussion further. We can, however, only state that he
recognizes three classes of "false riddles," to which he gives the
names "wisdom tests," "life-ransoming riddles," and "catch-questions."

Of "true riddles" there is a vast variety of form and content. Most
typical is the descriptive riddle of a single object to be guessed. In
its complete and normal form Petsch claims that such a riddle
consists of five elements or parts. 1 Introduction; 2 denominative;
3 descriptive; 4 restraint or contrast; 5 conclusion. 1 and 5 are
merely formal, trimmings; 2 and 3 are inherent and essential; 4
is common and adds vigor and interest. Such complete and "normal"
riddles are rare in any language. Usually one or more of the five
elements are lacking. It is only by such an analysis of riddle forms
that a comparative study of riddles can be made. Any single riddle is
best understood, by the constant holding before the mind this pattern
framework and noting the degree of development of the case in hand.

The Filipinos themselves recognize several classes of riddles. An
old Tagal lady told us there were three kinds:



    1. _Alo-divino_: concerning God and divine things
    2. _Alo-humano_: concerning persons
    3. _Parabula_: all others



There is no science in this classification, which embodies considerable
corrupted Spanish. Another informant recognizes six classes:


    1. _Alo-divino_
    2. _Historia-vino:_ history of God and saints
    3. _Alo-humano_
    4. _Historia-mano_: history of persons.
    5. _Karle-mano_: God and saints and persons together.
    6. _Parabula_ or _biniyabas_.


These names call for little comment and the classification they
embody is of the loosest. The word _parabula_ is Spanish in source
and equivalent to our parable; _biniyabas_ is Tagal.

Some features of our riddles call for comment. Filipino riddles, in
whatever language, are likely to be in poetical form. The commonest
type is in two well-balanced, rhyming lines. Filipino versification is
less exacting in its demand in rhyme than our own; it is sufficient if
the final syllables contain the same vowel; thus Rizal says--_ayup_
and _pagud_, _aval_ and _alam_, rhyme. The commonest riddle verse
contains five or seven, or six, syllables, thus:


    Daluang balon
    hindi malingon

or

    Bahay ni San Gabriel
    punong puno nang barel.


Just as in European riddles certain set phrases or sentences are
found frequently at the beginning or end of the riddle. In Ilocano
and Pangasinan a common introductory form is "What creature of
God" or "What thing made by Lord God," the expression in reality
being equivalent to a simple "what." These pious forms do not at all
necessarily refer either to animals or natural objects; thus, a boat or
a house is just as good a "creature of God" as a fowl is. A common form
of ending is "Tell it and I am yours," "Guess it and I am your man."

Quite analogous to calling inanimate or artificial things "creatures
of God" is the personification of all sorts of things, animate and
inanimate; thus, a rat is "an old man," a dipper is "a boy." Not
infrequently the object or idea thus personified is given a title of
respect; thus, "Corporal Black" is the night. Akin to personification
is bold metaphor and association. In this there may or may not be
some evident analogy; thus a crawfish is "a bird," the banca or canoe
is "rung" (like a bell.) Not uncommonly the word "house" is used of
anything thought of as containing something; thus "Santa Ana's house,"
"San Gabriel's house;" this use is particularly used in speaking
of fruits. "Santa Ana's house is full of bullets" is rather pretty
description for the papaya. The word "work" is often used for a thing
made, or a manufactured article.

Saints' names are constantly introduced, generally in the possessive
case; examples are "Santa Ana's house," "Santa Maria's umbrella,"
"San Jose's canes." Less commonly the names of other Bible worthies
occur; thus "Adam's hair." There is not always any evident fitness in
the selection of the Saint in the connection established. San Jose's
connection with rain is suitable enough. One would need to know a
good deal regarding local and popular hagiography in order to see to
what degree the selections are appropriate.

Sometimes words without meaning, or with no significance in the
connection where they occur are used. These may serve merely
to fill out a line or to meet the demands of metre. Such often
appear to be names of the style of "Humpty Dumpty;" these may be
phonetically happy, as similar ones often are in European riddles,
fitting well with the word or idea to be called up. _Marabotania_
is probably meaningless, merely for euphony. Place names with no real
connection with the thought are frequently introduced, as Pantaleon,
Mariveles. "_Guering-guering_" and "_Minimin_" are merely for sound.

Particularly interesting and curious are the _historia-vino_ given
in numbers 312-317. No doubt there are many such. Those here given
were secured from one boy at Malolos. When first examined, I believed
the boy had not understood what I was after. He assured me that they
were _bugtong_ and _bugtong_ of the best and finest class. The idea
in these is to propound a statement in a paradoxical form, which
calls for some reference to a bible story or teaching; the answer is
not immediately clear and demands a commentary which is quite often
subtle and ingenious. Friedreich gives examples of similar expository
religious riddles from Europe.

A curious group are the relationship riddles, numbers 286-289, which
closely resemble trick questions among ourselves. The evidence of
outside influence is here conclusive in the fact that the ideas and
terms of relationship in them are purely European, in nowise reflecting
the characteristic Malayan system and nomenclature.

Some of the riddles are distinctly stupid. "I let the sun shine on
your father's back" seems to mean no more than that the house roof
is exposed to the solar rays. It is doubtful whether this means much
even in the original Tagal. Of course many of the riddles demand
for their adequate understanding a knowledge of native customs,
which the outsider rarely has. Thus, until one knows a common method
of punishing naughty children, the riddle "I have a friend; I do
not like to face him" means nothing. Perhaps the most difficult to
adequately present are some plays on words. These frequently need a
considerable explanation. In some of these the parts of the word to
guess are concealed in or are suggested by the form of the statement
and one must extract them and combine them; such are "_iscopidor_" and
"_sampaloc_." In others the play depends upon homophony, the same sound
or word have different meanings. In yet a third class the answer is a
smart Aleck sort of an affair, "How do you take a deer without net,
dogs, spear, or other things for catching?" "Cooked." Most inane
of all, but with plenty of analogues among ourselves, are those
where the answer itself is introduced into the question with the
intention to mislead; "Its skin is green and its flesh is red like
a watermelon." "Watermelon."

Filipino riddles are mostly given out by young people. When several
are gathered together they will question and answer; they are much in
vogue when a young gentleman calls upon his sweetheart; among Tagals
and Pampangans at least the chief occasion for giving _bugtong_ is when
a little group are watching at night beside a corpse. In propounding
a riddle it is not uncommon to challenge attention by repeating as
witty a rhyme, which is quite as often coarse as witty. One Tagal
example runs:


    Bugtong co ka Piro!
    Turan mo ka Baldo!
    Pag hindi mo naturan
    Hindi ca nang iwang;
    Pag maturan mo
    May tae ang puit mo.


    I have a bugtong compadre P!
    Guess it compadre B!
    If you cannot guess it
    You have not cleaned yourself;
    If you do not guess it
    You are dirty.


We have mentioned two references to Malay riddles. Of the eight given
in Rizal's paper five have been given us by our informants. As Rizal's
entire paper will be reprinted in another volume of this series we have
not copied the other three. Sibree's paper is important for comparison,
since it presents matter drawn from the uttermost point of Malaysia,
Madagascar, which has been unaffected by Spanish influence. Sibree's
article is translated from a little book by another missionary, the
Rev. Louis Dahle. Dahle's book is entitled _Specimens of Malayasy
Folklore_ and its material is presented in Malagasy only. Mr. Sibree
translates twenty of his riddles. They are in character and flavor
like many of the Filipino riddles. As Sibree does not give the native
text and I have not seen Dahle's book, I cannot know whether they
are rhymed. They are all of the type of true riddles to be guessed,
descriptions wherein one or two characteristics or striking features
are presented, either directly or figuratively. Examination of this
little series deepens an impression already made by study of our own
collection, namely, that the true riddles in our series are largely
original Filipino while the insoluble riddles, the catches, the plays
on words, are those where foreign influence is most evident. Although
Sibree's article is easily accessible, we quote a few of these Malagasy
examples for comparison.

"Cut and no wound seen?" "Water," is our number 231.

"The mother says let us stand up, but the children say let us lie
across?" "A ladder." and "At night they come without being fetched
and by day they are lost, without being stolen?" "The stars." are
quite in the style and spirit of Filipino riddles. Compare "Coarse
rafia cloth outside and white robe inside?" "Manioc root" with the
"Poor outside; rich within," "Langca" of the Ilocano.

The order of presentation of these riddles has been a considerable
problem. To arrange them rigidly in Petsch's order of development
might have been fairly satisfactory but would have rendered the
finding of any desired riddle difficult. We have struck out a
crude arrangement in alphabetical order of the English answers,
with subdivisions under some general headings. The arrangement is
not scientific nor completely developed, but it will perhaps work
fairly well in practice. The original text is first given for riddle
and answer; the English translation of both follows; then are given
such explanation and comment as are necessary. When a riddle occurs
in different languages, the text of the question is given in one,
but the fact of its occurrence in others is indicated.

We are indebted to many for assistance. The list is too long for
individual acknowledgment. To our original Ilocano helpers this little
book is dedicated. To Messrs. George T. Shoens, Francisco A. Santos
(Calumpit), Rufino Santos (Arayat) and Conrado Benitez (Pagsanghan),
we are so deeply indebted that their names must be mentioned. To school
boys in Agoo, San Fernando (Union), Malolos, Manila and Tayug, we owe
many thanks. Would that the publication of this imperfect collection
might lead to their greater interest in a neglected section of their
folklore. Some Malay worker ought to perfect and complete the work
here begun.

This volume is the first number of a series of little books which the
undersigned plans to bring out under the general title of _Philippine
Studies_. Each number will treat of a distinct and separate subject;
each will be independent. The extent to which the series will be
developed, will depend upon the reception given to it and the degree
in which it appears to respond to a real need. Two numbers at any
rate are already arranged and the second should appear within a year.


Frederick Starr.

September, 1909.




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS MENTIONED IN THE INTRODUCTION


Bernheisel, K. Korean Conundrums. Korean Review. 1905, pp. 81-86.

Bloomfield, M. Religion of the Veda, pp. 215-218. (Sanskrit
Riddles.) Journal American Oriental Society, Vol. X, p. 172.

Dahle, L. Specimens of Malagasy Folk-Lore. Atananarivo, 1877, 8vo,
pp. 457.

Del pequeno Adivinadorcito. Mexico. Five chap-books, 16mo each, 16 pp.

Demofilo. Colleccion de enigmas y adivinanzas. Sevilla, 1880. 8vo,
pp. 495.

Friedreich, J. B. Geschichte des Raetsels. Dresden, 1860. 8vo,
pp. viii, 248.

Fuehrer, A. Sanskritische Raetsel. Zeitschrift der Deutsch. Morganlaender
Gesel. 1885. pp. 99-102.

Haug. Vedische Raetselfragen und Raetselspruche. Trans. Munich Academy,
1875.

Krauss, F. S. Allegemeine Methodik d. Volkskunde 1891-97, p. 112.

Korean Conundrums. Korean Review. Seoul; 1906. pp. 59-60.

Lakshminatha upasaru. Collection of Riddles. Patna, 1888. 32mo, pp. 32.

Ludwig. Der Rig Veda. iii. pp. 390.

Mitra. Sarat Chandra. Riddles current in Bihar. Journal Asiatic
Society, 1901, 8vo, pp. 33-58.

Petsch, R. Studien ueber das Volksraetsel. Berlin. 1898, 8vo, pp. 139.

Phillott, D. C. Persian Riddles. Calcutta, 1906. Journal Asiatic
Society of Bengal, pp. 86-94.

Rizal, J. Specimens of Tagal Folk-Lore. London, 1889, Trubner's Record,
pp. 45-46.

Sibree, Jr., J. The Oratory, Songs, Legends and Folk-Tales of the
Malagasy. London, 1883, Folk-Lore Journal, pp. 38-40.

Two Gypsy Riddles. Journal Gypsy Folk-Lore Society, 1907, pp. 92.

Wagner, P. Some Kolarian Riddles. Calcutta, 1904. Journal Asiatic
Society of Bengal, pp. 62-79.






FILIPINO RIDDLES


Animals: mammals.


1.

Ania iti pinarsua iti Dios a balin suec a maturog?
    (Iloc.) Panniqui

What thing that God made sleeps with its head down?
    Bat


2.

Pantas ca man, at marunong bumasa at sumulat, aling ibon dito sa
mundo ang lumilipad ay sumususo ang anak?
    (Tag.) Kabag

Although you are wise and know how to read and write, which bird in
this world flies and yet suckles its young?
    Bat


3.

Uppat iti adiguina, maysa iti baotna, dua iti paypayna, dua iti boneng.
    (Iloc.) Carabao

Four posts, one whip, two fans, and two bolos.
    Carabao



4.

Apat na tukod langit at isang pang hagupit.
    (Tag.) Kalabao

Four earth posts, two air posts and whip.
    Carabao


5.

Saquey so torutoro duaray quepay-quepay a patiray mansobsoblay.
    (Pang.) Dueg

One pointing, two moving, four changing.
    Carabao

    The head points, the ears move, the legs change position.


6.

Nu mat-tut-lud ay atanang udde; nu mat-tadag ay ibbafa.
    (Gad.) Atu

If he sits down he is high; if he stands up he is low.
    Dog


7.

Adda maysa nga parsua ni Apo Dios nga adda uppat a sacana, ipusna
quen maysa nga ulona nga aoan ti imana.
    (Iloc.) Caballo

There is one creature of our Lord God which has four legs and a tail
and one head; but it has no arms.
    Horse



8.

Carga nang carga ay ualang upa.
    (Tag.) Babuy

Always working and no pay.
    The pig

    He is ever eating garbage and waste.


9.

Eto na si "Nuno," may sunong na guinto.
    (Tag.) Babuy

Here comes "Nuno" with gold on his head.
    Pig

    The pig is a constant scavenger and frequents the space below
    latrines and privies; it is a common thing that his snout is
    yellow as result of his search.


10.

Magmagna ni inam sangsangitam.
    (Iloc.) Burias

While the mother is walking the child is crying.
    A little pig


11.

Adda maysa nga lacay gomogoyod ti oay.
    (Iloc.) Bao

There is an old man, who always drags rattan.
    Rat

    i.e. his tail.



12.

Kahoy cong Marigundong, na sangay ualang dahon.
    (Tag.) Sungay

My tree in Marigundong (town in Cavite) has branches but no leaves.
    Horn

    The branching horn of a deer.


13.

Maco ca quian, yacu naman ing quian.
    (Pamp.) Ding bitis daring animal a tiapat a bitis nung
    lalacad ya.

Away! let me have your place.
    The forward legs of an animal

    The hind feet tread in the prints of the forefeet.



Bell.


14.

Nang hataken co ang baging nagkagulo ang matsing.
    (Tag.) Batingao

When I pulled the vine the monkeys came around.
    Bell


15.

Tinugtog co ang bangca nagsilapit ang isda.
    (Tag.) Campana sa misa


I rang the banca and the fishes came.
    Bell

    Banca is the canoe or boat; to strike it as with the pole is to
    ring it. People called to mass by the ringing bell are likened
    to fishes.


16.

Togtoquec ti teppang agarayat ti bagsang
    (Iloc.) Campana

I strike upon the washout and the _bagsang_ come for help.
    Bell

    The curved side of the bell is compared to a washed out slope or
    curve of the bank; the _bagsang_ are small fishes; the bell is
    the church bell--the little fishes are the people.


17.

Otin nen laquic Tapal ni baleuet ed corral manaquis, ya agnaecal.
    (Pang.) Campana

Tapal's ---- hanging within the corral is crying to get out.
    Bell

    Tapal is a nickname for an old man.



Betel.


18.

Adda tallo nga babbalasang quet no mapanda maquimisa; iti caoes ti
maysa ata berde, quet dadiay maysa ata porao, quen dadiay maysa ata
lomabaga; quet norommuardan ata malabaga amin iti caoesdan.
    (Iloc.) Mamabuyo

There are three ladies who went to mass; the dress of one was green,
of another white, of the other red; when they came out together the
dresses of all were red.
    Betel


19.

Nasatiyan pa nang kanyang ina, kinuha at pinapagasawa.
    (Tag.) Ang bungang isinasama sa itso

Still in his mother's body was taken and made to marry.
    Betel

    The areca nut is first taken out of its covering before being
    united with the betel leaf and lime.


20.

Bulong tiptipparo; puso balasang baro.
    (Iloc.) Mama

A _tiptipparo_ leaf; the heart, a young man and a young woman.
    Betel


21.

Papel a berde sinoratac ti purao quet intedco iti sangaili dina
insubli.
    (Iloc.) Gaoed

I wrote a green paper with white: I gave it to my visitor and he did
not return it.
    Betel-leaf

    White lime is smeared upon the green leaf, which is then used to
    enwrap a bit of areca nut for chewing.



Birds.


22.

Nagcapa dimet nagpadi; Nagcorona dimet nagari.
    (Iloc.) Manoc

Gown but not priest; crown but not king.
    Cock


23.

Nancorona agimiet ari; nan capa agmuet pari.
    (Pang.) Manoc

The king's crown but not king; the priest's cope, but not priest.
    Cock


24.

Ania ti pinarsua ni Apo Dios nga ag-gungon ti maquimbaba quet agpidot
ti maquin ngato?
    (Iloc.) Manoc

What thing that Lord God made sifts below and picks up above?
    Fowl


25.

Dinay pinalsay Dios ya managtay carne?
    (Pang.) Manoc

What creature of God is with meat on its head?
    Cock


26.

Ania a parsuo ni Apo Dios ti nagsusoon ti carne nga aoan ti imana?
    (Iloc.) Tapingar

What creature of our Lord God carries meat but has no hands?
    Cock

The meat is the cock's comb.


27.

Uyana-uyana mamuntuk yang baya!
    (Pamp.) Manuc

Here he comes with glowing charcoal on his head!
    A cock


28.

No umayac idiay balayo agtuptupuaccayo.
    (Iloc.) Manoc

If I come to your house you will jump away.
    Fowl



Boats.


29.

Ania ti pinarsua ni Apo Dios nga ipagnana ti bocotna?
    (Iloc.) Baloto

What creature made by Lord God walks on its back?
    Boat


30.

Oalay asoc ya quisquis no onbatic tirakiang.
    (Pang.) Baloto

I have a hairless dog, who goes belly upward.
    Boat


31.

Naligo ang capitan hindi nabasa ang tian.
    (Tag.) Banca

The captain took a bath without his belly getting wet.
    Banca


32.

Adda impatacderco a caoayan no agbolong intan.
    (Iloc.) Parao

I set up a bambu; if it leafs out we shall go.
    Prao

    The bambu set up is the mast; the leaf is the sail.


33.

Nano nga cahoy nga con may dahon may gamut, pero eon ua-ay gani dahon
ua-ay man sing gamut?
    (Bis.) Parao

What tree is it, that when it has leaves it also has roots, but when
it has no leaves it also has no roots?
    Parao

    Sail, rudder and oars.


34.

Nagalacat nagahayang.
    (Bis.) Sacayan

He walks with his back.
    A ship


35.

Manica maco tana,
tipa ca queti tana.
    (Pamp.) Ancla

Come up and let us go, go down and here we stay.
    Anchor



Body: parts.


36.

Ania ti pinarsua ti Dios a masicog ti licudan?
    (Iloc.) Botoy

What thing created by God has the fullness of pregnancy (_masicog_)
behind?
    The calf of the leg

    Masicog is the swollen abdomen of the pregnant woman.


37.

Bulong ti cappa-cappa nagtalicud nagpada.
    (Iloc.) Lapayag

_Cappa-cappa_ leaves placed back to back.
    Ears



38.

Daluang balon hindi malingon.
    (Tag.) Tainga

Two wells, of which you cannot catch sight.
    (Your) ears


39.

Pito iti taoana; taltallo iti requepna.
    (Iloc.) Lapayag, agong, mata, ngioat

There are seven windows; only three shut.
    Ears, nostrils, eyes, mouth


40.

Sipac nga sipac, saan nga mangeg ti caaroba.
    (Iloc.) Mata

Claps and claps, but the neighbors do not hear.
    Eyes


41.

Tepac cac tan tepac agnereguel na ybac.
    (Pang.) Mata

Clapping and clapping but my companions cannot hear me.
    Eyes


42.

Dalaua cong cahon bucsan ualang ugong.
    (Tag.) Mata

I open my two boxes noiselessly.
    Eyes



43.

Dalawang batong maitim malayo ang dinarating.
    (Tag.) Mata

Two black stones which reach far.
    Eyes


44.

Dalawang tindahan sabay na binubucsan.
    (Tag.) Mata

Two stores are open at the same time.
    Eyes


45.

Adda dua nga Princesas quet nagseng nga tan da iti dua nga bantay;
no agsangit iti maysa agsangit danga dua.
    (Iloc.) Mata

There are two princesses, who live on the two sides of a mountain;
when one cries both cry.
    The eyes


46.

Adda dua nga pisi agtongpal idiay langit.
    (Iloc.) Mata

There are two halves; they go toward the sky.
    Eyes


47.

Malaon nang patay hindi maibaon at buhay ang capit bahay.
    (Tag.) Bulag ang isang mata


It is a long time since it died, yet it can not be buried for its
neighbor is still alive.
    One blind eye


48.

Senora a samsamping addai ti uneg ti sarming.
    (Iloc.) Taotao ti mata

A _samsamping_ is in the middle of the mirror.
    The pupil of the eye


49.

Daluang balahibuhen masarap pag daiten.
    (Tag.) Mata at kilay

Two hairy things, it's pleasant to have them meet.
    Eyelids


50.

Adda dua nga Princesa quet nagbaetanda ti maysa nga bantay quet daytoy
a bantay adda met dua nga oaig quet no agsangit daguitoy a Princesa
agayos met daytoy nga oaig ngem no saanda nga agsangit mamagaan
daguitoy nga oaig.
    (Iloc.) Mata quen agung

There are two princesses with a mountain between them. In this mountain
are two brooks and when the princesses cry these brooks flow and when
the princesses do not cry the brooks dry up.
    Eyes and nose


51.

Isang biyabas pito ang butas.
    (Tag.) Mukha

One guava with seven holes.
    Face


52.

Limang puno nang niog; isay matayog.
    (Tag.) Dalire

Five cocoanut palms; one is higher.
    Fingers


53.

Adda lima nga Principes nagcallogongda amin ti pisi.
    (Iloc.) Ramay

There are five princes and their hat is one half.
    Fingers

    The nails are the hats.


54.

Adda maysa nga ealapati nga nagna ti tinga ti ili manocayo cona ti
ari no adda mainayon nga pisi justo nga dua polo cami.
    (Iloc.) Ramay

There is a dove that walked in the middle of the town. How many are
you said the king. If there is a half added we shall be twenty.
    Fingers


55.

Ni ni conconana aoan ti matana
    (Iloc.) Tammodo

Here, here, he says, but has no eyes.
    Forefinger

    It points here and there, touching the things in question, but
    it cannot see.


56.

Tata baculud ay ain-mena maita na ut-tunna si catanang-nga.
    (Gad.) Quiray

A mountain the summit of which cannot be seen, being very high.
    Forehead


57.

Tubo sa punso, ualang buko.
    (Tag.) Buhoc

Sugar-cane on clay, with no joints (knots).
    Hair


58.

Cahoy nga tambalisa, tapson indi malaya.
    (Bis.) Buhoc

A plant which does not fade when cut down.
    Hair


59.

Iclog iti calao bolig iti lima.
    (Iloc.) Ima


The calao's egg is five-parted.
    Hand

    The _calao_ is the hornbill; the egg here in question is perhaps
    his strange head-excrescence.


60.

Isang bayabas peto ang butas.
    (Tag.) Ulo

One guava with seven holes.
    Head


61.

Isa ca bungsud nga pito ang iya buho.
    (Bis.) Olo

A small hill having seven holes.
    Head


62.

Sica a tao ti yan ti minuterum.
    (Iloc.) Puso

You are the man who has the minute-beater.
    Heart

    _Minuterum_ the pendulum beating.


63.

No agtacderac ania ngata ti omona a ipagnae?
    (Iloc.) Mocod

If I stand, what will be the first that steps?
    Heel


64.

Daluang bangiasan nag hahagaran.
    (Tag.) Binte


Two fence stakes chasing each other.
    Legs


65.

Atian na ing gulut; ing gulut na ya ing atian.
    (Pamp.) Bitis

Its front is the back, and its back is the front.
    The lower leg (below the knee)


66.

Adda oaig a bassit napnut bucbucaig.
    (Iloc.) Ngioat

There is a small brook filled with shells.
    Mouth


67.

Isang balong malalem, punong puno nang patalem.
    (Tag.) Bibig

A deep well is filled with chisels.
    Mouth


68.

Isa ca cahon-cahon nga punu sang tiguib.
    (Bis.) Baba

A box full of chisels.
    Mouth


69.

Dua nga bobon napnot allid quen dagum.
    (Iloc.) Agung


Two wells filled with wax and needles.
    Nose


70.

Baston ti Ygorot dica maparot
    (Iloc.) Bato

The cane of the Igorot, you cannot pull up.
    Penis


71.

Mapatar ya dalin tinoboay garing.
    (Pang.) Ngipuen

Plain earth has grown ivory.
    Teeth


72.

Umona nga aglaguis sa agdareedec.
    (Iloc.) Ngipen

First place the bars and then the posts.
    The teeth

    The comparison is with fence-building. Here the posts are first
    set, and then the cross-pieces. The babe has first smooth,
    horizontal gums; then the upright teeth appear.


73.

Nagapanilong apang basa.
    (Bis.) Dila

He is under the shed but is always wet.
    Tongue



74.

Enlongon empantion onbangon mansermon.
    (Pang.) Dila

Coffin in graveyard wakes up sermon.
    Tongue


75.

Na manantang ay maccatua udde na mannam ay malussao.
    (Gad.) Attut

He who loses it rejoices, but he who finds it gets mad at it.
    Bad odor; breaking wind


76.

Iti nacapocao agayayat quet iti nacabiroc agong onget
    (Iloc.) ottot

Who loses it is glad; who finds it is mad.
    Bad odor; Breaking of wind

77.

Magna sirirquep no nacalucat madi met.
    (Iloc.) Mucat

It walks while it is shut; when it is open it does not care to walk.
    Secretion from eye corner


78.

Aso cong pute inutusan co, ay hindi na umue.
    (Tag.) Lura


I sent out my white dog and he did not return.
    Spittle

    The practice of spitting, even unrelated to betel-chewing or
    tobacco-chewing, is far commoner among the Filipinos than among
    ourselves.



Book.


79.

Tinadtad a root insenpen a panonot.
    (Iloc.) Libro

Chopped grass hidden in the mind.
    Book

    Fodder or "food for thought."


80.

Nagbulong nagbunga nanganac diay nangala.
    (Iloc.) Pagbasan

It has leaves and fruits, Godfather took it.
    Book



Candle.


81.

Ania iti anac a pooranna iti baguis ni inana?
    (Iloc.) Candela

What son burns his mother's intestines?
    Candle


82.

Tite nang pare, mapute.
    (Tag.) Candela


The priest's ---- is white.
    Candle


83.

Kung babayaan mong ako ay mabuhay yaong kamatayay dagli kong kakamtan,
ngungit kung akoy pataing paminsan ay lalong lalawig ang ingat
kong buhay.
    (Tag.) Kandilang may sindi

If you let me live I shall soon die; if you kill me I shall live long.
    A lighted candle


84.

Masondug a cayu talaque na donna.
    (Gad.) Candela

A slender tree which bears only one leaf.
    Lighted candle


85.

Isang butel na palay punong puno ang bahay.
    (Tag.) Ilao

A grain of rice fills the whole house.
    Light

    The flame of a candle is a little thing, comparable to a rice
    grain; yet it gives light to the whole house.



Cardinal Points.


86.

Adda uppat a nga amigos; idi naparsua toy lubong inda naisigud.
    (Iloc.) Uppat aturong


There are four friends; they have existed since the beginning.
    The four directions



Clock: Watch.


87.

Aldao rabii agririaoac.
    (Iloc.) Reloj

Day and night I cry.
    Clock


88.

Amanu na mararamdam, dapot masaquit yang intindian, nung ing lupa na
ing quecang lauan a usta mu ing qucang sasabian.
    (Pang.) Relos

His words are audible but difficult to understand; when you look at
his face you will understand what he says.
    Clock


89.

Ania ti parsua ni apo Dios nga aoan ti imana nga aoan ti sacana quet
ammona ti agsao?
    (Iloc.) Leros = reloj

What creature of God has no arms and legs, but can talk?
    Clock



Coffin.


90.

Ang nagapahimo nagahibi; ang nagahimo indi iya; ang tag-iya uala
sing calibutan.
    (Bis.) Longon

The one who orders it made is crying; the one who has it, it is not
his to give; the one who owns it does not care anything about it.
    Coffin



Disease.


91.

Taong buhay inaanay.
    (Tag.) Bulutong

A living person being eaten up by "anay."
    Smallpox

    Anay, termites or white ants.


92.

Ania ti pagayatan na a mabalud.
    (Iloc.) Ti masaquit

Why does he wish to be in prison?
    Pain



Dress.


93.

Dadiay adalem agassiquet; dadiay ababao agatengngned.
    (Iloc.--also Pang., Bis.) Calzon; bado

What is deep reaches only to the waist; what is shallow comes to
the neck.
    Drawers; jacket



94.

Daluang pipit nag titimbangan sa isang siit.
    (Tag.) Hicao

Two _pipits_ balancing on a bambu stick.
    Earrings

    The _pipit_ is a small bird.


95.

Bumili ako nang alipin mataas pa sa akin.
    (Tag.) Sambalilo

I bought a slave, taller than myself.
    Hat


96.

Aniat aramid a canennaca,
    (Iloc.) Bado

What work devours you.
    Camisa

    The word work is used in several of these riddles with the meaning
    of a thing made, a manufactured article. The camisa is a shirt.


97.

Nacaquitaac iti dua a sasacayan; maymaysat naglugan.
    (Iloc.) Zapatos

I saw two boats; only one person was on board.
    Shoes


98.

Dala mo siya, dala ca niya.
    (Tag.) Bakia


You carry it it carries you.
    Shoe


09.

Dalan mucu, dalan da ca, mipa quinabang cata.
    (Pamp.) Sapin

Carry me, I will carry you; let us share alike.
    Shoes



Drinks.


100.

Con aga naga lapta, pero con hapon naga tipon.
    (Bis.) Tuba

In the morning it is scattered in many places, but in the evening it
is united into one place.
    Tuba

    An intoxicating drink made from cocoapalm sap; it is gathered
    daily. In the morning it is at the trees which yield; at evening
    it is brought in and stored.


101.

Adda maysa a balasang conana toy maysa a baro no ayatennac dacquel
ti pagdacsam.
    (Iloc.) Arac

There was a lady said to a gentleman "If you love me it will harm you."
    Wine



Egg.


102.

Yti pagapugan ti Ari; no maluctan saan nga maisubli.
    (Iloc.) Itlog

The limebox of the king; if you open it you cannot restore it.
    An egg


103.

Adda bayabasco idiay Manila aoan ti pamorosanna.
    (Iloc.) Itlog

I have a guava in Manila that has no stem.
    Egg


104.

Ang balay sang encantadora ua-ay ventana ua-ay puerta.
    (Bis.) Itlog

The house of an enchantress which has neither window nor door.
    Egg



Fishes.


105.

Lindus ne enetiran, dapot king asbuk ya milulan.
    (Pamp.) Balulingi

Harpooning at it he missed it, but it went into his mouth.
    Balulungi

    The shovel-nosed shark. In aiming at food, if it really enters
    his mouth which is below the long and projecting snout, he must
    seem to miss it.


106.

Adda maysa nga lacay; puqiiis nga oacray.
    (Iloc.) Corita

There is an old man; his hair cut short, the hair hangs.
    Corita

    It is a fish, with slender, pendent, feelers.


107.

Asino ti nabiag a togtogaoanna ti ngeoatna?
    (Iloc.) Corita

What living thing sits on its mouth?
    Corita


108.

Ania iti parsua ni Apo Dios nga pispisi iti baguina?
    (Iloc.) Dadali

What creature of our Lord God is but a half-body?
    Flounder


109.

Nag saeng si pusong, sa ibabao ang gatong.
    (Tag.) Bibingca

The clown cooked rice with the fire above.
    Cake


110.

Tignan, tignan, bago ngiuitan.
    (Tag.) Mais


Look at it first, before making a face at it.
    Corn

    Refers to eating it from the cob.


111.

Pina pina marabotinia
no aoan dayta matayca.
    (Iloc.) Bagas

_Pina pina marabotinia_,
If there is none you will die.
    Rice


112.

Siasino ngata ti nagbuniag a daga?
    (Iloc.) Asin

What earth has been baptised?
    Salt


113.

Aniat cangatoan a recado?
    (Iloc.) Asin

What is the best spice?
    Salt


114.

Perlas yang maningning a ibat qung mina, nung mibalic ya qung
penibatana matda ing ningning na.
    (Pamp.) Asin

A sparkling pearl that came from the mine, in going to its source
loses its brilliancy.
    Salt

    The original source was the sea; but in water salt dissolves.




Fruit.


115.

Matebtibonec malimtimbocol bagobagooay tapuco anbalbalangay dalem.
    (Pang.) Atsuete

Round, plump; hairy outside; red inside.
    Atsuete

    A red fruit used for seasoning fish.


116.

Ulo ng principe tinadtad ng ispile.
    (Tag.) Bunga ng bangcol

Head of a prince stuck full of pins.
    Bangcol

    It is like a round ball stuck with pins.


117.

Dinan yan penalsay Dios ya loab tod tabla it say paoay toel equet.
    (Pang.) Cabatite

What creature of God is smooth inside but like a net outside?
    A fruit. Cabatite


118.

Agbibitin a sinanlagangan.
    (Iloc.) Damortis

Hanging like a pot-rest.
    Camachilis (fruit)


119.

Balay ni Santa Ana nalicmut ti caramba.
    (Iloc.) Niog


Santa Ana's house is surrounded by a jar.
    Cocoanut


120.

Langit ngato, langit baba, danom ti tengana.
    (Iloc.--also Pang., Tag.) Niog

Sky above, sky below, water in the middle.
    Cocoanut


121.

Danum sadi Minimin, di mastrec ti angin.
    (Iloc.) Niog

The water of Minimin, the wind cannot reach it.
    Cocoanut


122.

Sang bata pa maniuang, anay sang tigulang na matamboc.
    (Bis.) Lubi

When young he is lean, but when he becomes old he is fat.
    Cocoanut

    The meat of the cocoanut grows in thickness.


123.

Tatlong bundok ang tinibag bago dumating nang dagat.
    (Tag.) Niog

Three mountains were blown down before they reached the sea.
    Cocoanut


    The husk, the shell, and the meat are passed to reach the water
    within.


124.

Pispisi a dalayap nagcatlo nagcapat.
    (Iloc.) Buquel ti capas

A half-lemon divides into three or four.
    Fruit of cotton


125.

Adda maysa nga banga nga bassit; Napno ti bato nga babassit.
    (Iloc.--also Pang.) Bayabas

Here is a little pot; it is full of small stones.
    Guava


126.

Aling cacania dito sa mundo ang nacalabas ang buto?
    (Tag.) Kasoy

Which of his brothers in this world has his bones outside?
    Kasoy

    A fruit, the hard seed of which projects entirely beyond its
    outer surface.


127.

Isang ungoy nakaupo sa lusong.
    (Tag.) Kasoy

One monkey sitting on a mortar.
    Kasoy

    The seed of the _balubad_ or Kasoy suggests the figure.




128.

Babuy sa pulo, ang balahibu ay paco.
    (Tag.) Langca

Wild hog, whose hairs are nails.
    Langca


129.

Pobre ti rabaona mayaman ti onegna.
    (Iloc.) Langca

Poor outside, rich within.
    Langca


130.

Tinadtad ti rabaona, lauya ti onegna.
    (Iloc.,--also Pang.) Langca

Minced outside; _lauya_ within.
    Langca

    _Lauya_; meat on bones, thoroughly cooked in water with vinegar
    and spices. Langca is a large sort of breadfruit.


131.

Agbibitin nga oging.
    (Iloc.,--also Pang.) Longboy

Charcoal hanging.
    Longboy

    A plum-like fruit.


132.

Adda inbitin co nga langdet tangtangaden ti baboaquet.
    (Iloc.) Longboy

I hang up a chopping-block: the old women look up at it.
    Longboy



133.

Hindi hayop, hindi tao,
Nag dadamit ng de pano.
    (Tag.) Mabalo

Not an animal, not a man,
Yet it is clad in velvet.
    Mabalo

    A fruit somewhat like a peach.


134.

Agbibiten a puso.
    (Iloc.) Manga

A heart hanging.
    Mango


135.

Isang cabang senorito, pulus may sombrero.
    (Tag.) Bunga

A group of little gentlemen, all with their hats.
    Palmnuts


136.

Bahay ni Santa Ana punong puno nang bala.
    (Tag.) Papaya

Santa Ana's house is full of bullets.
    Papaya

    The papaya contains abundance of round, shining, black seeds the
    size of buckshot or larger.


137.

Metung a bulsa mitmu yang paminta.
    (Pamp.) Kapaya


A pocket full of peppercorns.
    Papaya

    The round black seeds of the papaya are the peppercorns.


138.

Abongnin Dona Maria alictob na botilla.
    (Pang.) Apayas

Dona Maria's house is surrounded by a bottle.
    Papaya


139.

Balay ni Santa Maria nalicmut ti espada.
    (Iloc.,--also Pang., Gad., Bis.) Pina

Santa Maria's house is surrounded by swords.
    Pineapple


140.

Senora a nasam-sam-it addat oneg ti siit.
    (Iloc.) Pina

A sweet lady among the thorns.
    Pineapple


141.

Isang dalagang may corona at caloob saan ay may mata.
    (Tag.) Pina

The lady with a crown has eyes everywhere.
    Pineapple



142.

Agbibiten a danog.
    (Iloc.) Santol

A fist hanging.
    Santol


143.

Bahay ni Sang Gabriel, punong puno nang barel.
    (Tag.) Lucban

San Gabriel's house is full of guns.
    Shaddock




Furniture.


144.

Con adlao naga uba, pero con gabi naga saya.
    (Bis.) Catre; mosquitero

During the day she is naked, but at night she puts on her skirt.
    Bed; mosquito bar




Games.


145.

Aso co sa pantalan, lumucso nang pitong balon, umuli nang pitong gubat,
bago nag tanao dagat.
    (Tag.) Sungkahan

My dog from the wharf jumped over seven wells, jumped again over
seven forests, before it saw the sea.
    Mancala

    This well-known game is played upon a board in which a number
    of round pits are scooped out; two lines of seven of these are
    placed side by side.



Greeting.


146.

Bumile ako nang bigas, bigas din ang ibinayad.
    (Tag.) Ang pagbibigay nang magandang arao o gabi sa kanino man.

I bought rice with rice.
    The exchange of greeting--good morning or good night.



Hammock.


147.

Taray nga taray di met macaalis.
    (Iloc.) Indayon

Running and running, but it cannot go away.
    Hammock


148.

Adda caballoc a labang agsinanpontol panalian.
    (Iloc.) Indayon

I have a gray horse; I can halter him at both ends.
    Hammock



Heavenly bodies.


149.

Kabac na niog magdamag na kinayod.
    (Tag.) Buan



Half-a-cocoanut, retreating slowly all night.
    Moon


150.

Kabiac na niog, magdamag na ipod nang ipod.
    (Tag.) Buan

A half-cocoanut, scraped the whole night.
    Moon

    The moon keeps freshly white, like cocoanut meat just scraped.


151.

Sancagalip a rabong sila oanna amin a lobong.
    (Iloc.) Bulan

A half section of a bambu shoot illuminates the whole world.
    Moon


152.

Adda pisi a dalayap nga incalic; tal-lo a papadi dina macali.
    (Iloc.) Bulan

I planted a half-lemon; three priests cannot dig it up.
    Moon


153.

Letrang C a maging O, O maging C.
    (Pamp.,--also Tag.) Bulan

The letter C becomes O, O becomes C.
    The Moon



154.

Sim-migpatac ti tanobong silaoco a nagodong; sim-migpatac ti alodig,
silaoco nga nagaoid.
    (Iloc.) Bulan quen bituen

I chop a _tanobong_ for light when I go to town; I chop an _alodig_
for light when I go home.
    Moon and stars

    A _tanobong_ is a sort of bambu; _alodig_ is a small bush.


155.

Adda maysa nga dalayap imporoac co idiay tayac no may bagam cucuanac.
    (Iloc.) Bulan

There was a lemon which I threw out into the wide plain. Guess it
and I shall be yours.
    Moon


156.

Ako ay naghasik nang mais, pagka umaga ay palis.
    (Tag.) Bituin

I sowed maize grains; in the morning they were swept away.
    Stars

The stars, grains of maize, disappear with the dawn.



157.

Sangaplato nga busi maoarasanna amin ti inilinili.
    (Iloc.) Bituen

A plate of roasted rice can be spread all over the town.
    Stars


158.

Mayaquit alila nung ing sumbu macaslag ya, dapot nung capilan milaco
ya carin la paquit.
    (Pamp.) Batuin at aldo

When the lamp is shining they can scarcely be seen, but when it is
taken away they become visible.
    Stars and sun


159.

Abong nen Don Juan agnalocasan.
    (Pang.) Aguco

Don Juan's house, you cannot open.
    Sun


160.

Caoayan queling agnataquiling.
    (Pang.) Agueo

You cannot look directly at _caoayan queling._
    Sun

    A sort of bambu, of great diameter.


161.

Isbu ti andidit di masirip.
    (Iloc.) Ynit

_Andidit's_ urine cannot be looked at.
    Sun

    The _andidit_ is a cricket.



162.

Kung ako ay iyong pakatitigan pagkita sa akiy di mapapalaran.
    (Tag.) Arao

If you look at me, you cannot see me.
    Sun


163.

Nagmulaac iti saba idiay daya saan a nagbunga ta naabac ti cuenta,
nagmulaac iti niog idiay laud saan a nagugut ta naabac iti panonotna.
    (Iloc.) Ynit quen bulan

I planted a banana in the east and it did not fruit for it lost the
count and I planted a cocoanut in the west and it did not sprout
because it lost its mind.
    Sun and moon




Hole.


164.

Tapat nga guindadugangan tapat nga nagamag-an.
    (Bis.) Buho

The larger it grows, the lighter it becomes.
    A hole




House: and parts.


165.

Dinan yan penalsay Dios ya say quenantoit maengal?
    (Pang.) Abong

What creature of God, having eaten makes a noise?
    House



166.

Ama iti pinarsua ni Apo Dios nga agtagtagari ti quin nanna?
    (Iloc.) Balay

What creature of Lord God has talking its food?
    House


167.

Ama iti parsua ni Apo Dios nga umona nga agsilia sa agap-ap.
    (Iloc.) Balay

What creature of Lord God puts the saddle first and then the blanket?
    House

    The roof of a house is built before the walls.


168.

Naligo ang Kapitan hindi binasa ang tiyan.
    (Tag.) Sahig

The Captain took a bath, but did not wet his belly.
    Floor

    When being scrubbed with water, the bambu is as promptly dry as
    a duck's back.


168.

Hindi hayop, hindi tao nag ngangalan nang Tranquilino.
    (Tag.) Trangk'a nang pinto

Not animal, not man; its name is Tranquilino.
    Lock of door

    Mere resemblance in sound between Tranquilino, a personal name,
    and Trangka--a lock.


169.

Kung sino ang naunang umakiat siyang nahuli sa lahat.
    (Tag.) Pagaatip

He who climbed first became the last.
    Nipa thatching

    In roofing the work begins at the lower part and ends at the ridge.


170.

Adda ay ayatec nga gayyem (amigo) ngem saanco a cayat a casango.
    (Iloc.) Adigi

I have a loving friend but I do not wish to face him.
    Post

    A post in the house construction. Mothers punish naughty children
    by standing them in the corner facing the post.


171.

Quimmali siramari quimmagat.
    (Iloc.) Adigi

Set into the ground, breaks through, and bites.
    Post

    A post in house construction meets the requirement. It is firmly
    planted, penetrates flooring, and clutches and holds a rafter or
    other pole.



172.

Atin cung metung a caballero pabanua yang makakabayo, dapot eya mamako.
    (Pamp.) Pakabayu ning bubungan

I have a horseman who has been riding for a year but has not gone
a bit.
    Rider of bambu, over the ridge to keep the nipa from being
    blown away.


173.

Balubog nang ama mo, pina arawan co.
    (Tag.) Palupo nang babay

I let the sunshine on your father's back; i.e. the sun shines on your
father's back.
    The long poles at the roof crest of the house.

    These poles are the "father's back;" they are directly exposed
    to the sun's rays.


174.

No omoli baro, no omolog balo.
    (Iloc.) Atep

When it ascends it is new (young); When it goes down it is a widow.
    Roof



175.

Minalemae nga agtacop binigatac met nga agpiguis.
    (Iloc.) Tandoc

I mend it every evening, I tear it every morning.
    Window


176.

Na labi mansacabac; no agueo manpilatae.
    (Pang.) Ventana

At night closed; in day open.
    Window


177.

Abosta kippit, Comalcalipkip.
    (Iloc.) Riquep

Although thin, it can slide.
    Window shutter


Implements.


178.

Ypacapetco toy colisipeo dita bocotmo maimbagan ta nasaquitmo.
    (Iloc.) Tandec

I place my _colisipco_ upon your back and it cures your illness.
    Cupping-horn

    _Colisipco_ is a slender bambu sucking tube. _Tandoc_ is a piece
    of horn for blood-letting.



179.

Adda maysa nga amigoc no icaraed cod toy olic, maornos datoy booc.
    (Iloc.) Sagaysay

I have a friend and when I arrange my head, my hair is in order.
    Comb


180.

Aniat ina ni saba?
    (Iloc.) Ni daga

Quet ania met ti amana?
    Barrita

What is the mother of the banana?
    The earth

And what its father?
    Digging-stick


181.

Tombong con tombong manpilicay gustum.
    (Pang.) Agniob

Intestine (gut) choose what you want.
    Fire-blower

    It is a simple tube of bambu.


182.

Magdala ya laman mete, mamita yang laman mabie.
    (Pamp.) Mamaduas ing apana ating asan a dumamit.

He carries the flesh of the dead, but seeks the flesh of the living.
    Fishline



183.

Banga sadi Sinait, naapinan ti nangisit.
    (Iloc.) Tintiroan

A pot from Sinait, lined with black.
    Ink bottle


184.

Adda bassit nga quita nga casla tisa ngem mabalinna nga ayoanan ti
maysa nga balasang nga casla mangayoan a cas maysa nga leon.
    (Iloc.) Tulbec

There is a little thing like a piece of crayon, but it can guard a
lady like a lion.
    Key


185.

Hindi madangkal, hindi madipa, pinag-tutuangan nang lima.
    (Tag.) Carayom

You can not span it, you cannot measure it by your outstretched arms,
and it is being carried by five.
    Needle


186.

Begut nc ing andang tinuki ya ing ubingan.
    (Pamp.) Carayum ampong sinulad.

He pulled out a stick and it was followed by a snake.
    Needle and thread



187.

Na una ang trozo sa manghihila.
    (Tag.,--also Bis., Pang.) Carayom

The log comes first, then the hauling cable.
    Needle (and thread)


188.

Tinoduc ni ampalocneng ti obet ni ampatang quen.
    (Iloc.) Dagum

The soft one is thrust through the anus of the hard one.
    Needle and thread


189.

Ania nga abut iti tacopan iti iapadana nga abut?
    (Iloc.) Iquet

What hole do you mend with holes?
    Net


190.

Magmagnaac mangibatbatiac ti magnaac agbalbalicas.
    (Iloc.) Pluma

I am walking leaving tracks where I walk.
    Pen


191.

Mangipatacderac ti adigi madomadoma a corte.
    (Iloc.) Pluma

I set up a post variously cut (fashioned).
    Pen


    The pen of this riddle is the old-time quill pen.


192.

Con uyatan naga lacat; con buhi-an naga liguid.
    (Bis.) Pluma

When held it goes; When let loose it lies down.
    Pen


193.

Bolong na unas mancancanioas.
    (Pang.) Catli

Sugarcane leaves moving crisscross.
    Scissors


194.

Pukeng payat nangangagat.
    (Tag.) Gunteng

A narrow vagina bites.
    Scissors


195.

Maysa nga colibangbang tinaoentaoen nga mangan.
    (Iloc.) Raquem

There is a butterfly which is eating every year.
    Rice knife

    The small knife used to cut rice. Its shape suggests that of
    a butterfly.


196.

Diac maquita nacamolagatac; no abbongac maquitac.
    (Iloc.) Anteojos

I cannot see although my eyes are wide open; if I cover, I can see.
    Spectacles




Insects: and other invertebrates.


197.

Diotay pa si compare cahibalo na mag saca sa lubu.
    (Bis.) Subay

My _compadre_ is tiny, yet he knows how to climb up a cocoanut tree.
    Ant


198.

Bahay ni Man Tute haligue ay bali-bali.
    (Tag.) Alimango

House of Mr. Tute, whose rafters are twisted.
    Crab


199.

Nano nga pispis nga ua-ay pag lupad, may pac-pac cag may bala-hibu,
cag naga butu.
    (Bis.) Ulang

What bird is it, having wings cannot fly, which makes its nest and
hatches its young under its wings?
    Crayfish


200.

No umolog maturog; no umoli tomacqui.
    (Iloc.--also Pang.) Alinta

When it goes down, it sleeps; when it goes up it drops waste matter.
    Earthworm


201.

Magmagna mamingpingqui.
    (Iloc.) Colalanti

Walking, it strikes fire. Makes a spark.
    Fireflies


202.

Con sa latagon palanacal; con sa balay magansal; pero con sa mesa in
a ugdang.
    (Bis.) Lango

Out in the field she talks too much; In the house she makes much noise;
But when at table she is quiet.
    Fly


203.

Ang patay nag bata sing buhi, ang buhi nag bata cag ang iya bata
iya guin bilin sa patay, cag ang patay amo ang nag buhi sang bata
sang buhi.
    (Bis.) Langao, uhid, carne

A living thing left its young to a dead thing; this dead thing gave
nourishment to the young of the living thing.
    Fly, maggots, meat


204.

Siasino iti parsua ni apotayo nga Dios nga casla agropropa a caballo
quet iti payacna casla bulong iti caoayan?
    (Iloc.) Dudon

What creature of our Lord God has a face like a horse and wings like
bambu leaves?
    Grasshopper


205.

Adda maysa nga tumatayal yanna amin nga lugar uray no tayac quen
cabaquiran, quet iti rupana rupa iti baca, iti tengnguedna tengngued
iti caballo, iti barocongna barocong iti tao, iti payacna casla bolong
iti caoayan iti ipusna casla uleg, iti sacana casla saca iti tocling.
    (Iloc.) Oasay-oasay

There is a flying thing, which stays anywhere,--even in the forest and
tayac; its face is the face of a cow, its neck the neck of a horse,
the breast the breast of a man, the wing is like the leaf of a bambu,
his tail resembles a snake, and his feet look like the feet of a bird.
    Grasshopper



206.

Madilim na bundoc hayop na walan buto.
    (Tag.) Cutu

Dark mountain--boneless animal.
    Louse


207.

Atimon sa cagulangan ua-ay alipopo-an.
    (Bis.) Lusa

Melon of the wilderness without a stem.
    Nit


208.

Ating metung a cacanan ing queang pengan marayu ya qung atian.
    (Pamp.) Paro

There is a certain thing to eat; its fleshiness is far from its belly.
    Shrimp


209.

Ing labuad nang quebaitan yang ena na buring balicad, uling ing hie
na carin mipalamang.
    (Pamp.) Yamuc

He does not like to return to the land where he was born for there
he will meet his fate.
    Mosquito

    Born of water; he drowns in water.




210.

Aling hayop dito sa mundo, ang inilalakad ay ulo?
    (Tag.) Suso

What animal in this world walks with his head?
    Snail


211.

Maysa a naparato ti catayna pagsilona.
    (Iloc.) Laoalaoa

A joker uses his spittle for a snare.
    Spider


212.

Ating palacio mitmu yang cuartu, balang metung a cuartu maqui metung
yang curatu.
    (Pamp.) Calaba ning tainumu, o panilan.

There is a palace full of rooms, each containing a priest.
    Honeycomb


213.

Aroi Dom Pedro, hindi macolabas sa carcel?
    (Tag.) Tinik

Oh! Don Pedro, why don't you get out of prison?
    Sting

    Tinik means either a sting of an insect or the thorn of a plant. It
    is the sting or thorn which here is considered in prison and
    exhorted to escape.




Lamp.


214.

Metung a butil a pale kitmu ne ing bale.
    (Pamp.) Sumbu

A single grain of rice, filled the whole house.
    A lamp


215.

Memala ya ing labak meto ya ing tugak.
    (Pamp.) Sumbu

The swamp dried up and the frog died.
    An oil lamp


216.

Adda lognac quen adda met agtaytayab daytoy nga agtaytayab aggiyan
ditoy nga lognac quet no mamamagaan daytoy nga lognaquen matay met
datoy agtaytayaben.
    (Iloc.) Lamparaan

There is a pond and a bird; this bird lives in the pond. When the
pond dries up, the bird dies.
    Lamp




Love.


217.

Aniat casam itan ti nasamit?
    (Iloc.) Ayat

What is the sweetest of the sweet?
    Love



218.

Ania ti ayat nga agmalmalem?
    (Iloc.) Ti apagcascasar

What love lasts all day?
    Of those just married


219.

Ramaycot panagaladco luac ti panagsibugco.
    (Iloc.) Panangasaoa

I fence with my fingers; I water with my tears.
    To marry


220.

Nag molaac iti masetas ditoy locong iti dacolapco iti pinag si bogco
toy loac quet iti pinamorosco toy matac.
    (Iloc.) Nagayanayat

I planted a plant in the midst of the palm of my hand, I watered it
with my tears, I gathered it with my eyes.
    Loving each other


221.

Acoi nag tanim nang dayap sa gitna nang dagat marami ang nahanap,
iisa ang naka palad.
    (Tag.,--also Iloc.) Dalaga

I planted a lemon tree in the middle of the sea many sought it only
one found it.
    Girl




222.

Oalay saquey ya dalayap temmobod puegley na dayat amayamay ya manped
peraod sac sacquey so acagaoat.
    (Pang.) Panangasasa

There is a lemon-tree growing in the middle of the sea; many people
desire to take it, but cannot; only one person can succeed.
    Your sister

    To be married.



Mat.


223.

Mig quera cu babo ebus, lalam sasa cu me tudtud.
    (Pamp.) Dase

I lay down upon the buri, under the nipa I slept.
    Petate

    The sleeping mat is laid down upon the floor (of _buri_); the
    roof is of _nipa_.


224.

Sa gabey dagat sa arao ay bumbong.
    (Tag.) Baneg

At night it is a sea, in the day it is the bambu carry-tube.
    Petate

    The _petate_ is the sleeping mat of rushes; in the day-time it is
    rolled up and set away; at night it is unrolled and spread upon the
    floor. The word sea is often used for any extended or flat surface.


225.

No aldao tubong no rabii dadali.
    (Iloc.) Icamen

If day a tube; if night a flounder.
    Sleeping mat=petate




Mirror.


226.

Quitquitaec quet quitaennac; no cataoaac cataoaan nac.
    (Iloc.) Espejo

I am looking at it, and it looks at me; if I laugh, it laughs.
    Mirror




Musical Instruments.


227.

Guerret nga agpucpuc-cao, agpucpuc-cao a guerret.
    (Iloc.) Tambor

_Guerret_ crying, crying _guerret_.
    Drum

    _Guerret_ is a section cut transversely from a fish. It has
    somewhat the shape of a drum.


228.

Ania ti pinarsua ni Apo Dios nga iti ngioat na adda ti tian-na
maymaysa taequiag na, quen ti ramay na adda ti bocot ti dacolapna,
quen naquinruar ti baguisna.
    (Iloc.) Guitarra


There is a creature made by Lord God whose mouth is in his belly;
he has one arm and his fingers are in his back; and his intestines
are outside.
    Guitar


229.

Secal que batal legari que atian, ginulisac yang masican.
    (Pamp.) Dibil

I choked him, I sawed him across the belly, he screamed furiously.
    Violin



Nature Elements.


230.

Bibingca nang hari, hindi mo mahati.
    (Tag.) Tubig

The king's cake, you cannot divide it.
    Water


231.

No tinagbat, nagpiglat.
    (Iloc.) Danom

If you chop it, it heals at once.
    Water


232.

Ing inda maging anak ya, ing anak maging inda ya.
    (Pamp.) Yelo

The mother becomes the daughter and the daughter becomes the mother.
    Water, ice




233.

Siac nacaquitaac iti siam abilit quet pinaltogac iti lima mano iti
natedda?
    (Iloc.) Lima

I saw nine birds; I shot five of them; how many were left?
    Five

    The dead ones: the rest flew away.



Occupations.


234.

Ang madamu guina dugangan, pero ang diotay guina buhinan.
    (Bis.) Ang pag limas sang tubi sa sulod sang sacayan.

The greater is increased, the smaller is diminished.
    When water is pumped out of a boat.


235.

Ang iya olo sapat, ang iya lanao cahoy cag ang iya icog tauo.
    (Bis.) Carabao arado cog tauo.

His head is an animal, his body is wood and his tail is man.
    Plowing


236.

Adda tallo nga caquita; dadiay immona magmagna nga aoan tagarina;
dadiay maicadua mangmangan quet; dadiay maicatlo magmagna nga
tomanagari.
    (Iloc.) Agarado

There are three things; the first is walking without talking; the
second is eating; the third is walking and talking.
    Plowing

    The carabao, the plow, and the man.


237.

Manoc cong pute, nag talon sa pusale.
    (Tag.) Hugas bigas

My white chicken jumped into the puddle.
    Rice-washing

    The water that runs from rice washing is white; it falls from
    the kitchen down into the accumulated water under the house.


238.

Ania ti aramid ti babay a dina malpas?
    (Iloc.) Abel

What woman's work is never finished?
    Weaving

    There is always a lower edge which cannot be woven.




Persons.



239.

Acoi nag tanem nang sile sa tabe nang catre, ang idinileg coi, puro
ang ibinungay diamante.
    (Tag.) Bata

I planted a pepper near a bed, I watered it with honor, it yielded
a precious jewel.
    Baby


240.

Con mag atubang si tatay; apang con mag talicud si nanay.
    (Bis.) Insik

If it faces you it is your father; but if it turns its back it is
your mother.
    Chinaman

    Seen from before the general appearance is that of a man; from
    behind, a woman.


241.

Taung inucul dang loco, dapot ing dapat na mibulalag quing yatu.
    (Pamp.) Cristobal Colon

One whom they thought a fool, his work beeame world-known.
    Columbus


242.

Nag habla ang may sala nag tago ang justicia.
    (Tag.) Nagevemupisal


The culprit appears in court, the justice is hidden.
    The Confessional

    The person confessing is plainly seen; the priest receiving the
    confession is out of sight.


243.

Nagmolaac iti pipino idiay arisadsad ti convento dimet nagbunga ti
pipino no di Sto. Cristo.
    (Iloc.) Natay

I planted a pip near the convent but it did not produce a squash but
Sto. Cristo.
    A dead person


244.

Ania ti ringgor nga saan nga agtaud ti dila?
    (Iloc.) Umel

What quarrel is not made with the tongue?
    A dumb man's


245.

Sin-o ang napatay nga guin lubung sa tiyan sang iya nanay?
    (Bis.) Pari

Who died, who was buried in his mother's bosom?
    Friar

    He was buried in the church.


246.

Duro co nga dalagan pero ua-ay aco dinalaganan?
    (Bis.) Naga sacay sa duyan


Who was running fast but did not move from where he started?
    One in a hammock


247.

Ing makalub makalual ya, ing makalual makalub ya.
    (Pamp.) Ing inda ampo ing anak.

What was exposed is inside, what was inside is exposed.
    Mother and babe, when the latter is baptized.

    The mother stays at home in the house.


248.

Pinonggosco a pinongos bino caycayan iti Dios.
    (Iloc.) Masicog

I grasped and grasped and God loosed it.
    Pregnant woman


249.

Ania ti anac a mangisquis quen mana.
    (Iloc.) Ti mangrarit ti piracna.

What child shaves his mother?
    Who spends her money


250.

Aniat baybay a di aglippias?
    (Iloc.) Ti Quinaquirmet

What sea does not overflow?
    The stingy man


    Though he has abundance he gives out none.


251.

Con tulcon nimo uala sia pag pahuay sang lacat apang uala man sing
limacatan.
    (Bis.) Manoghabol

She appears to be always walking, but after all is still in her place
as before.
    A weaver



Plants.


252.

Deli queenteng kaballero rianu mang tiknang an nang palacio, agad
yanag malaso.
    (Pamp.) Balite

A gallant horseman causes any castle in which he is to crumble
to pieces.
    The Balite

    This is the great parasitic fig, which encloses other trees in
    its embrace.


253.

Adda maysa nga cayo nga bulong nga bulong di met agsabong; sanga nga
sanga dimet agbunga.
    (Iloc.) Caoayan

There is a plant that produces leaves after leaves, but no flowers;
branches after branches, but no fruit.
    Bambu





254.

Siroc iti balay ti bacnang di macaycayan.
    (Iloc.) Bulong ti caoayan

Under the _bacnang's_ house it cannot be clean.
    Bambu leaves


255.

Nab-barnasi sin accab-bing-nga udde sicuana.
    (Gad.,--also Iloc., Pang., Bis.) Ufud.

When newly-born, well dressed, but when he gets old he is naked.
    Bambu shoot

    The bud is covered with a down, which disappears.


256.

Nang munte ay may tapis, nang lumaki ay bulisles.
    (Tag.) Caoayan

When young she wore a tapis; when grown she is unclad
    Bambu shoot

    The _tapis_ is the most characteristic part of the woman's
    dress. It is a wide band of dark cloth (black or brown) worn over
    the other clothing, around the whole middle part of the body.




257.

Nanganak ang virgen itinapon ang lampen.
    (Tag.) Sagueng

The virgin gave birth to a child and threw away the blanket.
    Banana


258.

Nanganak ang asuang sa tuktok nagdaan.
    (Tag.) Sagueng

An asuang gave birth to a child from the top.
    Banana


259.

Naguit-log ni cannaoay inocopan ni teg-gaac idi cuan guiaoen ni oac
ti nagtaraquen.
    (Iloc.) Saba

A stork laid an egg; the crane hatched a lark from it; the crow took
care of the young.
    Banana


260.

Sancadaoa sangalabba.
    (Iloc.) Sangcabulig a saba

A seed-bearing stem; one fills a basket.
    Bunch of bananas


261.

Macagto sa simbahan si Mary, pito o ualo ang iya saya.
    (Tag.) Puso

Mary is going to church having seven or eight shirts.
    Banana bud


    The bud is wrapped or folded within a number of bracts.


262.

Adda puso a maysa dagat nag apuanna alupasit naglasatanna.
    (Iloc.) Puso ti saba

There is a heart that came from the earth and pushed up through
_alupasit._
    The heart of the banana

    _Alupasit_ is banana fibre.


263.

Caballo moreno umosoc idiay ngato.
    (Iloc.) Sabonganay ti saba

The red horse comes out upward.
    Banana flowers


264.

Isda co sa Sapa-sapa sapin-sapin ang taba.
    (Tag.) Saha nang saguing

My fish in Sapa-sapa has manifold layers of fat.
    Stem of banana

    The stem of a banana cut through shows in wrapping layers, not
    unlike fat.


265.

Dasug ca kaka, libutad ya y inda.
    (Pamp.) Saging ampo ding sui na

Move on my brother, let mother be in the middle.
    A banana plant and its suckers


    The new ones displace the older ones, pushing them outward.


268.

Ang puno lubi; ang dahon espada; ang bunga bala.
    (Bis.) Cahoy ngaburi

The trunk cocoanut; the leaves swords; the fruit bullets.
    Buri palm


267.

Angibitinac na liquen tangtanga yey mamasiquen.
    (Pang.) Camantilis

I was hung by a potring; the old men looked up at me.
    Camachili

    The pendent fruit suggests the riddle.


268.

Nano nga sapat nga ang iya palod hayang pero ang iya tudlo culub?
    (Bis.) Packing sang lubi

What animal is it which has its palm upside up but its fingers
upside down?
    Cocoanut leaves


269.

Payung y Santa Maria amena mabata.
    (Gad.) Tafal

Saint Mary's umbrella cannot be wetted.
    Gabi


    This is the cultivated plant commonly known as _taro_. Its great
    leaf sheds water perfectly.


270.

No malipatam maca-alaca; quet no malaguipmo dica maca-ala.
    (Iloc.) Poriquet=amorsico

If you do not remember, you get; but if you do remember, you do
not get.
    Grass-burs


271.

Agsabong dina met bonga agsanga isut bongana.
    (Iloc.) Mais

It produces a flower but it is not its fruit; it produces branches
which are its fruit.
    Maize


272.

Nag tapis nang nag tapis nacalitao ang bulbolis.
    (Tag.) Mais

She wore and wore her _tapis_ yet her pubic hair was displayed.
    Maize

    The green husks are considered the _tapis_, or wrap about the
    mid-body; the silk appearing from the husk wrapping is the
    pubic hair.



273.

Alo-divino de gracia malayo ang bulaklak sa bunga.
    (Tag.) Mais

Of all divine gifts it is the only plant whose flower is far from
the fruit.
    Maize


274.

Tite nang Ingles, puno nang gales.
    (Tag.) Mais

The Englishman's ---- is full of pustules.
    Maize; ear


275.

Siasino iti pinarsua ni Apo Dios nga umuna nga matay santo agbonga?
    (Iloc.--also Pang.) Sarguelas

What thing our Lord God made dies first and then fruits?
    Plum tree


276.

Uala sa langit, uala sa lupa, ang dahon ay sariwa?
    (Tag.) Quiapo

It is not in heaven, it is not on earth, its leaves are fresh.
    Quiapo

    The water-lettuce; it covers the surface of quiet spots in rivers.




277.

Cung hindi lamang si tagabundok si tagalati ay mahuhulog.
    (Tag.) Iyantok at parvid

But for the one living in the mountain the one living in the swamp
would fall.
    Nipa and rattan

    The rattan (growing in the mountain) is used to lash on the nipa
    (growing in the swamp) to the house framework.


278.

No colditenca matayea quet no adayoanca mabiagea.
    (Iloc.) Bainbain

If I touch you you will die; but if I get away from you you will live.
    Sensitive plant


279.

Adda maysa a cayo idiay toctoc adda bobonco.
    (Iloc.) Silag

There is a tree up there and I have a well on it.
    Silag

    A sort of palm, the bud is cut out and a sweet sap secured.


280.

Tagbatec ta sacam: inomec ta daram.
    (Iloc.) Unas

I chop your feet; I drink your blood.
    Sugarcane



281.

Lalabas cu, tindus dacn.
    (Pamp.) Sulput

I was going out into the field, they pierced me.
    A grass with slender and sharp seeds.


282.

Pinagsakitan kong aking matuklasan ang bagay na isang ninais makamtan
at nang sa pagkita ay hindi mapalaran tinaglay-taglay ko hangang
kamatayan.
    (Tag.) Tinik

I sought a thing I wished to get, and as I could not find it I kept
it until my death.
    Spine


283.

Adda tal-lo a Princesas sag-gaysa ti coartoda ngem saan da nga
agquiquita.
    (Iloc.) Tagunbao

There are three princesses; each has a separate room and they cannot
see each other.
    _Tagunboa_

    A shrub used for hedges, with a tripartite pod or capsule.


284.

Ania iti mula a uray bolding mailasinna?
    (Iloc.) Siit


What thing is blind but can select?
    Thorn



Qualities.


285.

Aniat cala-adan ti bomaro atao?
    (Iloc.) Ti quinasuquer

What is the worst disfigurement for a young man?
    Disobedience



Relationship.


286.

Ano ang itatawag mo sa biyenang babayi nang asawa nang kapatid mo?
    (Tag.) Ina

What will you call the mother-in-law of your sister's husband?
    Mother


287.

Ang amain kong buo ay may isang kapatid na babayi, ngunit siyai hindi
ko naman ali. Sino siya?
    (Tag.) Aking ina

My uncle has a sister but she is not my aunt. Who is she?
    My mother


288.

Ang mga babaying A at B ay nakasalubong sa daan ng dalawang lalaki;
at nagwika si A; naito na ang ating mga ama, mga ama nang ating mga
anak; at mga tunay nating.
    (Tag.) Ang ama ni A ay napakasal kay B at ang ama ni B ay
    napakasal kay A at nagkaroon sila nang tigisang anak.

Ladies A and B met two men and said, "There come our fathers, fathers
of our sons and our own husbands."
    A's father married with B and B's father with A, and each of
    them had a child.


289.

Nang malapos nang madalao nang isang lalaki ang isang bilango ay
tinanong nang bantay; ano mo ba ang tawong iyon? Kapatid mo ba o
ano? Ang sagot nang bilango ay ito; akoy ualang kapatid, ni pamangkin
ni amain, ni nuno, ni apo, ni kahit kaibigan; ngungit ang ama nang
tawong iyan, ay anak nang anak nang aking ama. Ano nang bilango ang
tawong iyon.
    (Tag.) Anak

After a man visited a prisoner, the guard asked him--"is that man your
brother, or what?" The prisoner's answer was, "I have no brother,
no uncle, no nephew, no grandfather, neither grandson nor friend;
but that man's father is my father's son. "Who was that man?
    Son



Religious.


290.

Oalayan pinalsay Dios ya amayamay iran sanaagui et sacsaquey so
pait da.
    (Pang.--also Bis.) Colintas

Many of them, brothers--but they have only one bodytube.
    Beads


291.

Adda tal-lo gasut a bacac maymaysat nanglidingac.
    (Iloc.) Cuentas

I have three hundred cattle, with a single nose cord.
    Beads


292.

Nacno agapaldua.
    (Pang.) Simbaan

Only half full.
    Church


293.

Napuno pero ua-ay mag tunga.
    (Bis.) Simbahan

They said it was full but it was half-full.
Church



294.

Idi nagcasar ni Ina quen ni Ama avanac pay a dara ngem idi nagbuniag
ni Apo siac ti namadrino.
    (Iloc.) Cristo

When my father and mother were married I was not yet in the womb,
but when my grandfather was baptized I was his godfather.
    Christ


296.

Dua ti taquiagna, maysat sacana, adda olo aoan matana.
    (Iloc.) Cruz

Two arms, one leg and a head, but no eyes.
    Cross


297.

Tatlo ang botones, apat ang ohales.
    (Tag.,--also Bis.) Cristo

Three buttons, four holes.
    Crucifix


298.

May isang batang lalaque, umakyat sa camachile nang hindi ma ca puede,
likod ang idinale.
    (Tag.) Si Cristo

There is a boy climbed up a _camachili_ tree; when he could not stand
it he climbed on his back.
    Crucifix



299.

Maysa a cayo nagango idiay poona nabasa idiay tingana, nagango met
ti ngodona.
    (Iloc.) Sto Cristo

A tree dry at the foot, wet in the middle, dry also above.
    Christ, i.e, crucifix


300.

Aramid ti masirib canen ti nalaing. amin a macaquita pasig amin
a logpi.
    (Iloc.) Ostia

Work of a wise man, eaten by a wise man; all who see are lame.
    The host


301.

Akoi nag tanim nang sicolo sa gitna nang convento, ibinunga ay
si Cristo.
    (Tag.) Hostia

I planted a _sicolo_ in the midst of the convent; it bore Christ
for fruit.
    The host

    A _sicolo_ is a small piece of money; it here relates to the
    contribution made at communion service.


302.

Isang tubong sinanduyon, abut sa langit ang dahon.
    (Tag.) Panalangin


A sugarcane without joints, whose leaves reach heaven.
    Prayer


303.

Nang maitayo na yaong hangang baywang nagbitiu ng pawang kalunkut
lunkutan.
    (Tag.) Ang pitong wikang iniaaral nang pari sa Viernes Santo.

After he hid from his feet to his waist he gave very sad things.
    The preaching in the pulpit by a priest about the seven
    utterances of Christ on Good Friday.


304.

Aquinngatot cadsaaran, aquinbabat bobengan.
    (Iloc.) Polpito

The floor is higher, the roof lower.
    Pulpit

    i.e. than that of the building in which it stands.


305.

Sag magkakapatid na pitong sin liyag ako ang naunang nagkitang
liwanag. At ako rin naman yaong nagkapalad na tawaging bunso sa
kanilang lahat.
    (Tag.) Ang pitong linggo nang Cuaresma.


Seven brothers are we; the firstborn was I but I am the youngest
of all.
    The seven weeks of Quaresma.


306.

Asin ti yanti espiritu iti bagui?
    (Iloc.) Aquincatiquid nga abaga.

Where is the spirit in the body?
    In the left shoulder

    In making the sign of the cross the word spirit comes when the
    left shoulder is pointed to.


307.

Adda pitu a botonisco; maymaysat pinat pategco.
    (Iloc.) Domingo

I have seven buttons; I like one best.
    Sunday


308.

Pitu casiglot maymaysat nairut.
    (Iloc.) Domingo

Seven twined ("twisted"), only one tight.
    Sunday


309.

Contirad contibong; bandera ti lobong.
    (Iloc.) Torre

Sharp and long; flag of the world.
    Tower



310.

Caoayan bayog ag nayogayog.
    (Pang.) Torre

_Caoayan bayog_ [1] you cannot shake it.
    Tower


311.

Mayroon akong pitong bunga nang kohol ibinigay co sa iyo ang anim at
ang isang natira sa akin ay ibig mo pang kunin.
    (Tag.) Ang pitong arao nang isang linggo.

I have seven oranges. I gave you six and you want to take the
remaining one.
    The seven days of the week


312.

Minagaling pa ang basag cay sa baong ualang lamat.
    (Tag.) Ang sabi sa evangelio ni Cristo ay ganito. Hindi rao
    sia naparito o nanoag dito sa lupa para sacupin ang mga banal
    cung di ang macasalanan.

Better the broken piece than the whole without crack.
    In the gospel Christ said that he did not come upon earth
    for the righteous but for the sinner.


313.

Cung uala cay magbigay ca at cung meroon ay huagna.
    (Tag.) Nung ang nga fariseo ay nacahuli nang mangangaluniang
    babae ay i ni habla cay Cristo, at ang canilang sabi, Hindi
    po ba maestro na sabi sa ley ni Moises na sino mang mahuli sa
    pangangalunia ay pupuculin nang bato hangan sa mamatay. Ang
    isinagot ni Cristo; sino mang ualang sala ay cumuha nang bato
    at puclin na.

Give if you have none; if you have don't give.
    When the Pharisees caught a woman in adultery, they took her
    before Christ. They said, "what sentence do you give to those
    taken in adultery, since in the law of Moses it is commanded
    that the woman taken in adultery shall be stoned until she
    die." Christ answered, "Let him which is without sin among
    you cast the first stone."



314.

Humiling ang hari sa canyang alagad nang uala sa kanyat di pa
natatangap, ang hiningan naman ay dagling nag-gaoad nang sa boong
yatu'y di pa natutuklas.
    (Tag.) Ang pagbibinyag ni San Juan Bautista cay Cristo.

The King asked from his soldier what he had _not_, and the soldier
gave him what was not in the world.
    The Baptism by St. John Baptist of Christ.


315.

Nang mabasag ang bote lalong na paka buti.
    (Tag.) Mahal na Virgen

The bottle became better when broken.
    The Virgin Mary

    "When Mary was yet unmarried and Christ had not yet been born
    she was not considered very sacred; we say the bottle was not
    yet broken. When she was married to Joseph and Christ was born
    she became very sacred; so we say that when the bottle was broken
    the better it became."



316.

Nang pitasin ang hinog hilas ang siang nahulog.
    (Tag.) Noong magpapugot si Herodes nang mga bata dahilan sa
    gusto niang mapatay si Cristo. Napatay ang meroon 1000 bata
    data puat si Cristo hinde napatay. Sa macatuid napitas nia
    ang hilao at ang hinog ay hindi. Si Cristo sapagcat puno nang
    carunungan ay ipinalagay na hinog at ang mga bata ay hilao
    sapagcat sila ualapang carunungan.

When he plucked the ripe, the unripe fell.
    When King Herod wanted to kill Christ, he ordered to kill
    all children; he thought that if all the children in his
    country were killed, Christ could not escape. But he did
    not know how powerful Christ was. So the children who knew
    nothing (were unripe) fell and Christ (ripe) because he knows
    everything escaped.


317.

Ipinalit ang guinto sa bibinga.
    (Tag.) Ito i nauucol sa pagsacop ni Cristo sa ating casalanan
    na hindi cailangan sia mamatay masacop lamang ang ating
    casalanan na siang catulad ng bibinga at ang caniang pagca
    Dios na catulad ang guinto.

Sand is changed to gold.
    This applies to Christ, when he redeemed our sins. He did
    not value his life but gave it that we might be saved from
    our sins. His life is gold because he was full of knowledge;
    he died on account of our sins which are like sand.




Reptiles, etc.


318.

Nang munti ay may buntot nang lumakiy napugot.
    (Tag.) Palaca

When he was little he had a tail but when he was grown he had none.
    Frog


319.

Adda maysa nga ubing nga adda idiay danum ngem di met uminom.
    (Iloc.) Tocak

There is a boy living in the water who does not drink.
    Frog


320.

Baston ti bacnang saan mo nga maiganan.
    (Iloc.,--also Pang.) Uleg

The _bacnang's_ cane, you cannot hold it.
    Snake

    _Bacnang_, a man of wealth.


321.

No nacariing nacamulagat; no nacaturog nacamuldagat.
    (Iloc.) Uleg

If awake, his eyes wide open; if asleep, his eyes wide open.
    Snake


322.

Anano nga sapat nga con maglacat, dala nia ang iya balay?
    (Bis.,--also Pang.) Ba-o

What animal carries his house wherever he goes?
    Turtle


323.

Tata a tolay icacangcalinna na balena.
    (Gad.) Dagga

A man who always carries his house along with him.
    Turtle


324.

Magmagna itugtogotnat balayna.
    (Iloc.) Pag-ong

Walking and walking and carrying his own house.
    Turtle



325.

Eto na si caca may sunong na dampa.
    (Tag.) Pagong

Here comes brother with a house over his head.
    Turtle


326.

Magma nagcal-logong no maibagam pag-ong.
    (Iloc.) Pag-ong

Walking, wearing his hat.
    Turtle



Road.


327.

Bulong ti saba umac-acaba; bulong ti niog umat-atid-dog.
    (Iloc.) Calzada

Leaf of a banana become wider; leaf of a cocoanut become longer.
    Road


328.

Nagmolaac iti carabosa iti santac na macada non idiay Manila.
    (Iloc.) Calzada

I planted a calabash; its branches can reach to Manila.
    Road

    Also has for answer, telegraph line.


329.

Nan ta ne mac na laver ed Dagupan angad diay lanioto.
    (Pang.) Calzada


I have planted a betel-tree in Dagupan but its roots reach to here.
    Road



Shade, Shadow, etc.


330.

No aoan sapolsapolen ngem no adda saan mo met nga alaen.
    (Iloc.) Linong

Tf there is none you are seeking it; if there is some you do not
take it.
    Shade


331.

Ania ti umona nga aramiden diay vaca no lumgac ti in it?
    (Iloc.) Quitaenna diay anninioanna

What is the first thing the cow does when the sun rises?
    Looks at its shadow


332.

No magnaac iti nasipnget aoan caduac quet no magnaac iti nalaoag
adda caduac.
    (Iloc.) Anninioan

If I walk in the dark I have no companion; if I walk in the light I
have one.
    Shadow


333.

No tilioec tilioennac; no itarayac camatennac.
    (Iloc.) Aninioan


If I catch, it catches; if I run away it chases me.
    Shadow


334.

Diad ogtoy agueo oalay mapalit con anapuen no na anap co agco alaen.
    (Pang.) Serom

At noon I must depart to find; if I can find it, I will not take.
    Shadow


335.

Milub yang alang liban, linual yang alang liualan.
    (Pamp.) Anina tamu a mayayaquit quing salamin.

He came in through no door and went out through no door.
    Reflection in a mirror



Smoking.


336.

San Fernando at Bakulod sabay na nasunog.
    (Tag.) Cigarillo

San Fernando and Bacolor were burned at the same time.
    Cigarette

    The paper and the tobacco are consumed together.




Storm, Sky, etc.


337.

Daluang dahon nang pinda-pinda, sing lalapad sing gaganda.
    (Tag.) Langit at lupa

Two leaves of pinda-pinda equal in width and beauty.
    Sky and earth


338.

Quinosicus a barraas; no maib-agam cucuanac.
    (Iloc.) Quimat

Twisted like a _barraas_; tell it and I am yours.
    Lightning

    The word _barraas_ is local. Perhaps the name of some vine.


339.

Baston ni San Josep indi ma isip.
    (Bis.) Ulan

Saint Joseph's canes cannot be counted.
    Rain

    Drops of rain in a tropical storm may well suggest rods or staves.


340.

Buhoc ni Adan, hindi mabilang.
    (Tag.) Ulan

Adam's hair cannot be counted.
    Rain



341.

Isbu ti guelang-guelang di mabilang.
    (Iloc.) Todo

Guelang-guelang's piss, you cannot count.
    Rain


342.

Vaca co sa Maynila, hangang ditoi, dinig ang unga.
    (Tag.) Culog

My cow in Manila, whose mooing is heard here.
    Thunder


343.

Aniat magna a saan a maquita?
    (Iloc.) Angin

What walks that cannot be seen?
    Wind


344.

Etuna-etuna hindi mo pa naqui-quita.
    (Tag.) Hangin

Here it comes, yet you do not see it.
    Wind


345.

Picabaluan de ding malda alang maca ibic uaga.
    (Pamp.) Angin

He is known everywhere but no one can explain what he is.
    Wind



Stove.


346.

Tal-lo a pugot natured ti pudut.
    (Iloc.) Dalican


Three ghosts endure much heat.
    Stove

    The three supports for the pot are meant. It seems that the _pugot_
    (ghost) is black.


347.

Tatlong magkakapatid nagtitiis sa init.
    (Tag.) Tungko nang calang

Three brothers suffering from the heat.
    Pot rests


348.

Tatlong mag kakapitid sing pupute nang dibdib.
    (Tag.) Calan

Three sisters with equally white breasts.
    Stove

    They are equally white--i.e. they are all three black from
    the fire.


349.

Nagcal-logong nag pica nagcaballo tallot sacana.
    (Iloc.) Dalican

It has a hat and a spear, a horse and three feet.
    Stove


350.

Malaki ang namahay cay sa bahay.
    (Tag.) Calang at ang bahay nang Calang.

The inhabitant is larger than the house.
    Stove and its lower part (called its house.)


351.

Na upo si ca Item, sinulot nica Pula.
    (Tag.) Pallot at apoy

Compadre "Item" (black) sat down, Compadre "Pula" (red) poked him.
    Pot and flame


352.

Ing caballero cung negro makasake yang attung cabayu dapat kikiak
yang anting loco.
    (Pamp.) Balanga ampong nasi.

My black horseman rides three horses but he is crying like a fool.
    A pot of cooking rice

    The three horses are the firestones or the three supports of the
    pot in the pottery stove; the bubbling is the crying.



Time.


353.

Ania nga aldao ti caatid-dagan?
    (Iloc.) Ti aldao a saan a panangan.

What day is the longest?
    The day on which you do not eat



354.

Nag daan si Cabo negro, namatay na lahat ang tao.
    (Tag.) Gabi

The black Corporal passed, all the people died.
    Night

    Died, here, is slept.



Tools.


355.

Nung eminuna ing malati, ing maragul emituqui.
    (Pamp.) Barrenang espiral

If not preceded by the smaller the larger one will not go.
    Auger


356.

Adda pinarsua iti Dios natanquen ti pammaguina madi a mangan no di
matoen ti olona.
    (Iloc.) Paet

There is a creature of God whose body is hard; it does not wish to
eat unless you strike its head.
    Chisel


357.

Adda babay a labang di mangan no diai paculan.
    (Iloc.) Paet

There is a woman who does not eat unless you strike her.
    Chisel



358.

Ing damulag cung dapa, quing gulut ya ta tacla.
    (Pamp.) Catam

My crawling carabao excretes its feces upward.
    Plane


359.

Taot ngato, taot baba, cayot tingana.
    (Iloc.) Ragadi

Man above, man below, wood in middle.
    Saw

    Below the horizontally placed timber to be sawed a pit is dug;
    one sawyer is below in the pit, the other above, each holds a
    handle of the great saw, which works up and down.



Toy.


360.

Enbontayog coy ecnol quinmocaoc ya tampol.
    (Pang.) Bibintarol

I throw the eggs; they crow immediately.
    Firecracker


361.

Adda abalbalayco a sinam granada rineppetco a binastabasta imbarsacco
diay daga nasay sayaat ti cancionna,
    (Iloc.) Sunay


I have a toy like a granada; I tied it around and around and threw
it on the ground and it sang sweetly.
    Top



Trunk.


362.

Pusipusec ta pusegmo ta iruarco ta quinnanmo.
    (Iloc.) Lacaza

I turn your navel to take out what you have eaten.
    Trunk


363.

Adda pay maysa nga quita diay balay a naaramid iti cayo quet adda met
uppat nga sacana nga babasit quet adda met innem nga acaba quencuana
rupano quet agngiao saan nga magna.
    (Iloc.) Baol

I have something in my house made of wood; it has four short legs
and six flat faces; it squeaks, but cannot walk.
    Trunk



Umbrella.


364.

No umulog ti senora augucrad ti sampaga.
    (Iloc.) Payong


When the lady comes down the _sampaga_ [2] opens.
    Umbrella


365.

Con butongon pasoc; con induso payog.
    (Bis.) Payong

When pulled it is a cane; when pushed a tent.
    Umbrella



Utensils, etc.


366.

Hindi tayop, hindi tao, apat ang suso.
    (Tag.,--also Pang.) Buslo

Not animal, not man. She has four breasts.
    Basket


367.

Hindi hare, hinde pare, nag dadamet nang sari-sari.
    (Tag.) Sampayan

Not king, not _padre_, it wears many kinds of clothes.
    Clothes-line


368.

Adda maysa nga ubing a natured ti lammin.
    (Iloc.) Sudo

There is a boy, who does not shiver with the cold.
    Dipper

    This dipper is made from the half of a polished cocoanut shell.



369.

Nang isoot coi, tuyo, nang bunuten coi natulo.
    (Tag.) Tabo

When I plunged it in it was dry; when I drew it out it was dripping.
    Dipper


370.

Sacay sino balay ina nga puno sang ventana?
    (Bis.) Puluguan

Whose house is that, which is full of windows?
    The hen house


371.

No adda ti lenong agcalcal logong.
    (Iloc.) Caramba

If it is in the shade it wears its hat.
    A jar full of water


372.

Aniat aramid a nagbaticuling ti sabut.
    (Iloc.) Pagbagasan

What work has a gizzard like a _sabut_?
    Storage jar for rice

    The _sabut_ is the cocoanut cup or bowl: in the _pagbagasan_,
    there is always a _ganta_ for measuring rice. This _ganta_ is
    the gizzard here meant.




373.

Pusepusec ti bato tumbog carayan Veto.
    (Iloc.) Gilingan

I turn the stone and there flows out like the Veto river.
    Mill


374.

Hiniguit co ang yantok, nag bibiling ang bundoc.
    (Tag.) Guilingan

I pulled the rope and the mountain turned.
    Mill


375.

Hiniguit co ang Caguin, nag kakara ang maching.
    (Tag.) Guilingan

I pulled the rope and the monkey began to howl.
    Mill

    Refers to the creaking of the mill, when grinding.


376.

Isang malaking babai, sa likuran tumatae.
    (Tag.) Guilingan

A big woman, who excretes at the back.
    Mill

    The meal is here considered as excreted.


377.

Dinalas nang dinalas mapute ang lumabas.
    (Tag.) Guilingan


Somebody got busy and something white appeared.
    Mill

    The ground rice pours out from the mill as a white meal.


378.

Aldo at bengi macanganga ya, manena ya yang parusa.
    (Pamp.) Asung

It gapes day and night awaiting punishment.
    Mortar


379.

Isa lamang ang sapin, duha ang batiis apat ang pa-a, isa ang lauas,
isa ang baba apang uala sing olo.
    (Bis.) Luzong

He has but one shoe, two shins, four legs, one body, one mouth,
but no head.
    Mortar


380.

No igamac ta siquet mo lagtoca a lagto.
    (Iloc.) Al-o

If I hold your waist you jump and jump.
    Pestle

    In pounding rice, the great wooden pestle is taken by the middle,
    which is more slender than the pounding ends.


381.

No magna ni arodoc agparintomeng amin a root.
    (Iloc.) Arado


When the creeper passes all the grass kneels.
    Plow


382.

Cobbo ni amam quiad ni inam sica nga anacda daramodum ca.
    (Iloc.) Arado

The father is bent over, the mother is bent back and the son is
bent forward.
    Plow

    This has reference to the different sticks, or pieces, of which
    the plow is composed.


383.

Sa palacol nabuhay
at sa untog namatay.
    (Tag.) Palayoc

Produced by hammering but destroyed by a jar.
    Pot

    Clay for pottery is prepared by pounding it with a light hammer;
    it is also beaten into shape in the process of giving it form.


384.

Pegarenco abot pegarenco abot.
    (Pang.) Liquen

I turn over completely, I turn over completely.
    Pot ring support


385.

Adda abal-balayco a pusipusac a pusipus mabalbal-cut.
    (Iloc.) Pudonan


I have a thing, which I twine and twine and it is covered.
    Weaving spool


386.

Nano nga sapat nga baba ang naga caon, mata ang nga pamus-on?
    (Bis.) Ayagan

What animal is it, which takes its food through its mouth and excretes
it through its eyes?
    Sieve


387.

Bahay ni Guiring-guiring butas-butas ang sinding.
    (Tag.) Bithay

"Guiring-guiring's" house is full of holes.
    Sieve


388.

Adda maysa a caballo; tal-lot sacana; no dica sacayan di magna.
    (Iloc.) Egad

There is a horse; he has three legs; if you do not ride on him,
he never walks.
    Copra shredder


389.

Limma ac ed Dagupan dugduaray bacatco.
    (Pang.) Sali

I went to Dagupan but I left only two footprints.
    Sled


390.

Aniat aramid a duduat tugaona inganat panacaparsuana?
    (Iloc.) Pasagad

What work has two seats since its creation?
    Sled


391.

Ania ti uppat ti sacana dudua ti tugotna?
    (Iloc.) Pasagad

What has four feet but only two foot-prints?
    Rice-sled

    The sled for hauling rice has four supports or legs, which end
    in two runners.


392.

Pusepusec ti pengan tum-bog carayan Vigan.
    (Iloc.) Dadapilan

I turn the plate and water flows out like the Vigan River.
    Sugarmill


393.

Oalay baboy con baleg son laben nga libngaleb.
    (Pang.) Darapitan

I have a large pig; during the night he grunts.
    Sugarmill



Vegetables.


394.

Tite nang ama mo, isinubsob co sa abo.
    (Tag.) Camote

Your father's ---- I place in the ashes.
    Camote


    The _camote_ is a sort of sweet potato; it may be baked in
    the ashes.


395.

Nagsabong ti sinan malucong nagbunga uneg ti daga.
    (Iloc.) Camote

It produces a flower like a cup; fruit underground.
    Camote


396.

Sirad _mirabilis_ oalad dalem so sicsic.
    (Pang.) Cete

The _mirabilis_ (fish) has his scales inside.
    _Cete_

    The _cete_ ("_piquante_") is the pepper.


397.

Otin nen laquic Duardo batil ya anga ed ngoro.
    (Pang.) Palia

My grandfather Eduardo's ---- is covered with pimples.
    Cucumber


398.

Oquis nan bagasnan.
    (Iloc.) Lasona

Its bark is its seed.
    Onion


399.

Binili ang isang minithi kong bagay at ang hinahangad ay pakina-bangan,
pagdating sa amin ang pinangyarihan, nang gagamitin luha koy bumakal.
    (Tag.) Sibuyas


I bought a thing I wished to use; when I tried to use it my tears fell.
    Onion


400.

Isda co sa Mariveles sapin-sapin ang caliskis.
    (Tag.) Sile

My fish in Mariveles has manifold scales.
    Pepper

    Scales laid upon one another; the seeds of the pepper are flat
    and stacked against one another.


401.

Mahanghang hindi naman paminta; maputi hindi naman papel; verde hindi
naman suha; turang mong bigla.
    (Tag.) Rabanos

It is sharp but not pepper; white but not paper; green but not
shaddock; guess what that is.
    Radish


402.

Ang iloy naga camang ang bata naga pungco.
    (Bis.) Calabaza

The mother creeps, and the son sits.
    Squash

    The mother is the vine; the child is the fruit. The riddle gains
    point, by suggesting a reversal of the natural conditions.


403.

Ania iti parsua ni Apo Dios nga aoan ti matana aoan ti ngioatna quen
aoan ti obetna quet mangan ti ladoc-ladoc?
    (Iloc.) Tabungao

What creature of Lord God has no eyes, no mouth, no anus--and eats
_ladoc-ladoc_?
    A white squash

    _Ladoc-ladoc_ is rice flattened in the mortar by the blows of
    the pounder. The seeds of the _tabungao_ resemble it.


404.

Berdi ya balat, malutu ya laman anti mo ing pacuan.
    (Pamp.) Pacuan

Its skin is green and its flesh is like a watermelon.
    Watermelon

    The riddle is poor, in that it introduces the answer as a term
    of comparison, in a way to mislead. Similar cases occur in
    other lands.


405.

Verde ang balat pula ang laman espectorante cung turan.
    (Tag.) Pacuan

Green skin, red meat, _espectorante_ they call it.
    Watermelon




Vision.


406.

Limocsoac alabasco agco asabi.
    (Pang.) Pacanengneng

I jumped further but I did not reach.
    To see



Waves.


407.

Naga dalagan nga ua-ay sing ti-il cog naga ngurub nga ua-ay sing baba.
    (Bis.) Balod

It runs having no feet and it roars having no mouth.
    Waves



Word plays.


408.

Ania iti mainaganan ari ditoy bagui?
    (Iloc.) Aripoyot

What king (_ari_) do you name in your body?
    _Ari_poyot

    This is the great inner muscle of the upper leg.


409.

Cung hindi lamang ang tatlong letra t, o, at s ay kinakain sana siya.
    (Tag.) Asintos

But for the letters t o s we would be eating it.
    (String)

    The word _asintos_ means string; dropping the letters _tos_
    we have _asin_ left, meaning salt.


410. Bugtong pasmiasa, puno at duloi may bunga.
    (Tag.) Calamias

Bugtong pas"mias"a, whose trunk and branches have fruit.
    Calamias

    Bugtong is a riddle: the word pas"mias"a has no meaning. There
    is here a mere play on the sound of words. "Pas"mias"a suggests
    the answer.


411.

Casano iti panangtiliu iti ugsa a di masapul iti silo, aso, gayang,
oen no a aniaman a paniliu?
    (Iloc.) Urayec a maloto

How do you take a deer without net, dogs, spear, or other things
for catching?
    Cooked


412.

Laguiung tao, laguiung manuc, delana ning me tung a yayup.
    (Pamp.) Culassisi

The name of a man, the name of a chicken, were carried by a bird.

    _Culas_ is a man's name; _sisi_ the name of a chicken. Combined
    they make a bird's name.




413.

Indi sapat indi man tano apang, ang ngalan nia si "esco."
    (Bis.,--also Tag.) Escopidor, Escopeta.

Neither animal nor man but its name is "esco."
    Escopidor, Escopeta

    A mere play on the words. _Esco_ is a nickname for Francisco. The
    _escupidor_ is a cuspidor, the _escopeta_ a broom. The meaning of
    the words goes for nothing. The words are both of Spanish origin.


414.

Macatu ti poonna, rugac iti ngo-duna.
    (Iloc.) Macaturugac

    Macatu = cloth
    Rugac = old, rotten clothing

Cloth is the beginning; tatters the ending.
    i.e. _Macatu_ is the beginning, _rugac_ the ending. The whole
    word means I am sleeping.


415.

Salapi iti poona; ngao ti ngodona.
    (Iloc.) Salapingao

    (Fifty cents) _Salapi_ is the beginning; (     ) _ngao_
    the end.


    The _Salapingao_ is a bird "like a swallow."


416.

Sinampal co bago inaloc.
    (Tag.) Sampaloc

I slapped before I offered.
    Sampaloc

    There is simple word play here; the beginning and end of the
    riddle give the word S(in)ampal-oc. The Sampaloc is a fruit tree.







NOTES

[1] A species of bambu; firm, slender and high.

[2] a flower.






End of Project Gutenberg's A Little Book of Filipino Riddles, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK OF FILIPINO RIDDLES ***

***** This file should be named 14358.txt or 14358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/3/5/14358/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders
Team, from scans kindly made available by the University of Michigan.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
