The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of
the Presidents, by James D. Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents
       Section 1 (of 3) of Volume 10.

Author: James D. Richardson

Release Date: January 4, 2005 [EBook #14584]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.











A COMPILATION OF THE MESSAGES AND PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS

BY JAMES D. RICHARDSON

A REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE


VOLUME X

1902




Prefatory Note


This volume closes the task, entered upon by me in April, 1895, of
compiling all the official papers of the Presidents. Instead of finding
it the labor of a year, as I supposed it would be when I undertook it,
the work has occupied me closely for more than four years. A great
portion of this time has been consumed in the preparation of the Index.
The Index is mainly the work of my son, James D. Richardson, jr., who
prepared it with such assistance as I could give him. He has given
his entire time to it for three years. Every reference in it has been
examined and compared with the text by myself. We have endeavored
to make it full, accurate, and comprehensive, with numerous cross
references. There will be found in this Index a large number of
encyclopedic articles, which are intended, in part at least, to furnish
the reader definitions of politico-historical words and phrases
occurring in the papers of the Chief Magistrates, or to develop more
fully questions or subjects to which only indirect reference is made or
which are but briefly discussed by them. There will also be found short
accounts of several hundred battles in which the armies of the United
States have been engaged; also descriptions of all the States of the
Union and of many foreign countries. We have striven earnestly to make
these encyclopedic articles historically correct, and to this end have
carefully compared them with the most eminent authorities. This feature
was not within the scope of the work as contemplated when the resolution
authorizing the compilation was passed, nor when the act was passed
requiring the preparation of the Index; but with the approval of the
Joint Committee on Printing I have inserted the articles, believing that
they would be of interest. They contain facts and valuable information
not always easily accessible, and it is hoped that they will serve to
familiarize the young men of the country who read them with its history
and its trials and make of them better citizens and more devoted lovers
of our free institutions. There has been no effort or inclination on my
part to give partisan bias or political coloring of any nature to these
articles. On the other hand, I have sought only to furnish reliable
historical data and well-authenticated definitions and to avoid even the
appearance of an expression of my own opinion. It is proper to add that
these articles have all been read and approved by Mr. A.R. Spofford,
Chief Assistant Librarian of Congress, to whom I now make acknowledgment
of my indebtedness.

In pursuance of the plan originally adopted certain papers were
omitted from the earlier volumes of this work. Referring to these
papers, the following statement occurs in the Prefatory Note to Volume
I: "In executing the commission with which I have been charged I have
sought to bring together in the several volumes of the series all
Presidential proclamations, addresses, messages, and communications to
Congress excepting those nominating persons to office and those which
simply transmit treaties, and reports of heads of Departments which
contain no recommendation from the Executive." In the Prefatory Note to
Volume IX the statement was made that this course was a mistake, and
"that the work to be exhaustive should comprise every message of the
Presidents transmitting reports of heads of Departments and other
communications, no matter how brief or unintelligible the papers were in
themselves, and that to make them intelligible I should insert editorial
footnotes explaining them. Having acted upon the other idea in making up
Volume I and a portion of Volume II, quite a number of such brief papers
were intentionally omitted. Being convinced that all the papers of the
Executives should be inserted, the plan was modified accordingly, and
the endeavor was thereafter made to publish all of them. In order,
however, that the compilation maybe 'accurate and exhaustive,' I have
gone back and collected all the papers--those which should have appeared
in Volumes I and II as well as such as were unintentionally omitted from
the succeeding volumes--excepting those simply making nominations, and
shall publish them in an appendix in the last volume." These omitted
papers, with editorial footnotes, have been inserted in the Appendix,
and appear in the Index in alphabetical order, so that no serious
inconvenience will result to the reader.

The compilation properly closed with President Cleveland's second
Administration, March 4, 1897, but as the Spanish-American War excited
great interest I determined, after conferring with the Joint Committee
on Printing, to publish the official papers of President McKinley which
relate exclusively to that war. These will be found in the Appendix.

I have been greatly assisted in the work of compilation by Mr. A.P.
Marston, of the Proof Room of the Government Printing Office. Without
his valuable assistance in searching for and obtaining the various
papers and his painstaking care in the verification of data the work
would not have been so complete. Mr. Charles T. Hendler, of the State
Branch of the Government Printing Office, rendered timely aid in
procuring proclamations from the archives of the State Department.
To these gentlemen I make proper acknowledgments.

The work has met with public favor far beyond all expectations, and
words of praise for it have come from all classes and callings. Those
who possess it may be assured that they have in their libraries all the
official utterances of the Presidents of the United States from 1789 to
1897 that could possibly be found after the most diligent search, and
that these utterances are not to be found complete in any other
publication.

I close by quoting from the Prefatory Note to Volume I: "If my work
shall prove satisfactory to Congress and the country, I will feel
compensated for my time and effort."

JAMES D. RICHARDSON.

JULY 4, 1899.




APPENDIX




Messages, Proclamations, Executive Orders, etc.,
Omitted from Volumes I to IX




SPECIAL MESSAGES, ETC.


SATURDAY, _August 22, 1789_.[1]

[Footnote 1: See message of August 21, 1789, Vol. I, p. 61.]

The President of the United States came into the Senate Chamber,
attended by General Knox, and laid before the Senate the following state
of facts, with the questions thereto annexed, for their advice and
consent:

"To conciliate the powerful tribes of Indians in the southern district,
amounting probably to 14,000 fighting men, and to attach them firmly to
the United States, may be regarded as highly worthy of the serious
attention of Government.

"The measure includes not only peace and security to the whole southern
frontier, but is calculated to form a barrier against the colonies of a
European power which in the mutations of policy may one day become the
enemy of the United States. The fate of the Southern States, therefore,
or the neighboring colonies may principally depend on the present
measures of the Union toward the southern Indians.

"By the papers which have been laid before the Senate it will appear
that in the latter end of the year 1785 and the beginning of 1786
treaties were formed by the United States with the Cherokees, the
Chickesaws, and Choctaws. The report of the commissioners will show the
reasons why a treaty was not formed at the same time with the Creeks.

"It will also appear by the papers that the States of North Carolina and
Georgia protested against said treaties as infringing their legislative
rights and being contrary to the Confederation. It will further appear
by the said papers that the treaty with the Cherokees has been entirely
violated by the disorderly white people on the frontiers of North
Carolina.

"The opinion of the late Congress respecting the said violation will
sufficiently appear by the proclamation which they caused to be issued
on the 1st of September, 1788.

"By the public newspapers it appears that on the 16th of June last a
truce was concluded with the Cherokees by Mr. John Steele on behalf of
the State of North Carolina, in which it was stipulated that a treaty
should be held as soon as possible and that in the meantime all
hostilities should cease on either side.

"As the Cherokees reside principally within the territory claimed by
North Carolina, and as that State is not a member of the present Union,
it may be doubted whether any efficient measures in favor of the
Cherokees could be immediately adopted by the General Government.

"The commissioners for negotiating with the southern Indians may be
instructed to transmit a message to the Cherokees, stating to them as
far as may be proper the difficulties arising from the local claims of
North Carolina, and to assure them that the United States are not
unmindful of the treaty at Hopewell, and as soon as the difficulties
which are at present opposed to the measure shall be removed the
Government will do full justice to the Cherokees.

"The distance of the Choctaws and Chickesaws from the frontier
settlements seems to have prevented those tribes from being involved in
similar difficulties with the Cherokees.

"The commissioners may be instructed to transmit messages to the said
tribes containing assurances of the continuance of the friendship of the
United States and that measures will soon be taken for extending a trade
to them agreeably to the treaties of Hopewell. The commissioners may
also be directed to report a plan for the execution of the said treaties
respecting trade.

"But the case of the Creek Nation is of the highest importance and
requires an immediate decision. The cause of the hostilities between
Georgia and the Creeks is stated to be a difference in judgment
concerning three treaties made between the said parties, to wit, at
Augusta in 1783, at Galphinton in 1785, and at Shoulderbone in 1786.
The State of Georgia asserts and the Creeks deny the validity of the
said treaties.

"Hence arises the indispensable necessity of having all the
circumstances respecting the said treaties critically investigated by
commissioners of the United States, so that the further measures of
Government may be formed on a full knowledge of the case.

"In order that the investigation may be conducted with the highest
impartiality, it will be proper, in addition to the evidence of the
documents in the public possession, that Georgia should be represented
at this part of the proposed treaty with the Creek Nation.

"It is, however, to be observed, in any issue of the inquiry, that it
would be highly embarrassing to Georgia to relinquish that part of the
lands stated to have been ceded by the Creeks lying between the Ogeeche
and Oconee rivers, that State having surveyed and divided the same among
certain descriptions of its citizens, who settled and planted thereon
until dispossessed by the Indians.

"In case, therefore, the issue of the investigation should be
unfavorable to the claims of Georgia, the commissioners should be
instructed to use their best endeavors to negotiate with the Creeks
a solemn conveyance of the said lands to Georgia.

"By the report of the commissioners who were appointed under certain
acts of the late Congress by South Carolina and Georgia it appears that
they have agreed to meet the Creeks on the 15th of September ensuing.
As it is with great difficulty the Indians are collected together at
certain seasons of the year, it is important that the above occasion
should be embraced if possible on the part of the present Government
to form a treaty with the Creeks. As the proposed treaty is of great
importance to the future tranquillity of the State of Georgia as well
as of the United States, it has been thought proper that it should be
conducted on the part of the General Government by Commissioners whose
local situations may free them from the imputation of prejudice on this
subject.

"As it is necessary that certain principles should be fixed previously
to forming instructions for the commissioners, the following questions
arising out of the foregoing communications are stated by the President
of the United States and the advice of the Senate requested thereon:

"First. In the present state of affairs between North Carolina and
the United States will it be proper to take any other measures for
redressing the injuries of the Cherokees than the one herein suggested?

"Second. Shall the commissioners be instructed to pursue any other
measures respecting the Chickesaws and Choctaws than those herein
suggested?

"Third. If the commissioners shall adjudge that the Creek Nation was
fully represented at the three treaties with Georgia, and that the
cessions of land were obtained with the full understanding and free
consent of the acknowledged proprietors, and that the said treaties
ought to be considered as just and equitable, in this case shall
the commissioners be instructed to insist on a formal renewal and
confirmation thereof, and in case of a refusal shall they be instructed
to inform the Creeks that the arms of the Union shall be employed to
compel them to acknowledge the justice of the said cessions?

"Fourth. But if the commissioners shall adjudge that the said treaties
were formed with an inadequate or unauthorized representation of the
Creek Nation, or that the treaties were held under circumstances of
constraint or unfairness of any sort, so that the United States could
not with justice and dignity request or urge a confirmation thereof,
in this case shall the commissioners, considering the importance of the
Oconee lands to Georgia, be instructed to use their highest exertions
to obtain a cession of said lands? If so, shall the commissioners be
instructed, if they can not obtain the said cessions on better terms,
to offer for the same and for the further great object of attaching the
Creeks to the Government of the United States the following conditions:

"First. A compensation, in money or goods, to the amount of $----,
the said amount to be stipulated to be paid by Georgia at the period
which shall be fixed, or in failure thereof by the United States.

"Second. A secure port on the Altamaha or St. Marys rivers, or at any
other place between the same as may be mutually agreed to by the
commissioners and the Creeks.

"Third. Certain pecuniary considerations to some and honorary military
distinctions to other influential chiefs on their taking oaths of
allegiance to the United States.

"Fourth. A solemn guaranty by the United States to the Creeks of their
remaining territory, and to maintain the same, if necessary, by a line
of military posts.

"Fifth. But if all offers should fail to induce the Creeks to make
the desired cessions to Georgia, shall the commissioners make it an
ultimatum?

"Sixth. If the said cessions shall not be made an ultimatum, shall the
commissioners proceed and make a treaty and include the disputed lands
within the limits which shall be assigned to the Creeks? If not, shall a
temporary boundary be marked making the Oconee the line, and the other
parts of the treaty be concluded? In this case shall a secure port be
stipulated and the pecuniary and honorary considerations granted? In
other general objects shall the treaties formed at Hopewell with the
Cherokees, Chickesaws, and Choctaws be the basis of a treaty with the
Creeks?

"Seventh. Shall the sum of $20,000 appropriated to Indian expenses and
treaties be wholly applied, if necessary, to a treaty with the Creeks?
If not, what proportion?"

Whereupon the Senate proceeded to give their advice and consent.

The first question, viz, "In the present state of affairs between North
Carolina and the United States will it be proper to take any other
measures for redressing the injuries of the Cherokees than the one
herein suggested?" was, at the request of the President of the United
States, postponed.

The second question, viz, "Shall the commissioners be instructed to
pursue any other measures respecting the Chickesaws and Choctaws than
those herein suggested?" being put, was answered in the negative.

The consideration of the remaining questions was postponed till Monday
next.



MONDAY, _August 24_.

The President of the United States being present in the Senate Chamber,
attended by General Knox--

The Senate resumed the consideration of the state of facts, and
questions thereto annexed, laid before them by the President of the
United States on Saturday last; and the first question, viz, "In the
present state of affairs between North Carolina and the United States
will it be proper to take any other measures for redressing the injuries
of the Cherokees than the one herein suggested?" being put, was answered
in the negative.

The third question, viz, "If the commissioners shall adjudge that the
Creek Nation was fully represented at the three treaties with Georgia,
and that the cessions of land Were obtained with the full understanding
and free consent of the acknowledged proprietors, and that the said
treaties ought to be considered as just and equitable, in this case
shall the commissioners be instructed to insist on a formal renewal and
confirmation thereof, and in case of a refusal shall they be instructed
to inform the Creeks that the arms of the Union shall be employed to
compel them to acknowledge the justice of the said cessions?" was wholly
answered in the affirmative.

The fourth question and its four subdivisions, "But if the commissioners
shall adjudge that the said treaties were formed with an inadequate or
unauthorized representation of the Creek Nation, or that the treaties
were held under circumstances of constraint or unfairness of any sort,
so that the United States could not with justice and dignity request or
urge a confirmation thereof, in this case shall the commissioners,
considering the importance of the Oconee lands to Georgia, be instructed
to use their highest exertions to obtain a cession of said lands? If so,
shall the commissioners be instructed, if they can not obtain the said
cessions on better terms, to offer for the same and for the further
great object of attaching the Creeks to the Government of the United
States the following conditions: First. A compensation, in money or
goods, to the amount of $----, the said amount to be stipulated to be
paid by Georgia at the period which shall be fixed, or in failure
thereof by the United States. Second. A secure port on the Altamaha or
on St. Marys River, or at any other place between the same as may be
mutually agreed to by the commissioners and the Creeks. Third. Certain
pecuniary considerations to some and honorary military distinctions to
other influential chiefs on their taking oaths of allegiance to the
United States. Fourth. A solemn guaranty by the United States to the
Creeks of their remaining territory, and to maintain the same, if
necessary, by a line of military posts," was wholly answered in the
affirmative. The blank to be filled at the discretion of the President
of the United States.

The fifth question, viz, "But if all offers should fail to induce the
Creeks to make the desired cessions to Georgia, shall the commissioners
make it an ultimatum?" was answered in the negative.

The sixth question being divided, the first part, containing as follows,
viz, "If the said cessions shall not be made an ultimatum, shall the
commissioners proceed and make a treaty and include the disputed lands
within the limits which shall be assigned to the Creeks?" was answered
in the negative.

The remainder, viz: "If not, shall a temporary boundary be marked making
the Oconee the line, and the other parts of the treaty be concluded?"

"In this case shall a secure port be stipulated and the pecuniary and
honorary considerations granted?"

"Is other general objects shall the treaties formed at Hopewell with the
Cherokees, Chickesaws, and Choctaws be the basis of a treaty with the
Creeks?" were all answered in the affirmative.

On the seventh question, viz, "Shall the sum of $20,000 appropriated
to Indian expenses and treaties be wholly applied, if necessary, to
a treaty with the Creeks? If not, what proportion?" it was agreed to
advise and consent to appropriate the whole sum, if necessary, at the
discretion of the President of the United States.

The President of the United States withdrew from the Senate Chamber, and
the Vice-President put the question of adjournment, to which the Senate
agreed.



UNITED STATES, _September 26, 1789_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

Having yesterday received a letter written in this month by the governor
of Rhode Island at the request and in behalf of the general assembly of
that State, addressed to the President, the Senate, and the House of
Representatives of the eleven United States of America in Congress
assembled, I take the earliest opportunity of laying a copy of it before
you.

Go. WASHINGTON.



STATE OF RHODE ISLAND AND PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS,
  _In General Assembly, September Session, 1789_.

_To the President, the Senate, and the House of Representatives of the
Eleven United States of America in Congress assembled_:

The critical situation in which the people of this State are placed
engage us to make these assurances on their behalf of their attachment
and friendship to their sister States and of their disposition to
cultivate mutual harmony and friendly intercourse. They know themselves
to be a handful, comparatively viewed; and although they now stand, as
it were, alone, they have not separated themselves or departed from the
principles of that Confederation which was formed by the sister States
in their struggle for freedom and in the hour of danger. They seek by
this memorial to call to your remembrance the hazards which we have run,
the hardships we have endured, the treasure we have spent, and the blood
we have lost together in one common cause, and especially the object
we had in view--the preservation of our liberty; wherein, ability
considered, they may truly say they were equal in exertions with the
foremost, the effects whereof, in great embarrassments and other
distresses consequent thereon, we have since experienced with severity;
which common sufferings and common danger we hope and trust yet form a
bond of union and friendship not easily to be broken.

Our not having acceded to or adopted the new system of government formed
and adopted by most of our sister States we doubt not have given
uneasiness to them. That we have not seen our way clear to do it
consistent with our idea of the principles upon which we all embarked
together has also given pain to us. We have not doubted but we might
thereby avoid present difficulties, but we have apprehended future
mischief. The people of this State from its first settlement have been
accustomed and strongly attached to a democratical form of government.
They have viewed in the Constitution an approach, though perhaps but
small, toward that form of government from which we have lately
dissolved our connection at so much hazard and expense of life and
treasure; they have seen with pleasure the administration thereof from
the most important trust downward committed to men who have highly
merited and in whom the people of the United States place unbounded
confidence. Yet even in this circumstance, in itself so fortunate, they
have apprehended danger by way of precedent. Can it be thought strange,
then, that with these impressions they should wait to see the proposed
system organized and in operation, to see what further checks and
securities would be agreed to and established, by way of amendments,
before they could adopt it as a constitution of government for
themselves and their posterity? These amendments, we believe, have
already afforded some relief and satisfaction to the minds of the people
of this State, and we earnestly look for the time when they may with
clearness and safety be again united with their sister States under a
constitution and form of government so well poised as neither to need
alteration or be liable thereto by a majority only of nine States out of
thirteen--a circumstance which may possibly take place against the sense
of a majority of the people of the United States. We are sensible of the
extremes to which democratical government is sometimes liable, something
of which we have lately experienced; but we esteem them temporary and
partial evils compared with the loss of liberty and the rights of a free
people. Neither do we apprehend they will be marked with severity by our
sister States when it is considered that during the late trouble the
whole United States, notwithstanding their joint wisdom and efforts,
fell into the like misfortune; that from our extraordinary exertions
this State was left in a situation nearly as embarrassing as that
during the war; that in the measures which were adopted government
unfortunately had not that aid and support from the moneyed interest
which our sister States of New York and the Carolinas experienced under
similar circumstances; and especially when it is considered that upon
some abatement of that fermentation in the minds of the people which is
so common in the collision of sentiments and of parties a disposition
appears to provide a remedy for the difficulties we have labored under
on that account. We are induced to hope that we shall not be altogether
considered as foreigners having no particular affinity or connection
with the United States, but that trade and commerce, upon which the
prosperity of this State much depends, will be preserved as free and
open between this and the United States as our different situations at
present can possibly admit; earnestly desiring and proposing to adopt
such commercial regulations on our part as shall not tend to defeat the
collection of the revenue of the United States, but rather to act in
conformity to or cooperate therewith, and desiring also to give the
strongest assurances that we shall during our present situation use our
utmost endeavors to be in preparation from time to time to answer our
proportion of such part of the interest or principal of the foreign and
domestic debt as the United States shall judge expedient to pay and
discharge.

We feel ourselves attached by the strongest ties of friendship, kindred,
and of interest with our sister States, and we can not without the
greatest reluctance look to any other quarter for those advantages of
commercial intercourse which we conceive to be more natural and
reciprocal between them and us.

I am, at the request and in behalf of the general assembly, your most
obedient, humble servant,

JOHN COLLINS, _Governor_.

His Excellency the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.



UNITED STATES, _February 9, 1790_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

Among the persons appointed during the last session to offices under the
National Government there were some who declined serving. Their names
and offices are specified in the first column of the foregoing list.[2]
I supplied these vacancies, agreeably to the Constitution, by temporary
appointments, which you will find mentioned in the second column of the
list. These appointments will expire with your present session, and,
indeed, ought not to endure longer than until others can be regularly
made. For that purpose I now nominate to you the persons named in the
third column of the list as being, in my opinion, qualified to fill the
offices opposite to their names in the first.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 2: Omitted.]



UNITED STATES, _December 14, 1790_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives_:

Having informed Congress of the expedition which had been directed
against certain Indians northwest of the Ohio, I embrace the earliest
opportunity of laying before you the official communications which have
been received upon that subject.

Go. WASHINGTON.



[The following was transmitted with the message of January 26, 1791 (see
Vol. I, p. 95).]

[From Annals of Congress, Vol. II, 2116-2118.]

PARIS, _June 20, 1790_.

Mr. PRESIDENT:

The National Assembly has worn during three days mourning for Benjamin
Franklin, your fellow-citizen, your friend, and one of the most useful
of your cooperators in the establishment of American liberty. They
charge me to communicate their resolution to the Congress of the United
States. In consequence I have the honor to address to you, Mr.
President, the extract from the proceedings of their session of the 11th
which contains the deliberations.

The National Assembly have not been stopped in their decree by the
consideration that Franklin was a stranger. Great men are the fathers of
universal humanity; their loss ought to be felt as a common misfortune
by all the tribes of the great human family; and it belongs without
doubt to a nation still affected by all the sentiments which accompany
the achievement of their liberty, and which owes its enfranchisement
essentially to the progress of the public reason, to be the first to
give the example of the filial gratitude of the people toward their true
benefactors. Besides that, these ideas and this example are so proper to
disseminate a happy emulation of patriotism, and thus to extend more and
more the empire of reason and virtue, which could not fail promptly to
determine a body devoted to the most important legislative combinations.
Charged with assuring to the French the rights of men and citizens, it
has believed without doubt that fruitful and great truths were likewise
numbered among the rights of man.

The name of Benjamin Franklin will be immortal in the records of freedom
and philosophy, but it is more particularly dear to a country where,
conducted by the most sublime mission, this venerable man grew very
soon to acquire an infinite number of friends and admirers as well by
the simplicity and sweetness of his manners as by the purity of his
principles, the extent of his knowledge, and the charms of his mind.

It will be remembered that every success which he obtained in his
important negotiation was applauded and celebrated (so to express it)
all over France as so many crowns conferred on genius and virtue.

Even then the sentiment of our rights existed in the bottom of our
souls. It was easily perceived that it feelingly mingled in the interest
which we took in America and in the public vows which we preferred for
your liberty.

At last the hour of the French has arrived. We love to think that the
citizens of the United States have not regarded with indifference our
steps toward liberty. Twenty-six millions of men breaking their chains
and seriously occupied in giving themselves a durable constitution are
not unworthy the esteem of a generous people who have preceded them in
that noble career.

We hope they will learn with interest the funeral homage which we
have rendered the Nestor of America. May this solemn act of fraternal
friendship serve more and more to bind the tie which ought to unite two
free nations. May the common enjoyment of liberty shed itself over the
whole globe and become an indissoluble chain of connection among all
the people of the earth. For ought they not to perceive that they will
march more steadfastly and more certainly to their true happiness in
understanding and loving each other than in being jealous and fighting?

May the Congress of the United States and the National Assembly of
France be the first to furnish this fine spectacle to the world! And
may the individuals of the two nations connect themselves by a mutual
affection worthy of the friendship which unites the two men at this
day most illustrious by their exertions for liberty--Washington and
Lafayette!

Permit me, Mr. President, to offer on this occasion my particular homage
of esteem and admiration.

I have the honor to be, with respectful consideration, Mr. President,
your most humble and most obedient servant,

SIEVÈS, _President_.



DECREE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF THE 11TH OF JUNE, 1790.

The National Assembly decree that their members shall wear during three
days mourning for Benjamin Franklin, to commence on Monday next; that
the discourse pronounced on this occasion be printed, and that the
president write to the American Congress in the name of the National
Assembly.

Compared with the original by us, president and secretaries of the
National Assembly, at Paris, June 10, 1790.

  SIEVÈS, _President_.
  GOUDAU,
  FÉLIX DE PARDIEU,
  DUMOUCHET,
  _Secretaries_.



UNITED STATES, _February 18, 1791_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I have received from the Secretary of State a report on the proceedings
of the governor of the Northwestern Territory at Kaskaskia, Kahokia,
and Prairie under the resolution of Congress of August 29, 1788, which,
containing matter proper for your consideration, I lay the same before
you.[3]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 3: Relating to land claimants in the Northwest Territory.]



UNITED STATES, _February 22, 1791_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I lay before you a report of the Secretary of War, relative to the
appointment of two brigadier-generals of militia in the territory of
the United States south of the Ohio, and I nominate John Sevier to
be brigadier-general of the militia of Washington district and James
Robertson to be brigadier-general of the militia of Miro district,
both within the said territory.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _December 28, 1791_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you, for your consideration, the copy of a letter[4] which
I have received from the Attorney-General of the United States.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 4: Respecting the relation between district attorneys and the
Attorney-General.]



UNITED STATES, _January 2, 1792_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you an official statement of the expenditures to the end of
the year 1791 from the sum of $10,000 granted to defray the contingent
expenses of Government by an act passed on the 26th of March, 1790.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _November 7, 1792_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you copies of certain papers relative to the Spanish
interference in the execution of the treaty entered into in the year
1790 between the United States and the Creek Nation of Indians, together
with a letter from the Secretary of State to the President of the United
States on the same subject.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _December 30, 1793_.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I now transmit you a report by the Secretary of State of such laws,
decrees, and ordinances,[5] or their substance, respecting commerce in the
countries with which the United States have commercial intercourse as
he has received and had not stated in his report of the 16th instant.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 5: Decree of the National Assembly of France of March 26,
1793, "exempting from all duties the subsistence and other objects of
supply in the colonies relatively to the United States," and extract of
an ordinance of Spain of June 9, 1793, "for regulating provisionally
the commerce of Louisiana and the Floridas."]



UNITED STATES, _December 30, 1793_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I communicate to you the translation of a letter[6] received from the
representatives of Spain here in reply to that of the Secretary of State
to them of the 21st instant, which had before been communicated to you.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 6: Relating to affairs with Indians on the southern frontier.]



UNITED STATES, _December 31, 1793_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I now lay before you a letter from the Secretary of State, with
his account of the expenditure of the moneys appropriated for our
intercourse with foreign nations from the 1st of July, 1792, to the 1st
of July, 1793, and other papers relating thereto.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _January 6, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I herewith transmit the copy of a letter from the Secretary of War,
stating the circumstances which have hitherto prevented any explanation
of the fourth article of the treaty with the Wabash Indians.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _January 7, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you an official statement of the expenditure to the end of
the year 1793 from the sum of $10,000 granted to defray the contingent
expenses of Government by an act passed on the 26th of March, 1790.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _January 15, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you, as being connected with the correspondence already in
your possession between the Secretary of State and the minister
plenipotentiary of the French Republic, the copy of a letter from that
minister of the 25th of December, 1793, and a copy of the proceedings of
the legislature of the State of South Carolina.[7]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 7: Relating to enlistments in South Carolina for the service
of the French Republic.]



UNITED STATES, _January 16, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit for your information certain intelligence[8] lately received
from Europe, as it relates to the subject of my past communications.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 8: Respecting relations between the United States and France.]



UNITED STATES, _January 22, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I forward to you extracts from the last advices from our minister in
London[9], as being connected with communications already made.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 9: Relating to commercial restrictions.]



UNITED STATES, _January 30, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you the copy of a letter from the governor of the State of
North Carolina, together with two petitions,[10] to which it refers, and
which I am requested by the legislature of that State and himself to
transmit to Congress.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 10: Relating to lands ceded to the United States by North
Carolina.]



UNITED STATES, _March 12, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to you the translation of two letters from the commissioners
of His Catholic Majesty to the Secretary of State, and of their
inclosures.[11]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 11: Relating to the declaration of war of March 23, 1793,
against France by Spain and to expeditions of United States citizens
against East Florida.]



UNITED STATES, _March 25, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

The two letters[12] which I now forward to Congress were written by a
consul of the United States, and contain information which will probably
be thought to require some pecuniary provision.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 12: Relating to the capture of American vessels by British
ships of war.]



UNITED STATES, _May 23, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before you the copy of a letter from the minister plenipotentiary
of His Britannic Majesty, in answer to a letter from the Secretary of
State communicated to Congress yesterday, and also the copy of a letter
from the Secretary which is referred to in the above-mentioned letter of
the minister.[13]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 13: Relating to a speech of Lord Dorchester, Governor-General
of Canada, tending to an incitement of the Indians to hostilities
against the United States, to complaints against alleged acts of
violence by citizens of Vermont, etc.]



UNITED STATES, _June 4, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before Congress the copy of a letter, with its inclosures, from
the Secretary of State to the minister plenipotentiary of His Britannic
Majesty, it being an answer to a letter from the minister to him bearing
date the 22d ultimo and already communicated.[14]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 14: Relating to a speech of Lord Dorchester, Governor-General
of Canada, tending to an incitement of the Indians to hostilities
against the United States; justifying the measures pursued by the United
States to enforce their neutrality, and rebutting the accusation of
partiality to France.]



UNITED STATES, _December 3, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to you an official statement of the expenditure to the 30th
of September last from the sums heretofore granted to defray the
contingent expenses of Government by acts passed the 26th day of March,
1790, and the 9th of June, 1794.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _December 11, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to you, for consideration, a representation made to me by
the Secretary of the Treasury on the subject of constituting an officer
to be specially charged with the business of procuring certain public
supplies.[15]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 15: For the Army and Navy.]



UNITED STATES, _December 16, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to Congress the copy of a letter from the Secretary of State,
with his account, as adjusted with the Treasury Department, of the
expenditure of moneys appropriated for our intercourse with foreign
nations up to the 1st of July, 1794.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _December 30, 1794_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I lay before you, for your consideration, certain additional articles
of the treaty with the Cherokees, stipulated the 28th of June last,
together with the conferences which occasioned the formation of the
said articles.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _January 12, 1795_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before Congress, for their consideration, the copy of a letter
from the Secretary of War, accompanied by an extract from a memorandum
of James Seagrove, agent of Indian affairs.[16]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 16: Relating to the justice of compensating owners of negroes
taken by the Creek Indians from the conclusion of the Revolutionary War
to 1790.]



[The following was transmitted with the message of January 4, 1796 (see
Vol. I, pp. 189-190).]

[From American State Papers, Foreign Relations, Vol. I, pp. 527-528.]

PARIS, _30th Vendémiaire, Third Year of the French Republic, One and
Indivisible (October 21, 1794)_.


_The Representatives of the French People composing the Committee
of Public Safety of the National Convention, charged by the law of
the 7th Fructidor with the direction of foreign relations, to the
Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled_.

CITIZENS REPRESENTATIVES: The connections which nature, reciprocal
wants, and a happy concurrence of circumstances have formed between two
free nations can not but be indissoluble. You have strengthened those
sacred ties by the declarations which the minister plenipotentiary of
the United States has made in your name to the National Convention and
to the French people. They have been received with rapture by a nation
who know how to appreciate every testimony which the United States have
given to them of their affection. The colors of both nations, united in
the center of the National Convention, will be an everlasting evidence
of the part which the United States have taken in the success of the
French Republic.

You were the first defenders of the rights of man in another hemisphere.
Strengthened by your example and endowed with an invincible energy,
the French people have vanquished that tyranny which during so many
centuries of ignorance, superstition, and baseness had enchained a
generous nation.

Soon did the people of the United States perceive that every victory of
ours strengthened their independence and happiness. They were deeply
affected at our momentary misfortunes, occasioned by treasons purchased
by English gold. They have celebrated with rapture the successes of our
brave armies.

None of these sympathetic emotions have escaped the sensibility of the
French nation. They have all served to cement the most intimate and
solid union that has ever existed between two nations.

The citizen Adet, who will reside near your Government in quality
of minister plenipotentiary of the French Republic, is especially
instructed to tighten these bands of fraternity and mutual benevolence.
We hope that he may fulfill this principal object of his mission by a
conduct worthy of the confidence of both nations and of the reputation
which his patriotism and virtues have acquired him.

An analogy of political principles; the natural relations of commerce
and industry; the efforts and immense sacrifices of both nations in the
defense of liberty and equality; the blood which they have spilled
together; their avowed hatred for despots; the moderation of their
political views; the disinterestedness of their counsels, and especially
the success of the vows which they have made, in presence of the Supreme
Being, to be free or die, all combine to render indestructible the
connections which they have formed.

Doubt it not, citizens, we shall finally destroy the combination of
tyrants--you by the picture of prosperity which in your vast country has
succeeded to a bloody struggle of eight years; we by that enthusiasm
which glows in the breast of every Frenchman. Astonished nations, too
long the dupes of perfidious kings, nobles, and priests, will eventually
recover their rights, and the human race will owe to the American and
French nations their regeneration and a lasting peace.

The members of the Committee of Public Safety,

  J.S.B. DELMAS,
  MERLIN (OF DOUAI), ETC., ETC.



_The minister plenipotentiary of the French Republic to the President
of the United States_.

Mr. PRESIDENT: I come to acquit myself of a duty very dear to my heart.
I come to deposit in your hands and in the midst of a people justly
renowned for their courage and their love of liberty the symbol of the
triumphs and of the enfranchisement of my nation.

When she broke her chains; when she proclaimed the imprescriptible
rights of man; when in a terrible war she sealed with her blood the
covenant she had made with liberty, her own happiness was not alone
the object of her glorious efforts; her views extended also to all free
people. She saw their interest blended with her own, and doubly rejoiced
in her victories, which in assuring to her the enjoyment of her rights
became to them new guaranties of their independence.

These sentiments, which animated the French nation from the dawn of
their revolution, have acquired new strength since the foundation
of the Republic. France at that time, by the form of its Government,
assimilated to, or rather identified with, free people, saw in them only
friends and brothers. Long accustomed to regard the American people as
her most faithful allies, she has sought to draw closer the ties already
formed in the fields of America, under the auspices of victory, over the
ruins of tyranny.

The National Convention, the organ of the will of the French nation,
have more than once expressed their sentiments to the American people,
but above all these burst forth on that august day when the minister of
the United States presented to the National Representation the colors of
his country. Desiring never to lose recollections as dear to Frenchmen
as they must be to Americans, the Convention ordered that these colors
should be placed in the hall of their sittings. They had experienced
sensations too agreeable not to cause them to be partaken of by their
allies, and decreed that to them the national colors should be
presented.

Mr. President, I do not doubt their expectation will be fulfilled, and
I am convinced that every citizen will receive with a pleasing emotion
this flag, elsewhere the terror of the enemies of liberty, here the
certain pledge of faithful friendship, especially when they recollect
that it guides to combat men who have shared their toils and who were
prepared for liberty by aiding them to acquire their own.

P.A. ADET.



_Answer of the President of the United States_.

UNITED STATES, _January 1, 1796_.

Born, sir, in a land of liberty; having early learned its value; having
engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; having, in a word, devoted
the best years of my life to secure its permanent establishment in my
own country, my anxious recollections, my sympathetic feelings, and my
best wishes are irresistibly excited whensoever in any country I see
an oppressed nation unfurl the banners of freedom. But above all, the
events of the French Revolution have produced the deepest solicitude
as well as the highest admiration. To call your nation brave were to
pronounce but common praise. Wonderful people! Ages to come will read
with astonishment the history of your brilliant exploits! I rejoice that
the period of your toils and of your immense sacrifices is approaching.
I rejoice that the interesting revolutionary movements of so many
years have issued in the formation of a constitution designed to give
permanency to the great object for which you have contended. I rejoice
that liberty, which you have so long embraced with enthusiasm--liberty,
of which you have been the invincible defenders--now finds an asylum in
the bosom of a regularly organized Government, a Government which, being
formed to secure the happiness of the French people, corresponds with
the ardent wishes of my heart, while it gratifies the pride of every
citizen of the United States by its resemblance to their own. On these
glorious events accept, sir, my sincere congratulations.

In delivering to you these sentiments I express not my own feelings
only, but those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to the commencement,
the progress, and the issue of the French Revolution, and they will
cordially join with me in purest wishes to the Supreme Being that the
citizens of our sister Republic, our magnanimous allies, may soon enjoy
in peace that liberty which they have purchased at so great a price,
and all the happiness which liberty can bestow.

I receive, sir, with lively sensibility the symbol of the triumphs and
of the enfranchisement of your nation, the colors of France, which you
have now presented to the United States. The transaction will be
announced to Congress, and the colors will be deposited with those
archives of the United States which are at once the evidences and the
memorials of their freedom and independence. May these be perpetual,
and may the friendship of the two Republics be commensurate with their
existence.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _January 13, 1796_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I lay before you an official statement of the expenditure to the end of
the year 1795 from the sums heretofore granted to defray the contingent
expenses of the Government.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _February 29, 1796_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I send herewith the papers relating to the negotiation of the treaty
with Spain, to which I referred in my message of the 26th instant.[17]

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 17: See Vol. I, p. 192.]



_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I send herewith a copy of the treaty of friendship, limits, and
navigation between the United States and His Catholic Majesty, which has
been ratified by me with your advice and consent. A copy of the treaty
will be immediately communicated to the House of Representatives, it
being necessary to make provision in the present session for carrying
into execution the third and twenty-first articles, particularly the
former, seeing that execution must commence before the next meeting of
Congress.

Estimates of the moneys necessary to be provided for the purposes of
this and several other treaties with foreign nations and the Indian
tribes will be laid before you by the proper Department.

Go. WASHINGTON.

MARCH 29, 1796.



UNITED STATES, _February 15, 1707_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I lay before you an official statement of the expenditure to the end of
the year 1796 from the sums heretofore granted to defray the contingent
charges of the Government.

Go. WASHINGTON.



UNITED STATES, _June 22, 1797_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

Having sent the report and documents which accompany this message to the
House of Representatives,[18] in compliance with their desire expressed
in their resolution of the 10th of this month, I think it proper to send
duplicates to the Senate for their information.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 18: See message of June 22, 1797, Vol. I, p. 247.]



UNITED STATES, _May 4, 1798_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I now transmit to Congress copies of all the communications[19] from our
envoys extraordinary received since their arrival in Paris, excepting
those before presented by me to both Houses.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 19: Relating to affairs between the United States and France.]



UNITED STATES, _May 29, 1798_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

An article explanatory of the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation
between the United States and His Britannic Majesty has been signed by
the plenipotentiaries of the two powers, which I now submit to the
Senate for their consideration.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _June 5, 1798_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I now transmit to both Houses the communications[20] from our envoys
at Paris received since the last which have been presented by me to
Congress.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 20: Relating to affairs between the United States and France.]



UNITED STATES, _June 18, 1798_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I now transmit to Congress the dispatch No. 8 from our envoys
extraordinary to the French Republic,[21] which was received at the
Secretary of State's office on Thursday, the 14th day of this month.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 21: Inclosing correspondence with the French minister of
foreign relations relative to affairs between the United States and
France.]



DECEMBER 31, 1798.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

A report of the Secretary of War made to me on the 24th of this month,
relative to the military establishment,[22] I think it my duty to
transmit to Congress and recommend to their consideration.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 22: Reorganization of the Army.]



JANUARY 8, 1799.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

In obedience to the law, I now lay before you my annual account of the
application of the grant made by Congress for the contingent charges of
Government from the 1st of January to the 31st of December, 1798.

JOHN ADAMS.



JANUARY 21, 1799.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

According to an intimation in my message of Friday last,[23] I now lay
before Congress a report of the Secretary of State, containing his
observations on some of the documents which attended it.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 23: See message of January 18, 1799, Vol. I, p.281.]



JANUARY 30, 1799.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I send you, for your consideration, a treaty with the Oneida Nation of
Indians, made on the 1st day of June, 1798, at their village.

JOHN ADAMS.



JANUARY 31, 1799.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I have received a report from the Director of the Mint on the state of
the business committed to his superintendence, and a statement of the
coinage of the Mint of the United States for the year 1798, which it is
proper to lay before Congress.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _December 13, 1799_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

In conformity with your recommendation expressed in your resolution of
March 6, 1798, I have entered into a friendly negotiation with the Bey
and Government of Tunis on the subject[24] of the fourteenth article of
the treaty of peace and friendship between the United States and that
power. The result of that negotiation I now lay before the Senate for
their consideration.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 24: Commerce.]



UNITED STATES, _January 8, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

A report made to me on the 1st day of this month by the Director of the
Mint, through the office of the Secretary of State, with the documents
attending it, I transmit to both Houses of Congress for their
consideration.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _January 20, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

In obedience to law, I transmit to Congress my annual account of the
contingent fund.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _February 7, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

In consequence of your request to me conveyed in your resolution of the
4th of this month, I directed the Secretary of State to lay before me
copies of the papers intended.[25] These copies, together with his
report, I now transmit to the House of Representatives, for the
consideration of the members.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 25: Relating to the surrender by the United States to Great
Britain of Thomas Nash, charged with murder and piracy on the British
frigate _Hermione_.]



UNITED STATES, _February 17, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I now lay before you the instructions given to our minister at the Court
of Berlin, with the correspondence, respecting the negotiation of the
treaty with Prussia, according to your request of the 12th of this
month.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _April 17, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

In conformity with your request, I transmit you a return from the
War Office of those officers who have been appointed under the act
entitled "An act to augment the Army of the United States, and for
other purposes," designating such officers who have accepted their
appointments and those who have declined accepting, resigned their
commissions, died, etc.

A report from the Secretary of War, which accompanied this return, as
it contains observations which may throw some light upon the subject,
I transmit with it.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _December 22, 1800_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

In conformity with your request in your resolution of the 19th of
this month, I transmit you the instructions given to our late envoys
extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary to the French Republic.

It is my request to the Senate that these instructions may be considered
in strict confidence and returned to me as soon as the Senate shall have
made all the use of them they may judge necessary.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _January 16, 1801_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I now transmit to both Houses of Congress, in conformity to law, my
annual account of the application of grants for the contingent charges
of Government for the year 1800.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _February 20, 1801_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

The inclosed report[26] to me, made by the Acting Secretary of War on the
14th of this month, appears to be so well founded in all respects that I
recommend it to the consideration of Congress.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 26: Relating to the inconveniences arising from the want of a
competent general staff of the Army.]



UNITED STATES, _February 20, 1801_.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I request of the Senate that the letter and journal of our late envoys
to France and the copy of their instructions and other documents relative
to that negotiation may be returned to me or to the Office of State.

JOHN ADAMS.



UNITED STATES, _February 27, 1801_.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit you a report of the Secretary of State, with sundry documents,
relative to the subject of your resolution of the 24th instant.[27]

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 27: Relating to depredations on American commerce by British
ships of war; lists of captured American vessels, etc.]



UNITED STATES, _February 27, 1801_.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to you, in conformity with your request of the 17th instant,
two reports, one from the Acting Secretary of War, the other from the
Secretary of the Treasury, of the 26th,[28] with details of the
expenditure of the moneys appropriated by the acts of the 20th [4th]
of May and 6th of July, 1798, and of the 10th of May, 1800.

JOHN ADAMS.

[Footnote 28: Estimates of the necessary expenditures for the purchase
and fabrication of arms and cannon and establishment of foundries and
armories, 1798-1801, and statement of appropriations for above purposes
and of warrants drawn on same to December 31, 1800.]



JANUARY 12, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

According to the request in your resolution of the 8th instant, I now
lay before you a letter from the Secretary of State, containing an
estimate of the expenses necessary for carrying into effect the
convention between the United States of America and the French Republic.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 8, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

In compliance with your resolution of the 2d instant, I have to inform
you that early in the preceding summer I took measures for carrying into
effect the act passed on the 19th of February, 1799, and that of the
13th of May, 1800, mentioned in your resolution. The objects of these
acts were understood to be to purchase from the Indians south of the
Ohio some portions of land peculiarly interesting to the Union or to
particular States and the establishment of certain roads to facilitate
communication with our distant settlements. Commissioners were
accordingly appointed to treat with the Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws,
and Creeks. As these nations are known to be very jealous on the subject
of their lands, the commissioners were instructed, as will be seen by
the inclosed extract, to enlarge, restrain, or even to suppress
propositions as appearances should indicate to be expedient. Their first
meeting was with the Cherokees. The extract from the speech of our
commissioners and the answers of the Cherokee chiefs will show the
caution of the former and the temper of the latter, and that though our
overtures to them were moderate and respectful of their rights, their
determination was to yield no accommodation.

The commissioners proceeded then to the Chickasaws, who discovered at
first considerable alarm and anxiety lest land should be asked of them.
A just regard for this very friendly nation, whose attachment to us has
been invariable, forbade the pressure of anything disagreeable on them,
and they yielded with alacrity the road through their country which was
asked and was essential to our communication with the Mississippi
Territory.

The conferences with the Choctaws are probably ended, but as yet we are
not informed of their result. Those with the Creeks are not expected to
be held till the ensuing spring.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 17, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I lay before both Houses of Congress, for their information, the report
from the Director of the Mint, now inclosed.

TH: JEFFERSON.



MARCH 25, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

The act fixing the military peace establishment of the United States
rendering it necessary that the officers retained in service should in
most cases be transferred into regiments different from those to which
their commissions attach them, new commissions are deemed necessary for
them, as well as for those entitled to promotion and for the ensigns
newly nominated. The inclosed report from the Secretary of War exhibits
the transfers, promotions, and new appointments proposed in conformity
with the law, and I accordingly nominate the several persons named in
the report for commissions according to its tenor.

TH: JEFFERSON.



APRIL 3, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

According to the request expressed in your resolution of yesterday, I
now transmit to the Senate the proceedings of the court-martial lately
held for the trial of Captain Cornelius Lyman, asking the favor of their
return at the convenience of the Senate, as they are the originals.

TH: JEFFERSON.



APRIL 17, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the Senate_:

I now transmit you a report of the Secretary of State, with the document
accompanying it, on the subject of your resolution of the 12th instant,
concerning the seventh article[29] of the treaty between the United
States and Great Britain.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 29: Relating to claims of American citizens against Great
Britain and of British subjects against the United States for illegal
captures of vessels, etc.]



APRIL 20, 1802.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

The object of the inclosed letter from the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia being within legislative competence only, I transmit it to
both Houses of Congress.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 11, 1803.

_Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives_:

I transmit you a report received from the Director of the Mint on the
subject of that institution.

TH: JEFFERSON.



MARCH 1, 1803.

_Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

According to the request stated in your resolution of December 20,
I communicated to you such returns of the militia of the different
States as had then been received.[30] Since that date returns have been
received from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, North
Carolina, Georgia, and Kentucky, which are now transmitted to you.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 30: See message of January 5, 1803, Vol. I, p. 350.]



DECEMBER 7, 1803.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

Since the last communication made to Congress of the laws of the Indiana
Territory I have received those of which a copy is now inclosed for the
information of both Houses.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 13, 1804.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

The Director of the Mint having made to me his report of the
transactions of the Mint for the year 1803, I now lay the same before
you for your information.

TH: JEFFERSON.



MARCH 7, 1804.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to Congress an extract of a letter from Governor Claiborne
to the Secretary of State, with one which it covered, for their
information as to the present state of the subject to which they
relate.[31]

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 31: Importation of slaves into Louisiana.]



MARCH 15, 1804.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

Agreeably to the request of the Senate and House of Representatives,
delivered me by their Joint Committee of Enrolled Bills, I now return
the enrolled bill entitled "An act for the relief of the captors of the
Moorish armed ships _Meshouda_ and _Mirboha_" to the House of
Representatives, in which it originated.

TH: JEFFERSON

[The same message was sent to the Senate.]



DECEMBER 6, 1804.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, a report of the Surveyor
of the Public Buildings at Washington on the subject of those buildings
and the application of the moneys appropriated for them.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 25, 1805.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operations of that institution during the
last year.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 31, 1805.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

According to the desire expressed in your resolution of the 28th instant,
I now communicate a report of the Secretary of State, with documents,
relative to complaints[32] against arming the merchant ships and
vessels of the United States and the conduct of the captains and crews
of such as have been armed.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 32: By Great Britain and France.]



FEBRUARY 23, 1805.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In further compliance with the desire of the House of Representatives,
expressed in their resolution of December 31, I now transmit the
report and map of Isaac Briggs referred to in my message of the 1st
instant,[33] and received by the last post from New Orleans.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 33: See Vol. I, pp. 376-377.]



DECEMBER 6, 1805.

The PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE.

SIR: In order to give to Congress the details necessary for their full
information of the state of things between Spain and the United States,
I send them the communication and documents now inclosed. Although
stated to be confidential, that term is not meant to be extended to all
the documents, the greater part of which are proper for the public eye.
It is applied only to the message itself and to the letters from our
own and foreign ministers, which if disclosed might throw additional
difficulties in the way of accommodation. These alone, therefore, are
delivered to the Legislature in confidence that they will be kept
secret.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[The same message was addressed to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.]



DECEMBER 10, 1805.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

The inclosed documents,[34] relating to my message of the 6th instant,
not being ready at that date, I thought it better not to detain the
message, but to communicate these papers afterwards, as supplementary to
those then sent. They are not of a nature to be deemed confidential.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 34: Relating to depredations on American commerce by Spanish
privateers, etc.]



DECEMBER 27, 1805.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Surveyor of the Public Buildings,
stating the progress made on them during the last season and what may be
expected to be accomplished in the ensuing one.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 15, 1806.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operations of that institution during the
last year.

TH: JEFFERSON



JANUARY 24, 1806.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

According to the request of your resolution of yesterday, I again
communicate the letter of the minister plenipotentiary of the United
States at London to the secretary of that Government for foreign affairs
dated October 18, 1805, with a postscript of October 25, but still in
confidence that the matter of it shall not be made public.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 4, 1806.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I now transmit the letters desired by the resolution of the Senate of
January 20 so far as they exist in the offices, to wit:

Extract of a letter from the Department of State to Mr. Eaton, May 20,
1801.

The letter from Mr. Cathcart to Mr. Eaton dated Leghorn, June 15, 1801,
is not in the offices, but the substance of it is supposed to be recited
in those of Mr. Cathcart to the Secretary of State of August 15, 1802,
and July 2, 1801, extracts of both of which are transmitted.

The letter of Mr. Eaton of September 5, 1801, supposed to be that
intended by the Senate, as it answers their description. There is no
letter of his of September 15.

Extract of a letter from William Eaton to the Secretary of State,
December 13, 1801.

Extract from Captain Murray's letter of August 18, 1802.

Extract of a letter from Mr. Cathcart to the Secretary of State, August
25, 1802.

Extract of a letter from Mr. Morris to the Secretary of the Navy, March
30, 1803.

The letter from the Swedish admiral to Hamet Bashaw designated in the
resolution of the Senate is not in possession of the Executive.

The extracts above mentioned give the whole matter contained in the
respective letters relating to Hamet B. Caramalli. The parts omitted are
on subjects entirely foreign to what concerns him.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 4, 1806.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

Sundry letters relative to Hamet Caramalli, in addition to the documents
which accompanied my message of January 13,[35] having been sent to the
Senate on their particular request, the same are now transmitted to the
House of Representatives also, as the same subject is before them.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 35: See Vol. I, pp. 392-394.]



FEBRUARY 7, 1806.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit, for the consideration of the Senate, a treaty entered into
on behalf of the United States with the Piankeshaw Indians, whereby our
possessions on the north bank of the Ohio are entirely consolidated; and
I ask the advice and consent of the Senate as to its ratification.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 18, 1806.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now communicate to the House of Representatives the information
desired by their resolutions of January 24, relative to the
fortifications erected at the several ports and harbors of the United
States and their Territories and to the Navy and navy-yards of the
United States.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 18, 1806.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

On the 13th instant I approved and signed the act entitled "An act
making provision for defraying any extraordinary expenses attending
the intercourse between the United States and foreign nations," which
originated in the House of Representatives, and I shall in due season
deposit it among the rolls in the office of the Secretary of State.

TH: JEFFERSON.



_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to Congress a letter recently received from the minister
plenipotentiary of the United States at London, stating some circumstances
which bear relation to the subject of my messages of January
17.[36] This paper being original and to be communicated to both Houses,
the return of it is requested.

TH: JEFFERSON.

MARCH 24, 1806.

[Footnote 36: See Vol. I, pp. 395-396.]



DECEMBER 15, 1806.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Surveyor of the Public Buildings,
stating the progress made on them during the last season and what is
proposed for the ensuing one.

TH: JEFFERSON.



DECEMBER 23, 1806.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now lay before you accounts of the sums which have been expended by
the United States on the Capitol, the President's house, the public
offices, the navy-yard, and the marine barracks, respectively, and the
amount expended on other objects of public expense within the city of
Washington, as requested by your resolution of the 15th instant.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 5, 1807.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the request of the House of Representatives
communicated in their resolution of the 26th of December, I now lay
before them a report of the Secretary of the Navy on the state of the
frigates, supplementary to his former report of January 28 of the last
year, communicated to the House of Representatives.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 27, 1807.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operations of that establishment during the
last year.

TH: JEFFERSON.



FEBRUARY 11, 1807.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to both Houses of Congress the laws adopted by the government
and judges of the Territory of Michigan from the 1st day of July, 1806,
to the 1st day of the present year.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 8, 1808.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 30, 1808.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

The Senate having advised and consented to the ratification of the
treaty with the Ottaways, Chippeways, Wyandots, and Pottawattamies
concluded at Detroit on the 17th day of November last, and also to the
treaty concluded with the Choctaws at Pooshapukanuck on the 16th of
November, 1805, I now lay them before both Houses of Congress for the
exercise of their constitutional powers as to the means of fulfilling
them.

TH: JEFFERSON.



MARCH 30, 1808.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I now transmit to the Senate the information requested in their
resolutions of the 28th instant,[37] from the Secretaries of the
Treasury and War.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 37: Relating to paying United States troops in the Territory
of Michigan in bills issued by the Bank of Detroit after Congress had
rejected the law of that Territory for establishing said bank, etc.]



MARCH 31, 1808.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

The confidential papers[38] desired by the resolution of yesterday are
now again sent to the Senate.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 38: Concerning the relations of the United States with England
and France.]



APRIL 1, 1808.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In answer to the inquiries of the resolution of the House of
Representatives of the 30th of March, relative to certain dates,[39]
I transmit a report of the Secretary of State to me on that subject.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 39: Of certain letters from the French ministry to the United
States minister at Paris, and the date of the receipt of said letters by
said minister.]



NOVEMBER 30, 1808.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

According to the request of the House of Representatives expressed
in their resolution of the 25th instant, I now lay before them a copy of
my proclamation of the 19th of April last.[40]

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Footnote 40: See Vol. I, pp. 450-451.]



DECEMBER 1, 1808.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Surveyor of the Public
Buildings of the progress made on them during the last season, of their
present state, and the expenditures incurred and of those that may be
requisite for their further prosecution.

TH: JEFFERSON.



DECEMBER 23, 1808.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

According to the request of the House of Representatives in their
resolution of November 11 that copies should be laid before them of all
acts, decrees, orders, and proclamations affecting the commercial rights
of neutral nations issued or enacted by Great Britain and France or any
other belligerent power since the year 1791, and also of an act placing
the commerce of America in English ports upon the footing of the most
favored nation, I now transmit them a report of the Secretary of State
of such of them as have been attainable in the Department of State and
are supposed to have entered into the views of the House of
Representatives.

TH: JEFFERSON.



JANUARY 5, 1809.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operations of that establishment during the
last year.

TH: JEFFERSON.



DECEMBER 4, 1809.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now transmit a report of the Secretary of the Navy, containing
statements[41] from that Department referred to in my message of the
29th ultimo.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 41: Showing the condition of the Navy and the application of
appropriations made for the Navy and Marine Corps.]



DECEMBER 16, 1809.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to both Houses of Congress a report from the Surveyor of the
Public Buildings of the progress made on them during the last season and
of other explanations relative thereto.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 5, 1810.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

The Director of the Mint having made to me his report of the operations
of the Mint for the year 1809, I lay the same before you for your
information.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 12, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to the House of Representatives the report[42] of the
Secretary of State on the subject of their resolution of the 3d instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 42: Transmitting translations of a ukase of Russia relating to
neutral commerce and regulations of Denmark for vessels commissioned as
privateers.]



JANUARY 12, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to the House of Representatives the report[43] of the
Secretary of State on the subject of their resolution of the 6th of
December last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 43: Relating to seizures, captures, and condemnations of ships
and merchandise of citizens of the United States under authority of
Denmark, Great Britain, and France.]



JANUARY 22, 1810.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1809.

JAMES MADISON.



FEBRUARY 1, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House a report[44] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
conformably to their resolution of 18th January, 1810.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 44: Transmitting copies of instructions issued relative to
foreign armed ships within the waters of the United States.]



FEBRUARY 1, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House a report[45] of the Secretary of War, conformably
to their resolution of January 22.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 45: Relating to the military force and its disposition in
1810.]



FEBRUARY 9, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House a report[46] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 22d of January.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 46: Relating to the free navigation of the Mobile River to its
confluence with the ocean.]



FEBRUARY 17, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit reports[47] of the Secretaries of State and of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of the 5th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 47: Transmitting communications relative to certain orders and
decrees of France and Great Britain violating the lawful commerce and
neutral rights of the United States, etc.]



FEBRUARY 17, 1810.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit a report[48] of the Secretary of the Treasury, complying with
their resolution of the 12th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 48: Transmitting statement showing value and amount of duties
which accrued in consequence of the duty of 2-1/2 per cent laid on all
goods, wares, and merchandise imported into the United States paying a
duty _ad valorem_ from July 1, 1804, to December 31, 1808, and
statement showing amount of duties which accrued on merchandise imported
into the United States from Mediterranean ports for years ending
September 30, 1805, 1806, 1807, and 1808.]



FEBRUARY 22, 1810.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[49] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of the 16th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 49: Transmitting copy of instructions to collectors under the
act to interdict commercial intercourse with Great Britain and France.]



MARCH 14, 1810.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit a report[50] of the Secretary of War, complying with their
resolution of the 22d January last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 50: Relating to the treaty with the Great and Little Osage
Indians.]



MARCH 20, 1810.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a return of the militia of the United States as
received by the Department of War from the several States and
Territories.

JAMES MADISON.



MARCH 30, 1810.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[51] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 22d instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 51: Relating to the capture of Danish vessels by United States
war ships.]



APRIL 4, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House a report[52] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 26th of March.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 52: Relating to the impressment of American seamen by British
ships of war.]



APRIL 27, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House a report[53] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 23d instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 53: Transmitting list of United States consuls and commercial
agents, etc.]



MAY 1, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House a report[54] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 30th of April.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 54: Relating to affairs between the United States and France.]



DECEMBER 28, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House a report[55] from the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 21st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 55: Transmitting a decree of the Emperor of France of July 15,
1810, and correspondence relative to affairs between the United States
and France.]



DECEMBER 31, 1810.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House of Representatives a supplemental report[56] of the
Secretary of State, containing information received since the date of my
late message on the subject of their resolution of the 21st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 56: Relating to affairs between the United States and France.]



JANUARY 7, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 12, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_.

I transmit to Congress copies of a letter from the minister
plenipotentiary of the United States at London to the Secretary of
State, and of another from the same to the British secretary for foreign
affairs.[57]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 57: Relating to affairs between the United States and Great
Britain.]



JANUARY 14, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives reports of the superintendent
of the city[58] and of the Surveyor of the Public Buildings on the
subject of their resolution of the 28th of December last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 58: Washington.]



JANUARY 14, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives copies of the documents[59]
referred to in their resolution of the 4th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 59: Proclamation of November 2, 1810 (see Vol. I, pp.
481-482), and circular letter from the Secretary of the Treasury to the
collectors of the customs in pursuance of said proclamation.]



JANUARY 14, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1810.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 14, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Surveyor of the Public
Buildings relative to the progress and present state of them.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 25, 1811.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[60] from the Secretary of the Treasury
on the subject of their resolution of the 21st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 60: Stating that there are no documents in his Department
showing the amount of property of citizens or subjects of Great Britain
or France confiscated under the acts of March 1, 1809, and May 1, 1810;
that inquiry of the several district attorneys for such information has
been made, and that the result will be communicated as soon as received;
that an account of the goods, wares, and merchandise imported into the
United States during the last three quarters of 1809 will be immediately
prepared, but that such account for the year 1810 can not be prepared
during the present session.]



JANUARY 25, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report of the superintendent
of the city,[61] stating the expenditures under the act of April 28, 1810,
for the better accommodation of the General Post-Office and Patent Office,
and for other purposes.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 61: Washington.]



JANUARY 31, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[62] of the Secretary
of War, complying with their resolution of the 21st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 62: Transmitting a general return of the Army.]



FEBRUARY 4, 1811.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[63] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of December 20, 1810.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 63: Transmitting correspondence relative to the execution of
the act to provide for surveying the coasts of the United States.]



FEBRUARY 5, 1811.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[64] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 1st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 64: Transmitting copies of the latest census of the Territory
of Orleans and of the latest militia returns of said Territory.]



FEBRUARY 7, 1811.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[65] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of the 21st January last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 65: Transmitting a statement of importations in American and
foreign vessels from April 1 to December 31, 1809.]



FEBRUARY 11, 1811.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[66] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of the 7th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 66: Transmitting account of George W. Erving relative to
awards under the seventh article of the treaty with Great Britain of
November 19, 1794.]



FEBRUARY 19, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a return of the militia of the United States as
received by the Department of War from the several States and
Territories.

JAMES MADISON.



FEBRUARY 19, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[67] of the Secretary
of State, complying with their resolution of the 18th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 67: Relating to affairs between the United States and Great
Britain.]



FEBRUARY 25, 1811.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives reports from the
superintendent of the city[68] and the Surveyor of the Public Buildings,
complying with their resolution of the 14th of January.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 68: Washington.]



FEBRUARY 28, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit and recommend to the attention of Congress a report of the
Secretary of State relative to deficiencies in the returns of the census.

JAMES MADISON.



NOVEMBER 7, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now lay before Congress two letters[69] to the Department of
State--one from the present plenipotentiary of France, the other
from his predecessor--which were not included among the documents
accompanying my message of the 5th instant,[70] the translation of them
being not then completed.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 69: Relating to affairs between the United States and France.]

[Footnote 70: See Third Annual Message, Vol. I, pp. 491-493.]



NOVEMBER 13, 1811.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress the result of the census lately taken of the
inhabitants of the United States, with a letter from the Secretary of
State relative thereto.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 7, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress, for their information, a report of the Director
of the Mint.

JAMES MADISON.



WASHINGTON, _January 15, 1812_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[71] of the Secretary
of State, complying with their resolution of the 29th of November.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 71: Relating to the impressment of American seamen by foreign
powers.]



JANUARY 16, 1812.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[72] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 18th of November.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 72: Relating to the commercial regulations of France applying
to the trade of the United States.]



WASHINGTON, _January 22, 1812_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a letter from the envoy extraordinary and minister
plenipotentiary of Great Britain to the Secretary of State, with the
answer of the latter.[73]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 73: Relating to the agency of the British Government in the
hostile measures of the Indian tribes toward the United States.]



WASHINGTON, _January 22, 1812_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

At the request of the legislature of New Jersey, I communicate to
Congress copies of its resolutions[74] transmitted by the governor of
that State.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 74: Expressing confidence in the wisdom and integrity of the
President and Congress and pledging the support of New Jersey should the
United States determine to resist by force the lawless aggressions by
Great Britain.]



FEBRUARY 1, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
containing a statement of proceedings under the "act to regulate the
laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland,
to the State of Ohio."

JAMES MADISON.



FEBRUARY 19, 1812.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House of Representatives a report[75] of the Secretary
of War, in pursuance of their resolution of the 17th of December, 1811.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 75: Transmitting rules and regulations for training and
disciplining the regular troops and militia of the United States.]



MARCH 12, 1812.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[76] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 10th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 76: Stating that his Department is not in possession of any
names of persons in the United States who entered into or countenanced
the project for the fomentation of sectional divisions in the United
States and the dissolution of the Union for the execution of which
John Henry was in the year 1809 employed by Sir James Craig, then
Governor-General of the British Provinces in North America.]



MARCH 13, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a letter[77] from the envoy extraordinary and
minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain to the Secretary of State.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 77: Disclaiming any knowledge of the employment of a secret
agent by Great Britain to foment disaffection to the constituted
authorities of the United States, etc. (See message of March 9, 1812,
Vol. I, p. 498.)]



APRIL 6, 1812.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report of the
superintendent of the city,[78] in compliance with their resolution of
the 24th of March, to which I add a letter from B.H. Latrobe, connected
with that subject.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 78: Washington.]



APRIL 23, 1812.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[79] of the Secretary of State, complying
with their resolution of the 4th of March last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 79: Relating to captures by belligerent European Governments
of American vessels bound to or from the Baltic or within that sea.]



JULY 4, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit, for the information of Congress, copies of a correspondence
of the minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain with the Secretary of
State.[80]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 80: Relating to the revocation of the Berlin and Milan decrees
by France, to the British orders in council, etc.]



JUNE 8, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress copies of letters[81] which have passed between
the Secretary of State and the envoy extraordinary and minister
plenipotentiary of Great Britain.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 81: Relating to impressment of American seamen in British
ships of war, detention of British seamen in American ships of war,
British orders in council, aid given by American citizens to deserters
from British ships, etc.]



JUNE 11, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit, for the information of Congress, copies of letters[82] which
have passed between the Secretary of State and the envoy extraordinary
and minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 82: Relating to the alleged agency of British authorities in
Canada in atrocities committed on the frontiers of the United States by
Indians.]



JUNE 15, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit, for the information of Congress, copies of letters[83] which
have passed between the Secretary of State and the envoy extraordinary
and minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 83: Relating to the revocation of the Berlin and Milan decrees
by France, to the British orders in council, etc.]



JUNE 16, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit, for the information of Congress, copies of a letter to the
Secretary of State from the chargé d'affaires of the United States at
London, accompanied by a letter from the latter to the British minister
of foreign affairs.[84]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 84: Relating to the British declaration and order in council
of April 21, 1812, to the hostile attitude of Great Britain toward
American commerce, etc.]



JUNE 22, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to Congress copies of a letter to the Secretary of State
from the chargé d'affaires of the United States at London and of a
note[85] to him from the British secretary for foreign affairs.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 85: Inclosing copy of a declaration accompanying the British
order in council of April 21, 1812.]



JUNE 23, 1812.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[86] of the Secretary of War, complying
with their resolution of the 19th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 86: Transmitting extracts from letters of governors of
Territories and other agents respecting the hostile and friendly
movements and intentions of the Indians toward the United States.]



JULY 6, 1812.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[87] of the Secretary
of State of this date, complying with their resolution of the 30th of
January last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 87: Transmitting lists of captures, seizures, and
condemnations of the ships and merchandise of citizens of the United
States under authority of Governments of Europe.]



NOVEMBER 6, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress copies of the correspondence between the
Department of War and the governors of Massachusetts and Connecticut
referred to in my message of the 4th instant.[88]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 88: Relating to the refusal of the governors of Massachusetts
and Connecticut to furnish their quotas of militia.]



NOVEMBER 18, 1812.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress copies of a communication from Mr. Russell to the
Secretary of State. It is connected with the correspondence accompanying
my message of the 12th instant,[89] but had not at that date been
received.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 89: See Vol. I, p. 521.]



DECEMBER 21, 1812.

_To the House, of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[90] of the Secretary
of State, complying with their resolution of the 9th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 90: Relating to the conduct of British officers toward persons
taken in American armed ships.]



DECEMBER 22, 1812.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[91] of the Secretary
of the Navy, complying with their resolution of the 16th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 91: Relating to the presentation to Commodore Edward Preble
of a gold medal emblematical of the attacks on the town, batteries, and
naval force of Tripoli by the squadron under his command, pursuant to
a resolution of Congress of March 3, 1805.]



JANUARY 4, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress, for their information, a report of the Director
of the Mint.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 11, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1812.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 11, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[92] of the Secretary of War, complying
with their resolution of the 24th December last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 92: Transmitting correspondence relative to murders committed
by Indians in Tennessee and vicinity.]



JANUARY 13, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

At the request of the general assembly of Maryland, communicated by the
governor of that State, I lay before Congress copies of their act passed
on the 2d instant.[93]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 93: Relating to the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal Company.]



JANUARY 13, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate copies of the correspondence[94] called for by
their resolution of the 7th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 94: Relating to capture of the British brigs _Detroit_
and _Caledonia_ on Lake Erie October 8, 1812.]



JANUARY 14, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[95] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 22d December.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 95: Relating to East Florida.]



JANUARY 23, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[96] of the Secretary of the Treasury,
complying with their resolution of the 20th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 96: Transmitting statements of purchases of Treasury notes by
banks.]



JANUARY 26, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[97] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 18th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 97: Transmitting correspondence, etc., relative to the
revocation by France of the Berlin and Milan decrees in so far as they
affected American vessels.]



JANUARY 27, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[98] of the Secretary of War, complying
with their resolution of the 7th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 98: Relating to enlistments under the "act authorizing the
President of the United States to accept and organize certain volunteer
military corps," etc.]



JANUARY 30, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

At the request of the legislature of Pennsylvania, conveyed through the
governor of that State, I transmit to Congress copies of its resolutions
of the 16th December, 1812.[99]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 99: Approving of the declaration of war against Great Britain,
etc.]



FEBRUARY 13, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a statement of the militia of the United States
according to the latest returns received by the Department of War.

JAMES MADISON.



FEBRUARY 18, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[100] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 18th of January, 1813.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 100: Transmitting correspondence relative to affairs between
the United States and Spain, etc.]



MARCH 1, 1813.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
containing a statement of proceedings under the "act to regulate the
laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland,
to the State of Ohio."

JAMES MADISON.



MARCH 3, 1813.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[101] of the
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 1st instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 101: Transmitting correspondence relative to and text of
decree of repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees.]



WASHINGTON, _May 29, 1813_.

_ To the Senate of the United States_:

Commissions having been granted during the recess of the Senate to the
following persons, I now nominate them to the same offices respectively
annexed to their names: Albert Gallatin, John Quincy Adams, and James A.
Bayard to be jointly and severally envoys extraordinary and ministers
plenipotentiary to negotiate and sign a treaty of peace with Great
Britain under the mediation of the Emperor of Russia, to negotiate and
sign a treaty of commerce with Great Britain; and the said John Quincy
Adams, Albert Gallatin, and James A. Bayard to be jointly and severally
envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary to negotiate and sign
a treaty of commerce with Russia.

       *       *       *       *       *

JAMES MADISON.



WASHINGTON, _June 3, 1813_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with their resolution of the 3d instant, the Senate
are informed that the office of the Secretary of the Treasury is not
vacated, and that in the absence of Albert Gallatin, commissioned as
one of the envoys to treat with Great Britain and Russia, the duties
of that office are discharged by William Jones, Secretary of the Navy,
authorized therefor according to the provisions of the act of Congress
entitled "An act making alterations in the Treasury and War
Departments," passed May 8, 1792.

JAMES MADISON.



WASHINGTON, _June 5, 1813_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress copies of certain legislative acts of
Pennsylvania,[102] transmitted for that purpose by the governor of that
State.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 102: "A supplement to an act to incorporate a company for the
purpose of cutting and making a canal between the river Delaware and the
Chesapeake Bay" and extracts from the act mentioned.]



JUNE 7, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[103] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 3d instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 103: Transmitting correspondence relative to an interchange of
ministers with the Swedish Government.]



WASHINGTON, _July 12, 1813_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[104] of the Secretary
of State, containing the information requested by their resolution of the
21st of June last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 104: Relating to the British declaration and order in council
of April 21, 1812.]



WASHINGTON, _July 12, 1813_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[105] of the
Secretary of State, containing the information requested by their
resolutions of the 21st of June last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 105: Relating to the French decree of April 28, 1811,
purporting to be a definitive repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees,
etc.]



WASHINGTON, _July 28, 1813_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[106] of the Acting Secretary of the
Treasury, containing the information requested by their resolution of
the 27th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 106: Relating to the loan of $16,000,000 authorized by act of
February 8, 1813.]



DECEMBER 20, 1813.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[107] of the Acting Secretary of the
Treasury, complying with the resolution of the 13th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 107: Transmitting statement of amount of duties accruing on
goods, wares, and merchandise imported into the United States from July
1 to December 31, 1812, etc.]



JANUARY 6, 1814.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 10, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[108] of the Acting Secretary of the
Treasury, complying with their resolution of the 31st December, 1813.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 108: Transmitting a statement of the quantity and estimated
value of spirits distilled from materials other than grain imported into
the United States from the West Indies and American colonies from
October 1, 1804, to September 30, 1812.]

JANUARY 14, 1814.



_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1813.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 15, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[109] of the Acting Secretary of the
Treasury, complying with their resolution of the 11th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 109: Transmitting a digest of the number, nature, extent,
situation, and value of the arts and manufactures of the United States.]



JANUARY 18, 1814.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Acting Secretary of the Treasury,
containing a statement of proceedings under the "act to regulate the
laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland,
to the State of Ohio."

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 18, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[110] of the
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 13th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 110: Relating to the mediation of Russia in the war between
the United States and Great Britain.]



JANUARY 18, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[111] of the
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 11th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 111: Relating to the reception by the French Government of the
United States minister to that court.]



JANUARY 19, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[112] of the Secretary
of State, complying with their resolution of the 12th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 112: Stating that no communication from the French minister
prescribing the conditions on which his sovereign would treat of amity
and commerce with the United States is on file in the Department of
State.]



JANUARY 31, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[113] of the
Secretary of War, complying with their resolution of the 31st of
December last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 113: Relating to the cause of the failure of the army on the
northern frontier.]



FEBRUARY 3, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate of the United States reports[114] of the
Secretary of War and Secretary of the Navy, complying with their
resolution of the 3d ultimo.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 114: Transmitting statements of foreign and domestic articles
consumed in clothing the Army and Navy of the United States in 1813, and
estimates for 1814.]



FEBRUARY 10, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[115] of the Acting
Secretary of the Treasury, complying with their resolution of the 30th
July, 1813.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 115: Transmitting accounts of United States ministers,
consuls, etc., from commencement of present Government expenses incurred
in and payments made under treaty with Algiers, and accounts of all
other expenditures in relation to the Barbary Powers, including those
occasioned by war with Tripoli and making of peace with that Regency.]



FEBRUARY 14, 1814.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

At the request of the legislature of Pennsylvania, conveyed through the
governor of that State, I transmit to Congress copies of its resolutions
of the 18th ultimo.[116]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 116: Commending the "decisive spirit and firmness which the
national authorities have manifested in securing hostages for the safety
of those defenders of the Republic who are threatened with the penalties
of treason against Great Britain," and pledging under all circumstances
to support the Government in every measure of just retaliation.]



MARCH 22, 1814.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

At the request of the legislature of Pennsylvania, conveyed through the
governor of that State, I transmit to Congress copies of its resolutions
of the 10th instant.[117]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 117: Expressing disapprobation of the action of the governor
of a sister State in issuing a proclamation ordering a detachment of
militia of that State then in the United States service to desert and
return to their respective homes, and also expressing disapprobation of
the threatened resistance of another State to any action of Congress
directing an inquiry by the President into the constitutionality of the
act of said governor, and pledging to support the General Government
in all lawful and constitutional measures to bring to justice all
infractors of the Constitution and laws of the United States and all
abettors and aiders of the enemies thereof.]



MARCH 28, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[118] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 26th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 118: Transmitting copies of certain commissions granted by
Presidents Washington and Madison during the recess of the Senate.]



APRIL 9, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[119] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 2d instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 119: Transmitting lists of ministers, their secretaries, and
consuls appointed by the several Presidents during the recess of the
Senate.]



APRIL 16, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[120] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolutions of the 2d of February and 9th of March.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 120: Transmitting list of American prisoners sent to England
for trial by the British commander in Canada; statement of the grounds
on which the British Government refused to deliver up American seamen
impressed into the British service, and statement of the conduct of the
British Government toward American seamen on board British ships of
war.]



APRIL 16, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[121] of the
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 13th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 121: Transmitting extract of a letter from the United States
minister at Paris touching relations with France.]



OCTOBER 3, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[122] from the Department of State,
complying with their resolution of the 26th ultimo.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 122: Stating that the relations of the United States with the
continental powers of Europe continue to be those of peace and amity;
that measures have been taken to continue diplomatic relations with
France under the existing Government and to renew those with Spain and
the United provinces of the Low Countries.]



WASHINGTON, _October 13, 1814_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now transmit to Congress copies of the instructions to the
plenipotentiaries of the United States charged with negotiating a peace
with Great Britain, as referred to in my message of the 10th
instant.[123]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 123: See Vol. I, p. 551.]



OCTOBER 28, 1814.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[124] from the
Department of State, complying with their resolution of the 15th
instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 124: Relating to retaliation upon prisoners of war.]



NOVEMBER 18, 1814.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate, for their consideration whether they will
advise and consent to the ratification thereof, a treaty concluded on
the 22d day of July last with the tribes of Indians called the Wyandots,
Delawares, Shawanese, Senecas, and Miamies.

I lay before the Senate also, for the like purpose, an instrument
entitled "Articles of agreement and capitulation made and concluded on
the 9th day of August last between Major-General Jackson and the chiefs,
deputies, and warriors of the Creek Nation of Indians."

These communications are accompanied by documents having relation to
them.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 2, 1815.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
containing a statement of proceedings under the "act to regulate the
laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland,
to the State of Ohio."

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 10, 1815.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 10, 1815.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1814.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 14, 1815.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report of the Secretary of War, complying
with their resolution of the 19th December.[125]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 125: Relating to measures authorized by the President in
pursuance of the "act to enable the President of the United States,
under certain contingencies, to take possession of the country lying
east of the river Perdido and south of the State of Georgia and the
Mississippi Territory, and for other purposes," for the purpose of
possessing and occupying any part of the country mentioned in said act.]



FEBRUARY 16, 1815.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[126] of the Acting Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of yesterday.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 126: Transmitting correspondence and protocols of conferences
between United States envoys at Ghent and ministers of Great Britain.]



FEBRUARY 23, 1815.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[127] from the Acting
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 15th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 127: Relating to affairs between the United States and the
Barbary Powers.]



WASHINGTON, _February 28, 1815_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[128] from the Postmaster-General,
complying with their resolution of the 15th of December last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 128: Transmitting statement of number of post-offices and
miles of post-roads in each State, net amount of postages for six months
ending June 30, 1814, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _February 28, 1815_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[129] from the Acting Secretary of
State, complying with their resolution of the 24th of October last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 129: Relating to the sale of negroes taken from the United
States by British forces.]



JANUARY 8, 1816.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 26, 1816.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolution of the 24th instant, I transmit two
letters from the envoy extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary of
Spain to the Secretary of State, with his answer.[130]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 130: Relating to demand of Spain for possession of West
Florida; to unlawful expeditions against Spanish possessions; to the
exclusion from ports of the United States of the flags of revolting
provinces of Spain; to the attitude of the United States toward the
Mexican revolution; to vessels of the United States condemned in ports
of Spain; to the free navigation of the Mississippi; to the boundaries
of Louisiana, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _January 31, 1816_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit a report[131] of the Secretary of State, complying with the
resolution of the 4th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 131: Relating to the massacre of American prisoners at
Dartmoor prison, England.]



FEBRUARY 13, 1816.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report from the Secretary of War, complying
with their resolution of the 5th instant.[132]

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 132: Relating to the reduction of the late Army to a peace
establishment.]



MARCH 11, 1816.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[133] of the
Secretary of the Treasury, complying with their resolution of the
17th of February.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 133: Transmitting statements of receipts and expenditures of
the city of Washington from 1791 to 1815, inclusive, and of moneys
advanced by the United States to said city.]



MARCH 12, 1816.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before Congress a report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
containing a statement of proceedings under the act to regulate the
laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland,
to the State of Ohio, with a statement of past appropriations and an
estimate of required appropriations.

JAMES MADISON.



MARCH 22, 1816.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[134] from the
Secretary of the Treasury, complying with their resolution of the 29th
of February last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 134: Relating to the employment of counsel to assist the
Attorney-General in prosecuting cases in the Supreme Court, names of
persons so employed, fees paid, etc.]



MARCH 26, 1816.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate, for their advice as to a ratification, articles
of a treaty and of a convention which have been concluded with the
Cherokee Nation, with documents relating to the losses by the Indians,
for which indemnity is stipulated.

JAMES MADISON.



APRIL 4, 1816.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[135] from the Secretary of the
Treasury, complying with their resolutions of the 26th March last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 135: Relating to the survey of the coasts of the United
States.]



APRIL 18, 1816.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[136] from the
Secretary of State, complying with their resolution of the 17th
February last.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 136: Relating to obstructions to American commerce in the
provincial and colonial possessions of Great Britain.]



APRIL 29, 1816.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[137] of the
Secretary of State on the subject of their resolution of February
28, 1816.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 137: Transmitting lists of impressed American seamen
transferred from British ships of war to Dartmoor and other prisons in
England and the West Indies and Nova Scotia, and those discharged in
England since the treaty of peace.]



JANUARY 6, 1817.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate, for the information of Congress, the report of the
Director of the Mint of the operation of that establishment during the
last year.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 17, 1817.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress an account of the contingent expenses of the
Government for the year 1816.

JAMES MADISON.



JANUARY 23, 1817.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[138] of the Acting Secretary of War,
in compliance with their resolution of the 8th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 138: Transmitting statement of claims of New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Carolina for militia services
during the late war.]



FEBRUARY 7, 1817.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[139] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 28th of last month.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 139: Relating to the deportation of slaves by Great Britain in
contravention of the treaty of Ghent, etc.]



FEBRUARY 22, 1817.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[140] of the Secretary of State,
complying with their resolution of the 20th instant.

JAMES MADISON.

[Footnote 140: Transmitting correspondence between the Governments of
the United States and Spain relative to settlement of boundaries, to
cession of East Florida by Spain, to indemnification for injuries to
American commerce by Spanish vessels, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _February 4, 1818_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

Pursuant to a resolution of the House of Representatives of the 31st of
December last, requesting information of the number of States which had
ratified the thirteenth article of the amendments to the Constitution of
the United States,[141] I transmit to the House a detailed report from
the Secretary of State, which contains all the information that has been
received upon that subject.

No time will be lost in communicating to the House the answers of the
governors of the States of South Carolina and Virginia to the inquiries
stated by the Secretary of State to have been recently addressed to them
when they are received at that Department.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 141: "If any citizen of the United States shall accept, claim,
receive, or retain any title of nobility or honor, or shall, without
the consent of Congress, accept and retain any present, pension, office,
or emolument of any kind whatever from any emperor, king, prince, or
foreign power, such person shall cease to be a citizen of the United
States, and shall be incapable of holding any office of profit or trust
under them, or either of them." This proposed amendment did not become
a part of the Constitution, failing of ratification by three-fourths of
the States.]



WASHINGTON, _February 6, 1818_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 13th of February,
1817, I now transmit copies of the reports in relation to the surveys and
examinations made by naval officers in cooperation with officers of the
Corps of Engineers.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _February 12, 1818_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

Conformably with a resolution of the House of Representatives of the 6th
of this month, I now lay before that House a report received from the
Secretary of State, with the copy of the correspondence[142] referred to
and requested by that resolution.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 142: Relating to a blockade of the Spanish coast in South
America by Spanish forces.]



WASHINGTON, _February 13, 1818_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the 28th of January last, I now
transmit to the Senate a statement of the expenditures upon the public
buildings and an account of their progress for the year 1818.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _February 18, 1818_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

Conformably with a resolution of the House of Representatives of the
12th instant, I lay before that House a report which I have received
from the Department of State, with a copy of the letter communicated
with it.[143]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 143: Relative to the claims of the heirs of Caron de
Beaumarchais.]



MARCH 5, 1818.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate, for their consideration and the exercise
of their constitutional power of advice and consent respecting the
ratification thereof, a treaty concluded on the 22d of January last with
the Creek Nation of Indians. This treaty is accompanied by certain
documents having relation to it.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _March 24, 1818_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In pursuance of a resolution of the House of Representatives of the 7th
instant, I now transmit the report of the Secretary of State, with a
statement of the expenses incurred under the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh articles of the treaty of Ghent, specifying the items of
expenditure in relation to each.

JAMES MONROE.



NOVEMBER 26, 1818.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate a report from the Commissioner of the Public
Buildings, made in compliance with a resolution of the 28th of January
last, requiring a statement of the expenditures upon the public
buildings and an account of their progress to be annually exhibited
to Congress.

JAMES MONROE.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



NOVEMBER 30, 1818.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolution of the 17th of April, I transmit to
the Senate a report[144] from the Acting Secretary of the Navy, which,
with the documents accompanying it, will be found to contain all the
information required.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 144: Relating to the navy pension fund.]



DECEMBER 15, 1818.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I lay before the House of Representatives copies of the remainder of
the documents[145] referred to in the message of the 17th of last month.

JAMES MONROE.

[The same message was sent to the Senate.]

[Footnote 145: Reports of Theodorick Bland and J.R. Poinsett,
commissioners, on the condition of South America, correspondence between
the Secretary of State and the Spanish minister relative to affairs
between the United States and Spain, etc.]



DECEMBER 18, 1818.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolution of the Senate of the 10th instant, I
transmit copies of the instructions to the commissioners who negotiated
the Indian treaties now before it.

JAMES MONROE.



DECEMBER 28, 1818.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 17th instant, I
transmit to that House a report from the Secretary of State, with the
papers and documents accompanying it.[146]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 146: Relating to affairs between the United States and Spain,
the prosecution of Captain Obed Wright for the murder of friendly
Indians, etc.]



DECEMBER 28, 1818.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the 15th instant, I lay before the
House of Representatives a report from the Secretary of State, with the
papers and documents accompanying it.[147]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 147: Relating to affairs between the United States and Spain.]



JANUARY 4, 1819.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate a report from the Secretary of State,
accompanied with a copy of a letter from Governor Rabun,[148] which was
not communicated on a former occasion from that Department.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 148: Relating to the case of Captain Obed Wright, charged with
the murder of friendly Indians.]



DECEMBER 24, 1819.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Commissioner of the Public
Buildings, which, with the accompanying documents, will exhibit the
present state of those buildings and the expenditures thereon during
the year ending the 30th of September last.

JAMES MONROE.



JANUARY 18, 1820.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolution of the Senate of the 5th instant,
the inclosed papers are transmitted to them _in confidence_, and
contain all the information in possession of the Executive respecting
the progress of the negotiation with the British Government in relation
to the intercourse between the United States and the British colonies.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _March 8, 1820_.

The SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:

I transmit to the House of Representatives, in pursuance of their
resolution of the 22d of last month, a report from the Secretary of
State, with the papers containing the information requested by that
resolution.[149]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 149: Relating to the Florida treaty.]



MARCH 10, 1820.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint of the
operations of that institution during the last year.

JAMES MONROE.



MARCH 17, 1820.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Secretary of the Treasury,
accompanied with statements of the annual expenditures made in the
construction of the road leading from Cumberland, in the State of
Maryland, to the State of Ohio from the year 1806 to the year 1820.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _March 23, 1820_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate, in pursuance of their resolution of the 1st of
February, a report[150] from the Secretary of State, with the information
required by that rotation.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 150: Relating to the construction of the first article of the
treaty of Ghent, relative to slaves.]



WASHINGTON, _March 28, 1820_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives, in pursuance of their
resolution of the 31st of January last, a report[151] from the Secretary
of the Treasury, with the documents which accompanied it.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 151: Relating to the marine-hospital fund.]



MARCH 30, 1820.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a general abstract of the militia of the United
States, in pursuance of the act of March 2, 1803.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _April 18, 1820_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate, in pursuance of their resolution of the 21st
of last month, the accompanying report and documents[152] from the
Department of State.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 152: Relating to the seizure, sequestration, or confiscation
of the ships or other property of citizens of the United States by
authority of Sweden.]



WASHINGTON, _May 12, 1820_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I communicate to Congress translations of letters from the minister of
Spain to the Secretary of State, received since my message of the 9th
instant.[153]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 153: See Vol. II, pp. 70-72.]



NOVEMBER 23, 1820.

The PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE:

In conformity with a resolution of the Senate passed the 28th of
January, 1818, I communicate herewith to the Senate the report of
the Commissioner of Public Buildings required by that resolution.

JAMES MONROE.

[The same message was addressed to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.]



JANUARY 26, 1821.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I lay before the Senate, for their consideration and advice as to a
ratification, a treaty concluded between the United States and the Creek
Nation of Indians.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _February 13, 1821_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the Senate a copy of a memorial received from
Richard W. Meade,[154] together with a report of the Secretary of State
concerning it.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 154: Relating to his claim against Spain for imprisonment.]



WASHINGTON, _February 14, 1821_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint, inclosing
a statement of the Treasurer, submitting the operations of the Mint for
the last year.

JAMES MONROE.



DECEMBER 24, 1821.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a treaty recently concluded with the Indian
tribes at Chicago, with the papers relating thereto, which is submitted
for consideration as to its ratification.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 7, 1822_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint, with a
statement of the operations for the last year.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 15, 1822_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate requesting the President
"to cause a statement of expenditures upon the public buildings and an
account of their progress to be annually laid before Congress at the
commencement of each session," I herewith transmit the annual report
of the Commissioner of the Public Buildings.

JAMES MONROE.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1822_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report from the Secretary of State,
containing the information required by the resolution of the Senate of
the 3d instant, with the documents[155] which accompanied that report.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 155: Relating to relief of sick, disabled, and destitute
American seamen in foreign ports in 1818, 1819, and 1820.]



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit a report from the Secretary of War, together with the
documents which accompany it, containing the information requested by
a resolution of the House of Representatives of the 22d instant.[156]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 156: Relating to Indian affairs.]



WASHINGTON, _February 6, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State on the subject required by the resolution of that House of the
22d ultimo,[157] with the documents which accompanied that report.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 157: Relating to that part of the boundary line between the
United States and the British Provinces which extends "from the source
of the river St. Croix to the northwesternmost head of Connecticut
River."]



WASHINGTON, _February 7, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the 17th ultimo, I transmit a report
from the Secretary of War, which, with the accompanying documents,[158]
contains the information requested.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 158: Statements of ordnance and ordnance stores in
fortifications, arsenals, etc., and estimates of amounts required,
contracted for, etc.]



FEBRUARY 8, 1822.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report from the Secretary of State,
containing the information required by the resolution of the Senate of
the 1st instant, with the documents which accompanied that report.[159]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 159: Relating to the appointment of William B. Irish as
marshal of the western district of Pennsylvania.]



WASHINGTON, _February 12, 1822_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report from the Secretary of State, containing
the information[160] required by the resolution of the Senate of the 4th
instant.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 160: Relating to the lease of a building on Capitol Hill for
the temporary use and accommodation of Congress.]



WASHINGTON, _February 15, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

In compliance with a resolution of the House of Representatives
"requesting the President of the United States to cause to be laid
before this House any information which he may have of the condition
of the several Indian tribes within the United States and the progress
of the measures hitherto devised and pursued for their civilization,"
I now transmit a report from the Secretary of War.

JAMES MONROE.



FEBRUARY 21, 1822.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 7th instant,
requesting the President of the United States to cause to be
communicated to the Senate the instructions to the commissioners who
negotiated the treaty concluded at Chicago with the Ottowa, Chippeway,
and Potawatamie nations of Indians, I herewith transmit a report from
the Secretary of War.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _February 21, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State, with the documents[161] accompanying it, in pursuance of a
resolution of the House of the 17th January last.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 161: Correspondence leading up to and protocol of treaty of
Ghent, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _March 4, 1822_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit a report from the Secretary of the Navy, communicating
information in relation to the Navy of the United States[162] requested
by a resolution of the House of Representatives of the 14th ultimo.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 162: List of the navy yards and stations, number and grade of
officers attached to each, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _March 15, 1822_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 29th of January,
I herewith transmit reports[163] from the Treasury and War Departments,
containing all the information in the possession of the Executive
embraced by that resolution.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 163: Relating to lands granted to officers and soldiers of
Virginia who served in the Revolutionary War.]



WASHINGTON, _April 1, 1822_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with two resolutions of the 11th ultimo, requesting that
the President of the United States cause to be furnished to that House
certain detailed information from the Navy Department, I herewith
transmit a report from the Secretary of the Navy, with other
documents.[164]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 164: Statements showing names and number of officers belonging
to the Navy attached to each navy-yard in the United States, and their
compensation for two years ending January 1, 1822.]



APRIL 19, 1822.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit a letter from the Attorney-General on the subject of the
resolution of the Senate of the 12th instant, which I have received this
day, and which in consequence of his absence was not communicated with
the message of the 15th instant.[165]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 165: See Vol. II, p. 136.]



DECEMBER 15, 1822.

_To the Congress of the United States_:

I now transmit to both Houses of Congress the report of the Commissioner
of Public Buildings made in obedience to a resolution of the Senate
passed the 28th day of January, 1818.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 20, 1823_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

In compliance with the resolution of the 20th of December, requesting
information "what appropriations will be required to fortify Thompsons
Island, usually called Key West, and whether a naval depot established
at that island, protected by fortifications, will not afford facilities
in defending the commerce of the United States and in clearing the Gulf
of Mexico and the adjacent seas from pirates," I transmit a report from
the Secretary of the Navy, which communicates all the information which
I am at this time able to give.

JAMES MONROE.



FEBRUARY 6, 1823.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 28th of January,
requesting the President to communicate the instructions to the
commissioners nominated to treat with the Indians for the extinguishment
of Indian titles in the State of Georgia, I transmit to the Senate a
report from the Secretary of War, with the documents referred to in it.

JAMES MONROE.



_To the Senate of the United States_.

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of 28th January, 1818, I
herewith transmit to Congress the report of the Commissioner of Public
Buildings, showing the expenditures on public buildings and other
objects committed to his care during the present year.

JAMES MONROE.

DECEMBER 19, 1823.



_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the House of Representatives a report from the
Secretary of State, together with a digest of recent commercial
regulations of foreign countries, prepared in compliance with a
resolution of the House of the 30th of January, 1823.

JAMES MONROE.

FEBRUARY 2, 1824.



WASHINGTON, _February 2, 1824_.

The SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State, agreeably to a resolution of that House of the 11th of
December last, with the papers[166] which accompanied that report.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 166:  Relating to French spoliations.]



FEBRUARY 24, 1824.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I herewith transmit a report from the Secretary of War, which
communicates all the information in possession of the Department which
was called for by a resolution of the Senate of the 21st of January,
1824.[167]

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 167: Relating to sites for fortifications at St. Marys and
Patuxent rivers, plans for same, and estimates of cost of each
fortification.]



WASHINGTON, _March 19, 1824_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State, with the papers[168] therein referred to, in compliance with a
resolution of the House of the 27th of January last.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 168: Relating to the suppression of the African slave trade.]



WASHINGTON, _May 7, 1824_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I communicate to the Senate copies of additional documents relating to
the convention for the suppression of the African slave trade, which
have this day been received at the Department of State.

JAMES MONROE.



MAY 24, 1824.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State, with an appendix to a report[169] from him already
communicated to the House.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 169: Addition to digest of foreign commercial law.]



WASHINGTON, _May 25, 1824_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report[170] from the Secretary of State,
concerning two resolutions of the Senate of the 8th of January and 1st
of March last, which had been referred to him.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 170: Relating to foreign spoliations on American commerce.]



MAY 25, 1824.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report[171] from the
Secretary of State, concerning a resolution of that House of the 20th of
April last, which was referred to him.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 171: Stating that the correspondence relative to French
spoliations and to the claims of France upon the United States for
noncompliance with the treaties of alliance and commerce of February 6,
1778, would be communicated at the next session of Congress.]



WASHINGTON, _December 13, 1824_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate, for its advice and consent as to the
ratification, the treaties concluded and signed on the 4th day of August
last between the United States and the Ioway, the Sock, and Fox tribes
of Indians.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _December 13, 1824_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

Agreeably to a resolution of the Senate of 28th January, 1818,
requesting the President "to cause a statement of expenditures upon the
public buildings and an account of their progress to be annually laid
before Congress at the commencement of each session," I herewith
transmit a report from the Commissioner of Public Buildings, which
contains the information required.

JAMES MONROE.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 5, 1825_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolution of the Senate of the 17th May last,
I transmit a report[172] from the Secretary of the Navy, which contains
the information requested.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 172: Relating to the use of canvas, cables, and cordage made
of hemp grown in the United States in the equipment vessels of the
American Navy.]



WASHINGTON, _January 17, 1825_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit to the House a report from the Secretary of State,
containing the information required by the resolution of the House of
the 16th ultimo, relating to the western boundary of the United States.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 17, 1825_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the House of Representatives of the
28th ultimo, requesting the President to inform that House what terms
were offered by applicants for the stock created by the act of the 24th
of May last and by whom such terms were offered, I herewith transmit a
report from the Secretary of the Treasury, with accompanying papers,
which contains the information called for.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 18, 1825_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit to the House of Representatives a report of
the Secretary of War, with a report made to that Department by the
commissioners who were appointed under the act of the 3d of March, 1823,
entitled "An act to establish an armory on the western waters."

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _January 18, 1825_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit to the House of Representatives a report of
the Secretary of War, with a report made to that Department by the
commissioners who were appointed under the act of 3d March, 1823,
entitled "An act to establish a national armory on the western waters."

JAMES MONROE.



JANUARY 19, 1825.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the Senate a report from the Secretary of State,
with the documents desired by their resolution of the 13th instant.[173]
In requesting that the originals may eventually be returned it may be
unnecessary to add that the negotiations being by common consent to be
hereafter resumed, it is important that this communication should be
regarded by the Senate as strictly confidential.

JAMES MONROE.

[Footnote 173: Relating to commercial intercourse with the British
colonies of the West Indies and Canada; to the boundary under the fifth
article of the treaty of Ghent, and the navigation of the St. Lawrence
River; to admission of United States consuls into British colonial
ports; to the Newfoundland fishery; to maritime questions; to the
northwest coast of America.]



WASHINGTON, _February 2, 1825_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit a report from the Director of the Mint of the United
States, showing the operations of that institution for the last year.

JAMES MONROE.



WASHINGTON, _March 1, 1826_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith a report from the Director of the Mint of the United
States, showing the operations of that institution for the year 1825.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _March 15, 1826_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I now submit to the consideration of Congress the propriety of making
the appropriation necessary for carrying into effect the appointment of
a mission to the congress at Panama.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _December 8, 1826_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 20th of January,
1818, I transmit a report of the Commissioner of the Public Buildings,
containing the annual statement of expenditures on those buildings and
the account of their progress, required by the said resolution.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _December 11, 1826_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress sundry additional papers appertaining to the
report from the War Department relating to Indian affairs, communicated
at the commencement of the session.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _December 28, 1826_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Secretary
of State, containing the information requested by two resolutions of the
House relating to certain negotiations[174] with the Government of the
United Mexican States.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.

[Footnote 174: Concerning the boundary line between the United States
and Mexico and the return of slaves escaping from the former country
into the latter.]



WASHINGTON, _January 18, 1827_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the House of Representatives of the
6th instant, I transmit herewith a report from the Secretary of State,
together with copies of the correspondence with the Government of the
Netherlands relating to discriminating duties.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _February 24, 1827_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
with a statement of its operations during the year 1826.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _December 24, 1827_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate, for their consideration and advice, a
convention of friendship, navigation, and commerce between the United
States and the Free Hanseatic Republics of Lubeck, Bremen, and Hamburg,
signed by the respective plenipotentiaries of the parties on the 20th
instant at this city. A copy of the convention is likewise inclosed.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _January 11, 1828_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress the annual report of the Commissioner of the
Public Buildings, made in conformity with a resolution of the Senate of
the 28th January, 1818.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _January 11, 1828_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In answer to the inquiry contained in a resolution of the Senate of the
9th instant, I readily express the opinion that the publication of the
message[175] and documents to which it alludes may be made without
detriment to the public service.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.

[Footnote 175: Of December 24, 1827 (see Vol. II, p. 393), relative to
the negotiation of the convention of November 13, 1826, with Great
Britain.]



WASHINGTON, _January 21, 1828_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

A report from the Director of the Mint, together with a statement of the
operations of that institution during the year 1827, are herewith
transmitted to Congress.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _December 8, 1828_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate of the 26th of May last,
I transmit a report of the Secretary of the Treasury, with statements
relative to the estimates and appropriations for the expenses of the
year 1828 at the last session of Congress.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _January 14, 1829_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint, with the
annual statement exhibiting the operations of that institution during
the year 1828.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _February 25, 1829_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith a statement of the expenses of the General Land
Office for the year 1827, as desired by a resolution of the Senate of
the 23d instant.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.



WASHINGTON, _February 8, 1830_.

_To the Congress of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1829.

ANDREW JACKSON.



JANUARY 12, 1831.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1830.

ANDREW JACKSON.



JANUARY 25, 1831.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I beg leave to call the attention of Congress to the annual report of
the inspectors of the penitentiary in the District of Columbia, herewith
transmitted.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _January 16, 1832_.

_To the Congress of the United States_:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1831.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _January 31, 1832_.

_To the Congress of the United States_:

I herewith transmit, for the information of Congress, the third annual
report of the inspectors of the penitentiary in the District of
Columbia.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _January 19, 1833_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the fourth annual report of the board of inspectors
of the penitentiary in the District of Columbia, which is required by
the act of the 3d of March, 1829, to be laid before Congress.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _January 19, 1833_.

The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE UNITED STATES:

I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1832.

ANDREW JACKSON.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, D.C., _January 15, 1834_.

The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE.

SIR: I transmit to Congress a report from the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1833.

ANDREW JACKSON.

[The same message was addressed to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1934_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary in the District of Columbia, which, agreeably to the act
for the government and discipline of the same, is to be laid before
Congress.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _January 10, 1835_.

The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE UNITED STATES.

SIR: I herewith transmit to the Senate a report from the Director of the
Mint, showing the operations of that institution during the year 1834.

ANDREW JACKSON.

[The same message was addressed to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 12, 1835_.

_To the Congress of the United States_:

I transmit, for the information of Congress, the sixth annual report of
the inspectors of the penitentiary for the District of Columbia, made in
compliance with the act of the 3d of March, 1829.

ANDREW JACKSON.



WASHINGTON, _December 10, 1835_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate of the United States a report[176] of the
Secretary of State, to whom was referred the resolutions of that body
passed on the 2d and 13th days of February last, together with such
portion of the correspondence and instructions requested by the said
resolutions as has not been heretofore transmitted and as can be
communicated without prejudice to the public interest.

ANDREW JACKSON.

[Footnote 176: Transmitting correspondence which passed between the
Governments of the United States and Spain in the negotiation of the
treaty of February 17, 1834, instructions given to the minister of the
United States during the course of the negotiation, etc.]



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1836_.

Hon. JAMES K. POLK,
  _Speaker of the House of Representatives_.

SIR: I transmit herewith the seventh annual report of the board of
inspectors of the penitentiary in the District of Columbia, which, in
pursuance of the act of the 3d of March, 1829, is submitted to Congress.

ANDREW JACKSON.



JANUARY 16, 1838.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I herewith transmit a report from the Director of the Mint, showing the
operations of that institution during the year 1837 and also the
progress made toward the completion of the branch mints in North
Carolina, Georgia, and Louisiana.

M. VAN BUREN.



WASHINGTON, _January 29, 1838_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the act of Congress of the 3d March, 1829, I herewith
transmit to Congress the ninth annual report of the board of inspectors
of the penitentiary of Washington.

M. VAN BUREN.



WASHINGTON, _January 18, 1839_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report of the Director of the Mint,
exhibiting the operations of that institution during the year 1838.

M. VAN BUREN.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _February 6, 1839_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the act of Congress of the 3d March, 1829, I herewith
transmit to Congress the tenth annual report of the board of inspectors
of the penitentiary of Washington.

M. VAN BUREN.



WASHINGTON, D.C., _February 1, 1840_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a report from the Director of the Mint, showing
the operations of that institution for the year 1839.

M. VAN BUREN.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _February 5, 1840_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the act of Congress of the 3d of March, 1829, I
herewith transmit to Congress the eleventh annual report of the board of
inspectors of the penitentiary of the District of Columbia.

M. VAN BUREN.



FEBRUARY 10, 1840.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit to the Senate a supplementary report received from the
Director of the Mint, containing a complete statement of the operations
of the branch mint at New Orleans for the year 1839.

M. VAN BUREN.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 27, 1841_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with an act of Congress of the 3d of March, 1829, I
herewith transmit to Congress the twelfth annual report of the board of
inspectors of the penitentiary of the District of Columbia.

M. VAN BUREN.



WASHINGTON, _January 31, 1842_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the Senate a report of the Director of the Mint,
showing the operations of the institution for the year 1841.

JOHN TYLER.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _January 17, 1843_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the report of the inspectors of the penitentiary for
the District of Columbia, made in pursuance of the act of Congress of
the 3d March, 1829, with the accompanying documents.

JOHN TYLER.



WASHINGTON, _March 1, 1843_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the Senate a copy of a report received from the
Director of the Mint, showing the operations of that institution for the
year 1842.

JOHN TYLER.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, D.C. _January 19, 1844_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the report of the inspectors of the penitentiary of
the District of Columbia for the past year, with the accompanying
documents.

JOHN TYLER.



WASHINGTON, D.C., _January 20, 1844_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, exhibiting the operations of the Mint and branch mints for
the past year.

JOHN TYLER.



WASHINGTON, _February 3, 1845_.

_To the Senate of the United States_:

I transmit herewith to the Senate a report from the Director of the
Mint, showing the operations of the institution for the year 1844.

JOHN TYLER.

[The same message was sent to the House of Representatives.]



WASHINGTON, _February 11, 1845_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary for this District, together with accompanying documents.

JOHN TYLER.



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1846_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary for the District of Columbia, made in compliance with the
act of the 3d March, 1829.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, D.C., _February 10, 1846_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operation of the Mint and branch mints for the
year 1845.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 16, 1847_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

In compliance with the resolutions of the 3d of March, 1829, I transmit
herewith the annual report of the inspectors of the penitentiary for the
District of Columbia.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _February 4, 1847_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit to the House of Representatives a report from the Director of
the Mint, showing the operations of that institution for the year 1846.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 18, 1848_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary for the District of Columbia, made in compliance with the
act of the 3d March, 1829.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 31, 1848_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operation of the Mint and branch mints for the
year 1847.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 11, 1849_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary for the District of Columbia, made in compliance with the
act of the 3d March, 1829.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 22, 1849_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operations of the Mint and branch mints for
the year 1848.

JAMES K. POLK.



WASHINGTON, _January 28, 1850_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operations of the Mint and its branches for
the year 1849.

Z. TAYLOR.



EXECUTIVE OFFICE, _February 5, 1850_.

_To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

I herewith transmit the annual report of the inspectors of the
penitentiary for the District of Columbia, made in compliance with the
act of the 3d March, 1829.

Z. TAYLOR.



WASHINGTON, _January 30, 1851_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operation of the Mint and branch mints for the
year 1850.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON, _February 15, 1851_.

The SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:

I have the honor herewith to transmit to the House of Representatives
the report of the inspectors of the penitentiary of the United States
in this District for the year ending December 31, 1850.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON, D.C., _February 10, 1852_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operations of the Mint and its branches for
the year 1851.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON, _April 2, 1852_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the report of the inspector of the penitentiary of
the United States in the District of Columbia for the year ending the
31st of December last.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON, _February 8, 1853_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives_:

I herewith communicate, for the information of Congress, a copy of the
report of the Director of the Mint for the past year.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON CITY, _February 10, 1853_.

The SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:

I transmit to the House of Representatives herewith a communication from
the Secretary of the Interior, accompanied by the annual report of the
board of inspectors of the penitentiary of the District of Columbia for
the year ending 31st December, 1852, as required by law.

MILLARD FILLMORE.



WASHINGTON, _February 1, 1854_.

The SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the Director of the Mint at
Philadelphia, showing the operation of the Mint and branch mints for the
year 1853.

FRANKLIN PIERCE.



WASHINGTON, _March 3, 1854_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the annual report of the board of inspectors of the
penitentiary for the District of Columbia for the year ending December
31, 1853.

FRANKLIN PIERCE.



WASHINGTON, _February 8, 1855_.

_To the House of Representatives_:

I transmit herewith the report of the Director of the Mint, showing the
operations of the Mint and its branches for the past year.

FRANKLIN PIERCE.



WASHINGTON, _March 27, 1856_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith a report of the operations of the Mint of the United
States and its branches, including the assay office, for the year 1855.

FRANKLIN PIERCE.



WASHINGTON, _February 3, 1857_.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

I transmit herewith the report of the Director of the Mint, showing the
operations of the Mint and its branches for the last year.

FRANKLIN PIERCE.




PROCLAMATIONS.


[From Laws of the United States of America (John Bioren and W. John
Duane, Philadelphia, and R.C. Weightman, Washington City, 1815),
Vol. V, p. 511.]


BY GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas by an act supplementary to the act entitled "An act establishing
a mint and regulating the coins of the United States," passed on the 3d
day of March, 1795, "the President of the United States is authorized,
whenever he shall think it for the benefit of the United States, to
reduce the weight of the copper coin of the United States, provided such
reduction shall not in the whole exceed 2 pennyweights in each cent and
in like proportion in a half cent; of which he shall give notice by
proclamation;" and

Whereas, on account of the increased price of copper and expense of
coinage, I have thought it would be for the benefit of the United
States to reduce the weight of the copper coin of the United States
1 pennyweight and 16 grains in each cent and in like proportion in each
half cent, and the same has since the 27th day of December last been
reduced accordingly:

I hereby give notice thereof and that all cents and half cents coined
and to be coined at the Mint of the United States from and after the
said 27th day of December are to weigh, the cents each 7 pennyweights
and the half cents each 3 pennyweights and 12 grains.

In testimony whereof I, the said George Washington, President of the
United States, have caused the seal of the United States to be hereto
affixed and signed the same with my hand.

[SEAL.]

Done at the city of Philadelphia on the 26th day of January, A.D. 1796,
and of the Independence of the United States the twentieth.

Go. WASHINGTON.

By the President:
  TIMOTHY PICKERING,
    _Secretary of State_.



[From Claypoole's American Daily Advertiser, Philadelphia, December 28,
1799.]

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas the Congress of the United States, "in honor of the memory of
General George Washington," have this day "_Resolved_, That it be
recommended to the people of the United States to wear crape on the left
arm as mourning for thirty days," and "that the President of the United
States be requested to issue a proclamation notifying to the people
throughout the United States the said recommendation:"

Now, therefore, I, John Adams, President of the United States, do hereby
proclaim the same accordingly.

[SEAL.]

Given under my hand and the seal of the United States, at Philadelphia,
the 24th day of December, A.D. 1799, and of the Independence of the
United States the twenty-fourth.

JOHN ADAMS.

By the President:
  TIMOTHY PICKERING,
    _Secretary of State_.



[From the Daily National Intelligencer, December 15, 1860.]

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.

A RECOMMENDATION.

WASHINGTON, _December 14, 1860_.

Numerous appeals have been made to me by pious and patriotic
associations and citizens, in view of the present distracted and
dangerous condition of our country, to recommend that a day be set apart
for humiliation, fasting, and prayer throughout the Union.

In compliance with their request and my own sense of duty, I designate
Friday, the 4th day of January, 1861, for this purpose, and recommend
that the people assemble on that day, according to their several forms
of worship, to keep it as a solemn fast.

The Union of the States is at the present moment threatened with
alarming and immediate danger; panic and distress of a fearful character
prevail throughout the land; our laboring population are without
employment, and consequently deprived of the means of earning their
bread. Indeed, hope seems to have deserted the minds of men. All classes
are in a state of confusion and dismay, and the wisest counsels of our
best and purest men are wholly disregarded.

In this the hour of our calamity and peril to whom shall we resort for
relief but to the God of our fathers? His omnipotent arm only can save
us from the awful effects of our own crimes and follies--our own
ingratitude and guilt toward our Heavenly Father.

Let us, then, with deep contrition and penitent sorrow unite in humbling
ourselves before the Most High, in confessing our individual and
national sins, and in acknowledging the justice of our punishment. Let
us implore Him to remove from our hearts that false pride of opinion
which would impel us to persevere in wrong for the sake of consistency
rather than yield a just submission to the unforeseen exigencies by
which we are now surrounded. Let us with deep reverence beseech Him to
restore the friendship and good will which prevailed in former days
among the people of the several States, and, above all, to save us from
the horrors of civil war and "blood guiltiness." Let our fervent prayers
ascend to His throne that He would not desert us in this hour of extreme
peril, but remember us as He did our fathers in the darkest days of the
Revolution, and preserve our Constitution and our Union, the work of
their hands, for ages yet to come.

An omnipotent Providence may overrule existing evils for permanent good.
He can make the wrath of man to praise Him, and the remainder of wrath
He can restrain. Let me invoke every individual, in whatever sphere of
life he may be placed, to feel a personal responsibility to God and his
country for keeping this day holy and for contributing all in his power
to remove our actual and impending calamities.

JAMES BUCHANAN.




EXECUTIVE ORDERS.

[From Sparks's Washington, Vol. X, pp. 11-12.]

NEW YORK, _June 8, 1789_.

SIR:[177] Although in the present unsettled state of the Executive
Departments under the Government of the Union I do not conceive it
expedient to call upon you for information officially, yet I have
supposed that some informal communications from the Office of Foreign
Affairs might neither be improper nor unprofitable. Finding myself at
this moment less occupied with the duties of my office than I shall
probably be at almost any time hereafter, I am desirous of employing
myself in obtaining an acquaintance with the real situation of the
several great Departments at the period of my acceding to the
administration of the General Government. For this purpose I wish to
receive in writing such a clear account of the Department at the head of
which you have been for some years past as may be sufficient (without
overburthening or confusing the mind, which has very many objects to
claim its attention at the same instant) to impress me with a full,
precise, and distinct general idea of the affairs of the United States
so far as they are comprehended in or connected with that Department.

As I am now at leisure to inspect such papers and documents as may be
necessary to be acted upon hereafter or as may be calculated to give me
an insight into the business and duties of that Department, I have
thought fit to address this notification to you accordingly.

I am, etc.,

GO. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 177: Addressed to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the
Secretary of War, the Board of the Treasury, and the Postmaster-General.]



[From American State Papers, Indian Affairs, Vol. I, pp. 96-97.]

INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES TO THE GOVERNOR OF
THE WESTERN TERRITORY--6TH OCTOBER, 1789.

ARTHUR ST. CLAIR, Esq.,

_Governor of the Territory of the United States Northwest of the Ohio
and Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Northern District_.

SIR: Congress having by their act of the 29th of September last
empowered me to call forth the militia of the States, respectively, for
the protection of the frontiers from the incursions of the hostile
Indians, I have thought proper to make this communication to you,
together with the instructions herein contained.

It is highly necessary that I should as soon as possible possess full
information whether the Wabash and Illinois Indians are most inclined
for war or peace. If for the former, it is proper that I should be
informed of the means which will most probably induce them to peace.
If a peace can be established with the said Indians on reasonable terms,
the interests of the United States dictate that it should be effected as
soon as possible.

You will therefore inform the said Indians of the dispositions of the
General Government on this subject and of their reasonable desire that
there should be a cessation of hostilities as a prelude to a treaty. If,
however, notwithstanding your intimations to them, they should continue
their hostilities or meditate any incursions against the frontiers of
Virginia and Pennsylvania or against any of the troops or posts of the
United States, and it should appear to you that the time of execution
would be so near as to forbid your transmitting the information to me
and receiving my further orders thereon, then you are hereby authorized
and empowered in my name to call on the lieutenants of the nearest
counties of Virginia and Pennsylvania for such detachments of militia as
you may judge proper, not exceeding, however, 1,000 from Virginia and
500 from Pennsylvania.

I have directed letters to be written to the executives of Virginia and
Pennsylvania informing them of the before-recited act of Congress and
that I have given you these conditional directions, so that there may
not be any obstructions to such measures as shall be necessary to be
taken by you for calling forth the militia agreeably to the instructions
herein contained.

The said militia to act in conjunction with the Federal troops in such
operations, offensive or defensive, as you and the commanding officer of
the troops conjointly shall judge necessary for the public service and
the protection of the inhabitants and the posts.

The said militia while in actual service to be on the continental
establishment of pay and rations. They are to arm and equip themselves,
but to be furnished with public ammunition if necessary; and no charge
for the pay of said militia will be valid unless supported by regular
musters, made by a field or other officer of the Federal troops, to be
appointed by the commanding officer of the troops.

I would have it observed forcibly that a war with the Wabash Indians
ought to be avoided by all means consistently with the security of the
frontier inhabitants, the security of the troops, and the national
dignity. In the exercise of the present indiscriminate hostilities it
is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to say that a war without
further measures would be just on the part of the United States.

But if, after manifesting clearly to the Indians the dispositions of
the General Government for the preservation of peace and the extension
of a just protection to the said Indians, they should continue their
incursions, the United States will be constrained to punish them with
severity.

You will also proceed, as soon as you can with safety, to execute the
orders of the late Congress respecting the inhabitants at St. Vincennes
and at the Kaskaskias and the other villages on the Mississippi. It is a
circumstance of some importance that the said inhabitants should as soon
as possible possess the lands to which they are entitled by some known
and fixed principles.

I have directed a number of copies of the treaty made by you at Fort
Harmar with the Wyandots, etc., on the 9th of January last to be printed
and forwarded to you, together with the ratification and my proclamation
enjoining the observance thereof.

As it may be of high importance to obtain a precise and accurate
knowledge of the several waters which empty into the Ohio on the
northwest and of those which discharge themselves in the Lakes Erie and
Michigan, the length of the portages between, and nature of the ground,
an early and pointed attention thereto is earnestly recommended.

Given under my hand, in the city of New York, this 6th day of October,
A.D. 1789, and in the thirteenth year of the Sovereignty and
Independence of the United States.

Go. WASHINGTON.



[From The Freeman's Journal; or, The North American Intelligencer,
Philadelphia, October 21, 1789.]

  CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES.

  AN ACT providing for the payment of the invalid pensioners of the United
  States.

  _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
  United States of America in Congress assembled_, That the military
  pensions which have been granted and paid by the States, respectively,
  in pursuance of the acts of the United States in Congress assembled, to
  the invalids who were wounded and disabled during the late war shall be
  continued and paid by the United States from the 4th day of March last
  for the space of one year under such regulations as the President of the
  United States may direct.

  FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG,
    _Speaker of the House of Representatives._

  JOHN ADAMS,
    _Vice-President of the United States and President of the Senate._

  Approved, September 29, 1789.

  Go. WASHINGTON,
    _President of the United States._



WAR OFFICE, _October 13, 1789._

In pursuance of the above-recited law, information is hereby given to
all the invalid pensioners of the United States that the amount of one
year's pension from the 4th day of March last will be paid to them or
their attorneys, respectively, in two equal payments, the first of which
will be made on the 5th day of March, 1790, and the second on the 5th
day of June following, at such places in each State and by such persons
as shall hereafter in due season be publicly made known.

The payments will be made according to the following regulations, to
wit:

The returns which have been or shall be made to the Secretary for the
Department of War by the several States of the pensions which have been
granted and paid by them, respectively, will, together with the vouchers
herein required, be considered as the evidence whereon the payments are
to be made.

Every application for payment must be accompanied by the following
vouchers:

First. The certificate given by the State, specifying that the person
possessing it is in fact an invalid and ascertaining the sum to which as
such he is annually entitled.

Secondly. An affidavit agreeably to the following form, to wit:

  A.B. came before me, one of the justices for the county of ----, in
  the State of ----, and made oath that he is the same A.B. to whom the
  original certificate in his possession was given, of which the following
  is a copy: [The certificate given by the State to be recited.]

  That he served in ---- [regiment or vessel] at the time he was disabled,
  and that he now resides in the ---- and county of ----, and has resided
  there for the last ---- years, previous to which he resided in ----.


In case an invalid should apply for payment by an attorney the said
attorney must, besides the certificate and oath before recited, produce a
special letter of attorney agreeably to the following form:

  I, A.B., of ----, county of ----, State of ----, do hereby constitute
  and appoint C.D., of ----, my lawful attorney to receive in my behalf
  ---- [the first or second moiety] of my annual pension as an invalid of
  the United States from the 4th day of March, 1789.

  In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal this ----.

  Signed and sealed in the presence of ---- ----.

  Acknowledged before me ---- ----.


Applications of executors or administrators must be accompanied with
legal evidence of their respective offices and also the time the invalid
died whose pension they may claim.

By command of the President of the United States of America:

H. KNOX,
  _Secretary for the Department of War._



[From Annals of Congress, Second Congress, 1247-1248.]

_George Washington, President of the United States of America, to the
Secretary of the Treasury for the time being_:

By virtue of the several acts, the one entitled "An act making provision
for the debt of the United States" and the other entitled "An act making
provision for the reduction of the public debt," I do hereby authorize
and empower you, by yourself or any other person or persons, to borrow
on behalf of the United States, within the said States or elsewhere,
a sum or sums not exceeding in the whole $14,000,000, and to make or
cause to be made for that purpose such contract or contracts as shall
be necessary and for the interest of the said States, subject to the
restrictions and limitations in the said several acts contained; and
for so doing this shall be your sufficient warrant.

In testimony whereof I have caused the seal of the United States to be
hereunto affixed.

[SEAL.]

Given under my hand, at the city of New York, this 28th day of August,
A.D. 1790.

Go. WASHINGTON.

By the President:
  TH: JEFFERSON.



[From Annals of Congress, Second Congress, 1249-1250.]

_George Washington, President of the United States of America, to the
Secretary of the Treasury for the time being_:

Having thought fit to commit to you the charge of borrowing on behalf of
the United States a sum or sums not exceeding in the whole $14,000,000,
pursuant to the several acts, the one entitled "An act making provision
for the debt of the United States," the other entitled "An act making
provision for the reduction of the public debt"--

I do hereby make known to you that in the execution of the said trust
you are to observe and follow the orders and directions following, viz:
Except where otherwise especially directed by me you shall employ in
the negotiation of any loan or loans which may be made in any foreign
country William Short, esq. You shall borrow or cause to be borrowed,
on the best terms which shall be found practicable (and within the
limitations prescribed by law as to time of repayment and rate of
interest), such sum or sums as shall be sufficient to discharge as well
all installments or parts of the principal of the foreign debt which
now are due or shall become payable to the end of the year 1791 as all
interest and arrears of interest which now are or shall become due in
respect to the said debt to the same end of the year 1791; and you shall
apply or cause to be applied the moneys which shall be so borrowed with
all convenient dispatch to the payment of the said installments and
parts of the principal and interest and arrears of the interest of
the said debt. You shall not extend the amount of the loan which you
shall make or cause to be made beyond the sum which shall be necessary
for completing such payment unless it can be done upon terms more
advantageous to the United States than those upon which the residue of
the said debt shall stand or be; but if the said residue or any part of
the same can be paid off by new loans upon terms of advantage to the
United States you shall cause such further loans as may be requisite to
that end to be made and the proceeds thereof to be applied accordingly.
And for carrying into effect the objects and purposes aforesaid I do
hereby further empower you to make or cause to be made with whomsoever
it may concern such contract or contracts, being of a nature relative
thereto, as shall be found needful and conducive to the interest of the
United States.

If any negotiation with any prince or state to whom any part of the
said debt may be due should be requisite, the same shall be carried on
through the person who in capacity of minister, chargé d'affaires, or
otherwise now is or hereafter shall be charged with transacting the
affairs of the United States with such prince or state, for which
purpose I shall direct the Secretary of State, with whom you are in
this behalf to consult and concert, to cooperate with you.

Given under my hand, at the city of New York, this 28th day of August,
A.D. 1790.

Go. WASHINGTON.



[From Annals of Congress, Second Congress, 1046.]

UNITED STATES, _January 16, 1792._

The SECRETARY FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF WAR.

SIR: As the circumstances which have engaged the United States in
the present Indian war[178] may some of them be out of the public
recollection and others perhaps be unknown, it may appear advisable that
you prepare and publish from authentic documents a statement of those
circumstances, as well as of the measures which have been taken from
time to time for the reestablishment of peace and friendship.

When the community are called upon for considerable exertions to relieve
a part which is suffering under the hand of an enemy, it is desirable to
manifest that due pains have been taken by those intrusted with the
administration of their affairs to avoid the evil.

Go. WASHINGTON.

[Footnote 178: With certain tribes of Indians northwest of the Ohio.]



[From Annals of Congress, Sixth Congress, 1335.]

SEPTEMBER 29, 1792.

The President of the United States doth hereby order and direct that
any lot or lots in the city of Washington may, after the public sale
to commence on the 8th day of October, be sold and agreed for by the
commissioners, or any two of them, at private sale for such price and
on such terms as they may think proper.

Go. WASHINGTON.



[From Sparks's Washington, Vol. X, pp. 546-548.]

RULES ADOPTED BY THE CABINET AS TO THE EQUIPMENT OF VESSELS IN THE PORTS
OF THE UNITED STATES BY BELLIGERENT POWERS, AND PROCEEDINGS ON THE
CONDUCT OF THE FRENCH MINISTER.

AUGUST 3, 1793.

1. The original arming and equipping of vessels in the ports of the
United States by any of the belligerent parties for military service,
offensive or defensive, is deemed unlawful.

2. Equipments of merchant vessels by either of the belligerent parties
in the ports of the United States purely for the accommodation of them
as such is deemed lawful.

3. Equipments in the ports of the United States of vessels of war in the
immediate service of the Government of any of the belligerent parties
which if done to other vessels would be of a doubtful nature, as being
applicable either to commerce or war, are deemed lawful, except those
which shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of
France coming with their prizes into the ports of the United States
pursuant to the seventeenth article of our treaty of amity and commerce
with France.

4. Equipments in the ports of the United States by any of the parties at
war with France of vessels fitted for merchandise and war, whether with
or without commissions, which are doubtful in their nature, as being
applicable either to commerce or war, are deemed lawful, except those
which shall be made prize, etc.

5. Equipments of any of the vessels of France in the ports of the United
States which are doubtful in their nature, as being applicable to
commerce or war, are deemed lawful.

6. Equipments of every kind in the ports of the United States of
privateers of the powers at war with France are deemed lawful.

7. Equipments of vessels in the ports of the United States which are
of a nature solely adapted to war are deemed unlawful, except those
stranded or wrecked, as mentioned in the eighteenth article of our
treaty with France, the sixteenth of our treaty with the United
Netherlands, the ninth of our treaty with Prussia, and except those
mentioned in the nineteenth article of our treaty with France, the
seventeenth of our treaty with the United Netherlands, the eighteenth
of our treaty with Prussia.

8. Vessels of either of the parties not armed, or armed previous to
their coming into the ports of the United States, which shall not have
infringed any of the foregoing rules, may lawfully engage or enlist
their own subjects or citizens, not being inhabitants of the United
States, except privateers of the powers at war with France and except
those vessels which shall have made prize, etc.

The foregoing rules having been considered by us at several meetings and
being now unanimously approved, they are submitted to the President of
the United States.

  THOMAS JEFFERSON.
  ALEXANDER HAMILTON.
  HENRY KNOX.
  EDMUND RANDOLPH.



RESTITUTION OF PRIZES

AUGUST 5, 1793.

That the minister of the French Republic be informed that the President
considers the United States as bound, pursuant to positive assurances
given in conformity to the laws of neutrality, to effectuate the
restoration of or to make compensation for prizes which shall have been
made of any of the parties at war with France subsequent to the 5th day
of June last by privateers fitted out of their ports.

That it is consequently expected that he will cause restitution to be
made of all prizes taken and brought into our ports subsequent to the
above-mentioned day by such privateers, in defect of which the President
considers it as incumbent upon the United States to indemnify the owners
of those prizes, the indemnification to be reimbursed by the French
nation.

That besides taking efficacious measures to prevent the future fitting
out of privateers in the ports of the United States they will not give
asylum therein to any which shall have been at any time so fitted out,
and will cause restitution of all such prizes as shall be hereafter
brought within their ports by any of the said privateers.

That instructions be sent to the respective governors in conformity to
the above communication.

The foregoing having been duly considered, and being now unanimously
approved, they are submitted to the President of the United States.

  THOMAS JEFFERSON.
  ALEXANDER HAMILTON.
  HENRY KNOX.
  EDMUND RANDOLPH.



CONCERNING THE CONDUCT OF THE FRENCH MINISTER.

At a meeting of the heads of Departments and the Attorney-General at the
President's on the 1st and 2d of August, 1793, on a review of the whole
of M. Genet's correspondence and conduct, it was unanimously agreed that
a letter should be written to the minister of the United States at Paris
stating the same to him, resuming the points of difference which had
arisen between the Government of the United States and M. Genet,
assigning the reasons for the opinions of the former and desiring the
recall of the latter; and that this letter, with those which have passed
between M. Genet and the Secretary of State, and other necessary
documents, shall be laid by Mr. Morris before the Executive of the
French Government.

At a meeting of the same at the President's August 15 the rough draft of
the said letter, having been prepared by the Secretary of State, was
read for consideration, and it was agreed that the Secretary of the
Treasury should take measures for obtaining a vessel, either by hire or
purchase, to be sent to France express with the dispatches when ready.

At a meeting of the same at the President's August 20 the said letter
was read and corrected by paragraphs, and finally agreed to.

At a meeting of the same at the President's August 23 it was agreed that
the preceding letter should bear the date of the last document which is
to accompany it, to wit, August 16; and the draft of a second letter to
our minister at Paris was read and unanimously approved, and to bear
date this day.

Sealed and signed, this 23d day of August, 1793.

  THOMAS JEFFERSON.
  ALEXANDER HAMILTON.
  HENRY KNOX.
  EDMUND RANDOLPH.



[From the original, Department of State.]

PHILADELPHIA, _August 4, 1793._

The SECRETARY OF STATE.

SIR: If the heads of Departments and the Attorney-General, who have
prepared the eight rules which you handed to me yesterday, are well
satisfied that they are not repugnant to treaties or to the laws
of nations, and, moreover, are the best we can adopt to maintain
neutrality, I not only give them my approbation, but desire they may
be made known without delay for the information of all concerned.

The same expression will do for the other paper, which has been
subscribed as above and submitted to my consideration, for restoring or
making restitution of prizes under the circumstances therein mentioned.

It is proper you should be informed that the minister of France intends
to leave this city for New York to-morrow, and not amiss, perhaps, to
know that in mentioning the seasonable aid of hands which the _Ambuscade_
received from the French Indiaman the day preceding her meeting the
_Boston_ he added that seamen would no longer be wanting, as he had
_now_ 1,500 at his command. This being the case (although the
allusion was to the subject he was then speaking upon), some of these
men may be employed in the equipment of privateers other than those
_now_ in existence, as the right of fitting out such _in our
ports_ is asserted in unequivocal terms.

Was the propriety of convening the Legislature at an earlier day than
that on which it is to assemble by law considered yesterday?

The late decree of the National Convention of France, dated the 9th of
May, authorizing their ships of war and armed vessels to stop any
neutral vessel loaded in whole or part with provisions and send them
into their ports, adds another motive for the adoption of this measure.

Go. WASHINGTON.



[From Annals of Congress, Seventh Congress, second session, 746-747.]

JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE COMMANDERS OF ARMED VESSELS BELONGING TO THE UNITED
STATES, GIVEN AT PHILADELPHIA THIS 28TH DAY OF MAY, A.D. 1798, AND IN
THE TWENTY-SECOND YEAR OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE SAID STATES.

Whereas it is declared by an act of Congress passed the 28th day of
May, 1798, that armed vessels sailing under authority or pretense of
authority from the French Republic have committed depredations on the
commerce of the United States and have recently captured the vessels and
property of citizens thereof on and near the coasts, in violation of the
law of nations and treaties between the United States and the French
nation:

Therefore, and in pursuance of the said act, you are instructed and
directed to seize, take, and bring into any port of the United States,
to be proceeded against according to the laws of nations, any armed
vessel sailing under authority or pretense of authority from the French
Republic which shall have committed, or which shall be found hovering
on the coasts of the United States for the purpose of committing,
depredations on the vessels belonging to citizens thereof, and also to
retake any ship or vessel of any citizen or citizens of the United
States which may have been captured by any such armed vessel.

By command:

JAMES M'HENRY, _Secretary of War_.



[From American State Papers, Foreign Relations, Vol. II, pp. 365-367.]

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PRIVATE ARMED VESSELS OF THE UNITED STATES.

First. In exercising the powers granted by the act of Congress entitled
"An act further to protect the commerce of the United States," passed
the 9th day of July, 1798, and which is hereto annexed, the regulations
therein prescribed are to be strictly attended to and observed.

Second. The powers of capturing and recapturing granted by the said act
being pointed solely and exclusively against French armed vessels and
those vessels, goods, and effects of citizens of the United States or of
persons resident therein which shall have been captured by the French,
the rights of all other nations are to be duly respected, and they are
not to be molested in their persons or property; consequently American
vessels and property captured by the commissioned vessels of such of
those other nations as are at war are not to be recaptured by the armed
vessels of the United States. Nevertheless, any vessels found on the
high seas may be examined in such manner as shall be necessary to
ascertain whether they are or are not armed French vessels, or "vessels
the property of or employed by any citizen of the United States or
person resident therein, or having on board any goods or effects
belonging to any such citizen or resident," that have been captured by
the French. But if they are of neither of these descriptions they are
to be dismissed with as little delay as possible. And in making such
examination care is to be taken that no injury be done to the vessel or
to the persons or property on board her. It peculiarly becomes a nation
like the American, contending for her just rights and defending herself
against insults and injuries, to respect the rights of others and
studiously to avoid not only the outrage and the inhumanity but even the
incivility of which itself complains. It is hoped that Americans will be
as distinguished for their justice and humanity as for their bravery and
love of true liberty. If, on the contrary, any of the officers or crews
of American armed vessels shall practice any cruelty or inhumanity
contrary to the usage of civilized nations, the offenders will be
severely punished.

Third. For the purposes of the act aforesaid you will consider the "high
seas" to extend to low-water mark on all the coasts of France and her
dominions and of all places subject to her power in any part of the
world, and exercise accordingly the powers of capturing and recapturing
granted by the act aforesaid. By the same rule, seeing a war exists
between Great Britain and France, you may capture and recapture as
aforesaid on all the coasts of the British dominions and of all places
subject to the British power. But you are to refrain from exercising the
aforesaid powers of capturing and recapturing in waters which are under
the protection of any other nations, that their peace and sovereignty
may remain unviolated. If, however, any armed French vessel, regardless
of the rights of these other nations, shall within their jurisdictional
limits attack or capture any vessel, goods, or effects the property of
citizens of or residents in the United States, and you are able to
attack and take such armed French vessel or to retake her prize within
the jurisdictional limits of such nations, you are to do it, provided
their governments, respectively, or the commanders or governors in chief
in such places give their permission.

Fourth. The master or pilot and one or more of the principal persons of
the company of every armed French vessel captured as aforesaid are to be
sent as soon after the capture as may be to the judge or judges of the
proper court in the United States to be examined upon oath touching the
interest or property of the captured vessel and her lading, and at the
same time are to be delivered to the judge or judges all passes, charter
parties, bills of lading, invoices, letters, and other documents and
writings found on board; the said papers to be proved by the affidavit
of the commander of the capturing vessel or some other person present
at the capture, to be produced as they were received, without fraud,
addition, subduction, or embezzlement.

Fifth. The commanders of American private armed ships are by all
convenient opportunities to send to the Secretary of the Navy written
accounts of the captures they shall make, with the number and names
of the captives and intelligence of what may occur or be discovered
concerning the designs of the French and the destinations, motions,
and operations of their fleets, cruisers, and armies.

Sixth. Where it can be done without injury or great inconvenience, the
armed French vessels captured as aforesaid are to be sent to some port
in the United States to be tried according to law. But such captures may
happen in places remote from the United States or under circumstances
which would render the sending of the captured vessels thither extremely
inconvenient, while, from the vicinity of the ports of the British
dominions or those of any other power in friendship with the United
States, but at war with France, or from other circumstances, it would be
easy to send such captured vessels into those friendly ports. In such
cases it will be lawful to send such prizes into those friendly ports
where they will find an asylum; and if the laws of those countries admit
of it and it can be done to the satisfaction of the captors, there will
be no objection on the part of the American Government to the libeling
and trying such captured armed French vessels by the proper courts of
those, countries, where also may be delivered to the proper officers
all French persons and others who shall be found acting on board of any
French armed vessel which shall be captured or on board of any vessel
of the United States which shall be recaptured as aforesaid.

Seventh. With respect to American vessels, goods, and effects
recaptured, it seems not necessary to bring them immediately into a port
of the United States. If brought in, they are to be restored to the
owners on the payment of salvage. But such recaptured vessels, goods,
and effects may at the time of recapture be so remote from the United
States and so near a market, or the goods and effects may be of a nature
so perishable, that to send such vessels, goods, and effects back to the
United States may prove extremely injurious to the owners and recaptors,
whereas, if permitted to proceed to their destined ports, or other
places, to a market, greater advantages may result to all concerned
therein; and as either the master, mate, or supercargo of any such
recaptured vessel is usually left on board, and with the aid of the
prizemaster and hands of the recaptors, which would be necessary to
bring her home, might proceed and complete their original or other
beneficial voyage, the commanders of the private armed vessels will in
such case consider maturely the course most proper to be pursued, as
well for the benefit of their fellow-citizens whose property they shall
thus recapture as of themselves in respect to the salvage to which they
and their crews and owners will be entitled. Nothing on this subject is
enjoined; the commanders of the private armed vessels are to use their
sound discretion.

Eighth. If any vessel of the United States, public or private, shall be
found in distress by being attacked or taken by the French, the commanders,
officers, and company of the private armed vessels aforesaid are
to use their utmost endeavors to aid, succor, relieve, and free every such
vessel in distress.



AN ACT further to protect the commerce of the United States.

SECTION 1. _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives
of the United States of America in Congress assembled_, That the
President of the United States shall be, and he is hereby, authorized
to instruct the commanders of the public armed vessels which are or
which shall be employed in the service of the United States to subdue,
seize, and take any armed French vessel which shall be found within
the jurisdictional limits of the United States or elsewhere on
the high seas; and such captured vessel, with her apparel, guns, and
appurtenances and the goods or effects which shall be found on board
the same, being French property, shall be brought within some port of
the United States and shall be duly proceeded against and condemned as
forfeited, and shall accrue and be distributed as by law is or shall be
provided respecting the captures which shall be made by the public armed
vessels of the United States.

SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That the President of the
United States shall be, and he is hereby, authorized to grant to the
owners of private armed ships and vessels of the United States who shall
make application therefor special commissions in the form which he shall
direct and under the seal of the United States; and such private armed
vessels, when duly commissioned as aforesaid, shall have the same
license and authority for the subduing, seizing, and capturing any armed
French vessel and for the recapture of the vessels, goods, and effects
of the people of the United States as the public armed vessels of the
United States may by law have, and shall be in like manner subject to
such instructions as shall be ordered by the President of the United
States for the regulation of their conduct; and the commissions which
shall be granted as aforesaid shall be revocable at the pleasure of the
President of the United States.

SEC. 3. _Provided, and be it further enacted_, That every person
intending to set forth and employ an armed vessel and applying for a
commission as aforesaid shall produce in writing the name and a suitable
description of the tonnage and force of the vessel and the name and
place of residence of each owner concerned therein, the number of the
crew, and the name of the commander and the two officers next in rank
appointed for such vessel, which writing shall be signed by the person
or persons making such application and filed with the Secretary of
State, or shall be delivered to any other officer or person who shall be
employed to deliver out such commissions, to be by him transmitted to
the Secretary of State.

SEC. 4. _And provided, and be it further enacted_, That before
any commission as aforesaid shall be issued the owner or owners of the
ship or vessel for which the same shall be requested and the commander
thereof for the time being shall give bond to the United States, with
at least two responsible sureties not interested in such vessel, in the
penal sum of $7,000, or, if such vessel be provided with more than 150
men, then in the penal sum of $14,000, with condition that the owners
and officers and crews who shall be employed on board of such
commissioned vessel shall and will observe the treaties and laws of the
United States and the instructions which shall be given them for the
regulation of their conduct, and will satisfy all damages and injuries
which shall be done or committed contrary to the tenor thereof by such
vessel during her commission, and to deliver up the same when revoked
by the President of the United States.

SEC. 5. _And be it further enacted_, That all armed French vessels,
together with their apparel, guns, and appurtenances and any goods or
effects which shall be found on board the same, being French property,
and which shall be captured by any private armed vessel or vessels of
the United States duly commissioned as aforesaid, shall be forfeited
and shall accrue to the owners thereof and the officers and crews by
whom such captures shall be made, and on due condemnation had shall be
distributed according to any agreement which shall be between them, or,
in failure of such agreement, then by the discretion of the court before
whom such condemnation shall be.

SEC. 6. _And be it further enacted_, That all vessels, goods, and
effects the property of any citizen of the United States or person
resident therein which shall be recaptured as aforesaid shall be
restored to the lawful owners upon payment by them, respectively, of a
just and reasonable salvage, to be determined by the mutual agreement of
the parties concerned or by the decree of any court of the United States
having maritime jurisdiction, according to the nature of each case:
_Provided_, That such allowance shall not be less than one-eighth
or exceeding one-half of the full value of such recapture, without any
deduction. And such salvage shall be distributed to and among the
owners, officers, and crews of the private armed vessel or vessels
entitled thereto according to any agreement which shall be between them,
or, in case of no agreement, then by the decree of the court who shall
determine upon such salvage.

SEC. 7. _And be it further enacted_, That before breaking bulk of
any vessel which shall be captured as aforesaid, or other disposal or
conversion thereof, or of any articles which shall be found on board the
same, such capture shall be brought into some port of the United States
and shall be libeled and proceeded against before the district court of
the same district; and if, after a due course of proceeding, such
capture shall be decreed as forfeited in the district court, or in the
circuit court of the same district in the case of any appeal duly
allowed, the same shall be delivered to the owners and captors concerned
therein, or shall be publicly sold by the marshal of the same court, as
shall be finally decreed and ordered by the court; and the same court,
who shall have final jurisdiction of any libel or complaint of any
capture as aforesaid, shall and may decree restitution, in whole or in
part, when the capture and restraint shall have been made without just
cause as aforesaid, and if made without probable cause or otherwise
unreasonably may order and decree damages and costs to the party
injured, and for which the owners, officers, and crews of the private
armed vessel or vessels by which such unjust capture shall have been
made, and also such vessel or vessels, shall be answerable and liable.

SEC. 8. _And be it further enacted_, That all French persons and
others who shall be found acting on board any French armed vessel which
shall be captured, or on board of any vessel of the United States which
shall be recaptured as aforesaid, shall be reported to the collector of
the port in which they shall first arrive, and shall be delivered to the
custody of the marshal or of some civil or military officer of the
United States or of any State in or near such port, who shall take
charge for their safe-keeping and support, at the expense of the United
States.

Enacted into a law July 9, 1798.

By command of the President of the United States of America:

---- ----,
  _Secretary of State_.



[From Annals of Congress, Seventh Congress, second session, 747.]

JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

INSTRUCTIONS TO COMMANDERS OF ARMED VESSELS BELONGING TO THE UNITED
STATES, GIVEN AT PHILADELPHIA THE 10TH DAY OF JULY, A.D. 1798, AND IN
THE TWENTY-THIRD YEAR OF OUR INDEPENDENCE.

In pursuance of the acts of Congress passed the 27th day of May, the
20th day of June, and the 9th day of July--

You are hereby authorized, instructed, and directed to subdue, seize,
and take any armed French vessel or vessels sailing under authority or
pretense of authority from the French Republic which shall be found
within the jurisdictional limits of the United States or elsewhere on
the high seas, and such captured vessel, with her apparel, guns, and
appurtenances and the goods and effects which shall be found on board of
the same, to bring within some port of the United States; and also
retake any vessel, goods, and effects of the United States or persons
resident therein which may have been captured by any French vessel, in
order that proceedings may be had concerning such capture or recapture
in due form of law and as to right shall appertain.

By command of the President of the United States of America:

BEN. STODDERT.



[From C.F. Adams's Works of John Adams, Vol. IX, p. 160.]

CIRCULAR TO THE COMMANDERS OF ARMED VESSELS IN THE SERVICE OF THE UNITED
STATES, GIVEN AT THE NAVY DEPARTMENT DECEMBER 29, 1798.

SIR: It is the positive command of the President that on no pretense
whatever you permit the public vessel of war under your command to be
detained or searched nor any of the officers or men belonging to her to
be taken from her by the ships or vessels of any foreign nation so long
as you are in a capacity to repel such outrage on the honor of the
American flag. If force should be exerted to compel your submission,
you are to resist that force to the utmost of your power, and when
overpowered by superior force you are to strike your flag and thus yield
your vessel as well as your men, but never your men without your vessel.

You will remember, however, that your demeanor be respectful and
friendly to the vessels and people of all nations in amity with the
United States, and that you avoid as carefully the commission of as the
submission to insult or injury.

I have the honor to be, etc.,

BEN STODDERT.



[From Annals of Congress, Seventh Congress, second session, 747-748.]

CIRCULAR INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CAPTAINS AND COMMANDERS OF VESSELS IN THE
SERVICE OF THE UNITED STATES.

NAVY DEPARTMENT, _March 12, 1799._

SIR: Herewith you will receive an act of Congress "further to suspend
the commercial intercourse between the United States and France and the
dependencies thereof," the whole of which requires your attention; but
it is the command of the President that you consider particularly the
fifth section as part of your instructions and govern yourself
accordingly.

A proper discharge of the important duties arising out of this act will
require the exercise of a sound and an impartial judgment. You are not
only to do all that in you lies to prevent all intercourse, whether
direct or circuitous, between the ports of the United States and those
of France or her dependencies in cases where the vessels or cargoes are
apparently, as well as really, American and protected by American papers
only, but you are to be vigilant that vessels or cargoes really
American, but covered by Danish or other foreign papers and bound to or
from French ports, do not escape you. Whenever, on just suspicion, you
send a vessel into port to be dealt with according to the aforementioned
law, besides sending with her all her papers send all the evidence you
can obtain to support your suspicions and effect her condemnation. At
the same time that you are thus attentive to fulfill the objects of the
law you are to be extremely careful not to harass or injure the trade of
foreign nations with whom we are at peace nor the fair trade of our own
citizens.

A misconstruction of his authority by Captain Nicholson in relation to
vessels of friendly nations captured by the French renders it necessary
that I should make some explanatory observations on that subject. Our
laws direct the capture of all armed vessels sailing under authority or
pretense of authority from the French Republic. A vessel captured by the
citizens of France must be considered as sailing under the authority
of France, and it is scarcely to be supposed that in times like the
present, when few vessels sail without arms, a captured vessel in
possession of the captors will be so circumstanced as not to come under
the description of an armed vessel within the meaning of our laws. To
justify a recapture nothing is necessary but that the vessel be provided
with such means of annoyance as will render her dangerous to an unarmed
American vessel in pursuit of lawful commerce. If, however, the vessel
can not be considered an armed vessel within the meaning of our laws,
you are not to recapture her unless you should have probable cause to
suspect that the citizens of the United States or persons resident
therein have some interest in the vessel or cargo.

It is always your duty to recapture American property and property of
persons resident within the United States whenever found in possession
of the French on the high seas.

I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,

BEN. STODDERT.



[From Claypoole's American Daily Advertiser, Philadelphia, December 20,
1799.]


The President with deep regret announces to the Army the death of its
beloved chief, General George Washington. Sharing in the grief which
every heart must feel for so heavy and afflicting a public loss, and
desirous to express his high sense of the vast debt of gratitude which
is due to the virtues, talents, and ever-memorable services of the
illustrious deceased, he directs that funeral honors be paid to him at
all the military stations, and that the officers of the Army and of
the several corps of volunteers wear crape on the left arm by way of
mourning for six months. Major-General Hamilton will give the necessary
orders for carrying into effect the foregoing directions.

Given at the War Office of the United States, in Philadelphia, this 19th
day of December, A.D. 1799, and in the twenty-fourth year of the
Independence of the said States.

By command of the President:

JAMES M'HENRY,
  _Secretary of War_.



[From Claypoole's American Daily Advertiser, Philadelphia, December 21,
1799.]

NAVY DEPARTMENT, _December 20, 1799_.

The President with deep affliction announces to the Navy and to the
marines the death of our beloved fellow-citizen, George Washington,
commander of our armies and late President of the United States, but
rendered more illustrious by his eminent virtues and a long series of
the most important services than by the honors which his grateful
country delighted to confer upon him.

Desirous that the Navy and marines should express, in common with every
other description of American citizens, the high sense which all feel of
the loss our country has sustained in the death of this good and great
man, the President directs that the vessels of the Navy in our own and
foreign ports be put in mourning for one week by wearing their colors
half-mast high, and that the officers of the Navy and of the marines
wear crape on the left arm below the elbow for six months.

BEN. STODDERT.



[From Claypoole's American Daily Advertiser, Philadelphia, December 24,
1799.]

Impressed with unspeakable grief and under the influence of an
affectionate sympathy which must pervade the hearts of his beloved
fellow citizen soldiers, the Blues, Brigadier-General MacPherson
announces the following communication:

PHILADELPHIA, _December 21, 1799_.

Major-General Hamilton has received through the Secretary of War
the following order from the President of the United States:

[For order see preceding page.]

The impressive terms in which this great national calamity is announced
by the President could receive no new force from anything that might be
added. The voice of praise would in vain endeavor to exalt a character
unrivaled on the lists of true glory. Words would in vain attempt to
give utterance to that profound and reverential grief which will
penetrate every American bosom and engage the sympathy of an admiring
world. If the sad privilege of preeminence in sorrow may justly be
claimed by the companions in arms of our lamented Chief, their
affections will spontaneously perform the dear though painful duty.
'Tis only for me to mingle my tears with those of my fellow-soldiers,
cherishing with them the precious recollection that while others are
paying a merited tribute to "The Man of the Age" we in particular,
allied as we were to him by a closer tie, are called to mourn the
irreparable loss of a kind and venerated patron and father!

In obedience to the directions of the President, the following funeral
honors will be paid at the several stations of the Army:

At daybreak sixteen guns will be fired in quick succession and one gun
at a distance of each half hour till sunset.

During the procession of the troops to the place representing that of
the interment and until the conclusion of the ceremonial minute guns
will be fired.

The bier will be received by the troops formed in line presenting their
arms and the officers, drums, and colors saluting. After this the
procession will begin, the troops marching by platoons in inverted order
and with arms reversed to the place of interment, the drums muffled and
the music playing a dead march.

The bier, carried by four sergeants and attended by six pallbearers,
where there is cavalry will be preceded by the cavalry and will be
followed by the troops on foot. Where there is no cavalry, a detachment
of infantry will precede the bier, which itself will in every case be
preceded by such of the clergy as may be present. The officers of the
general staff will immediately succeed the bier.

Where a numerous body of citizens shall be united with the military in
the procession, the whole of the troops will precede the bier, which
will then be followed by the citizens.

When arrived near the place of interment, the procession will halt, the
troops in front of the bier will form in line, and, opening their ranks,
will face inwards, to admit the passage of the bier, which will then
pass through the ranks, the troops leaning on their arms, reversed,
while the bier passes. When the bier shall have passed, the troops will
resume their position in line, and, reversing their arms, will remain
leaning upon them until the ceremonial shall be closed.

The music will now perform a solemn air, after which the introductory
part of this order shall be read.

At the end of this a detachment of infantry, appointed for the purpose,
will advance and fire three volleys over the bier.

The troops will then return, the music playing the President's march,
the drums previously unmuffled.

The uniform companies of militia are invited to join in arms the
volunteer corps.

The commanders at particular stations, conforming generally to this
plan, will make such exceptions as will accommodate it to situation. At
places where processions of unarmed citizens shall take place it is the
wish of the Major-General that the military ceremonial should be united,
and the particular commanders at those places are authorized to vary the
plan so as to adapt it to the circumstances.

Brigadier-General MacPherson is charged to superintend the ceremonial in
the city of Philadelphia; Major Tousard will attend to Fort Mifflin and
will cooperate with him.

The day of performing the ceremonial at each station is left to the
particular commander.

Major-General Pinckney will make such further arrangements within his
district as he shall deem expedient.

PHILIP CHURCH,
  _Aid-de-Camp._

In conformity to the above the volunteers of the city and county of
Philadelphia in the service of the United States will parade, completely
equipped, at the manege, in Chesnut street, on Thursday next, the 26th
instant, at 10 o'clock a.m. The officers, together with the uniform
companies of militia who may think proper to join on this mournful
occasion, will please to signify their intention to Brigadier-General
MacPherson at his quarters on or before Tuesday next at 1 o'clock p.m.,
in order that the necessary arrangement may be made to pay the last sad
tribute of veneration to the manes of the late Commander in Chief of the
Armies of the United States.

By order of Brigadier-General MacPherson:

JONATHAN WILLIAMS,
  _Aid-de-Camp._



[The following interesting paper is extracted from a speech of Senator
W.C. Rives, of Virginia, delivered in the United States Senate February
12, 1839, on a bill to prevent the interference of certain Federal
officers in elections. (See Congressional Globe, Twenty-fifth Congress,
third session, Vol. VII, Appendix, p. 409.) This order President
Jefferson caused to be issued by the heads of the several Departments
shortly after his inauguration, March 4, 1801. References are made to
it in several publications, but the originals could not be found.]

The President of the United States has seen with dissatisfaction
officers of the General Government taking on various occasions active
parts in elections of the public functionaries, whether of the General
or of the State Governments. Freedom of elections being essential to the
mutual independence of governments and of the different branches of the
same government, so vitally cherished by most of our constitutions, it
is deemed improper for officers depending on the Executive of the Union
to attempt to control or influence the free exercise of the elective
right. This I am instructed, therefore, to notify to all officers within
my Department holding their appointments under the authority of the
President directly, and to desire them to notify to all subordinate
to them. The right of any officer to give his vote at elections as a
qualified citizen is not meant to be restrained, nor, however given,
shall it have any effect to his prejudice; but it is expected that he
will not attempt to influence the votes of others nor take any part in
the business of electioneering, that being deemed inconsistent with the
spirit of the Constitution and his duties to it.



[From the Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Paul Leicester Ford, Vol. VIII,
pp. 99-101.]

CIRCULAR TO THE HEADS OF THE DEPARTMENTS.

WASHINGTON, _November 6, 1801._

DEAR SIR: Coming all of us into executive office new and unfamiliar
with the course of business previously practiced, it was not to be
expected we should in the first outset adopt in every part a line of
proceeding so perfect as to admit no amendment. The mode and degrees
of communication, particularly between the Presidents and heads of
Departments, have not been practiced exactly on the same scale in all of
them. Yet it would certainly be more safe and satisfactory for ourselves
as well as the public that not only the best but also an uniform course
of proceeding as to manner and degree should be observed. Having been
a member of the first Administration under General Washington, I can
state with exactness what our course then was. Letters of business came
addressed sometimes to the President, but most frequently to the heads
of Departments. If addressed to himself, he referred them to the proper
Department to be acted on. If to one of the Secretaries, the letter, if
it required no answer, was communicated to the President simply for his
information. If an answer was requisite, the Secretary of the Department
communicated the letter and his proposed answer to the President.
Generally they were simply sent back after perusal, which signified
his approbation. Sometimes he returned them with an informal note,
suggesting an alteration or a query. If a doubt of any importance arose,
he reserved it for conference. By this means he was always in accurate
possession of all facts and proceedings in every part of the Union, and
to whatsoever Department they related; he formed a central point for the
different branches; preserved an unity of object and action among them;
exercised that participation in the suggestion of affairs which his
office made incumbent on him, and met himself the due responsibility
for whatever was done. During Mr. Adams's Administration his long and
habitual absences from the seat of Government rendered this kind of
communication impracticable, removed him from any share in the
transaction of affairs, and parceled out the Government, in fact, among
four independent heads, drawing sometimes in opposite directions.
That the former is preferable to the latter course can not be doubted.
It gave, indeed, to the heads of Departments the trouble of making up
once a day a packet of all their communications for the perusal of the
President; it commonly also retarded one day their dispatches by mail;
but in pressing cases this injury was prevented by presenting that
case singly for immediate attention, and it produced us in return the
benefit of his sanction for every act we did. Whether any change of
circumstances may render a change in this procedure necessary a little
experience will show us. But I can not withhold recommending to heads of
Departments that we should adopt this course for the present, leaving
any necessary modifications of it to time and trial. I am sure my
conduct must have proved better than a thousand declarations would that
my confidence in those whom I am so happy as to have associated with
me is unlimited, unqualified, and unabated. I am well satisfied that
everything goes on with a wisdom and rectitude which I could not
improve. If I had the universe to choose from, I could not change one
of my associates to my better satisfaction. My sole motives are those
before expressed, as governing the first Administration in chalking out
the rules of their proceeding, adding to them only a sense of obligation
imposed on me by the public will to meet personally the duties to which
they have appointed me. If this mode of proceeding shall meet the
approbation of the heads of Departments, it may go into execution
without giving them the trouble of an answer. If any other can be
suggested which would answer our views and add less to their labors,
that will be a sufficient reason for my preferring it to my own
proposition, to the substance of which only, and not the form, I attach
any importance.

TH: JEFFERSON.



[From Annals of Congress, Tenth Congress, second session, 332-333.]

By virtue of the act entitled "An act making provision for defraying any
extraordinary expenses attending the intercourse between the United
States and foreign nations," passed on the 13th day of February, 1806,
and of which the annexed is an official exemplification, I, Thomas
Jefferson, President of the United States of America, do hereby
authorize and empower Albert Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States, to take all proper and necessary measures for placing the
$2,000,000 appropriated by the act above recited at the joint disposal
of John Armstrong and James Bowdoin, commissioners plenipotentiary and
extraordinary for settling all matters of difference between the United
States and the Government of Spain, and, in case of the death of one of
them, at the disposal of the survivor, to be jointly applied by the said
John Armstrong and James Bowdoin, or, in case of the death of one of
them, by the survivor, to such purposes as I may think proper to direct
in my instructions to them; and for so doing this shall be his
sufficient warrant.

In testimony whereof I have caused the seal of the United States to be
hereunto affixed.

[SEAL.]

Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this 18th day of March,
1806.

TH: JEFFERSON.

By the President:
  JAMES MADISON,
    _Secretary of State._



[From the Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Paul Leicester Ford, Vol. IX,
pp. 34-35.]

CIRCULAR LETTER TO THE GOVERNORS OF KENTUCKY, TENNESSEE, OHIO, AND
MISSISSIPPI.

WASHINGTON, _March 21, 1807._

SIR: Although the present state of things on the western side of the
Mississippi does not threaten any immediate collision with our neighbors
in that quarter and it is our wish they should remain undisturbed until
an amicable adjustment may take place, yet as this does not depend on
ourselves alone it has been thought prudent to be prepared to meet any
movements which may occur. The law of a former session of Congress for
keeping a body of 100,000 militia in readiness for service at a moment's
warning is still in force, but by an act of the last session, a copy of
which I now inclose, the Executive is authorized to accept the services
of such volunteers as shall offer themselves on the conditions of the
act, which may render a resort to the former act unnecessary. It is
for the execution of this act that I am now to solicit your zealous
endeavors. The persons who shall engage will not be called from their
homes until some aggression, committed or intended, shall render it
necessary. When called into action it will not be for a lounging but
for an active and perhaps distant service. I know the effect of this
consideration in kindling that ardor which prevails for this service,
and I count on it for filling up the numbers requisite without delay.
To yourself I am sure it must be as desirable as it is to me to transfer
this service from the great mass of our militia to that portion of them
to whose habits and enterprise active and distant service is most
congenial. In using, therefore, your best exertions toward accomplishing
the object of this act you will render to your constituents as well as
to the nation a most acceptable service.

With respect to the organizing and officering those who shall be engaged
within your State the act itself will be your guide, and as it is
desirable that we should be kept informed of the progress in this
business I must pray you to report the same from time to time to the
Secretary of War, who will correspond with you on all the details
arising out of it.

I salute you with great consideration and respect.

TH: JEFFERSON.



[From American State Papers, Finance, Vol. II, p. 449.]

_James Madison, President of the United States of America, to Albert
Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury_:

By virtue of the act entitled "An act authorizing a loan of money
for a sum not exceeding the amount of the principal of the public debt
reimbursable during the year 1810," passed on the 1st day of May, 1810,
I do hereby authorize and empower you, by yourself or any other person
or persons, to borrow on behalf of the United States, of the Bank of the
United States, any sum not exceeding in the whole $3,750,000, and to
make or cause to be made for that purpose such contract as shall be
necessary and for the interest of the said States, pursuant to the act
aforesaid; and for so doing this shall be your warrant.

Given under my hand, at Washington, this 28th day of May, A.D. 1810.

JAMES MADISON.



[From Annals of Congress, Thirteenth Congress, Vol. II, 2544-2545.]

NAVY DEPARTMENT, _July 29, 1813_.

_Commanding Officers of Stations or Vessels of United States Navy_:

The palpable and criminal intercourse held with the enemy's forces
blockading and invading the waters and shores of the United States is,
in a military view, an offense of so deep a dye as to call for the
vigilant interposition of all the naval officers of the United States.

This intercourse is not only carried on by foreigners, under the
specious garb of friendly flags, who convey provisions, water, and
succors of all kinds (ostensibly destined for friendly ports, in the
face, too, of a declared and rigorous blockade) direct to the fleets
and stations of the enemy, with constant intelligence of our naval
and military force and preparation and the means of continuing and
conducting the invasion, to the greatest possible annoyance of the
country, but the same traffic, intercourse, and intelligence is carried
on with great subtility and treachery by profligate citizens, who, in
vessels ostensibly navigating our own waters from port to port, under
cover of night or other circumstances favoring their turpitude, find
means to convey succors or intelligence to the enemy and elude the
penalty of the law. This lawless traffic and intercourse is also carried
on to a great extent in craft whose capacity exempts them from the
regulations of the revenue laws and from the vigilance which vessels
of greater capacity attract.

I am therefore commanded by the President of the United States to enjoin
and direct all naval commanding officers to exercise the strictest
vigilance and to stop and detain all vessels or craft whatsoever
proceeding or apparently intending to proceed toward the enemy's vessels
within the waters or hovering about the harbors of the United States, or
toward any station occupied by the enemy within the jurisdiction of the
United States, from which vessels or craft the enemy might derive
succors or intelligence.

W. JONES.



[From Congressional Globe, Vol. V, p. 323.]

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, _February 22, 1836_.

_To Receivers of Public Moneys, Collectors, Disbursing Officers, and
the Deposit Banks of the United States_:

The established policy of the Treasury Department, so far as may be
practicable under its present powers over the collection, keeping, and
disbursement of the public money, is to diminish the circulation of
small bank notes and to substitute specie, and especially gold, for such
notes, with the view of rendering the currency of the country, through
which its fiscal operations are performed, more safe, sound, and
uniform. In pursuance of that policy, a circular was issued last April
which prohibited after the 30th September, 1835, the receipt on account
of the Government of any bank notes of a less denomination than $5, and
which intimated that other steps to promote the desirable objects before
named would in due time be taken.

Consequently, in further pursuance of the same policy, you are hereby
required after the 1st of May next not to pay the demands of any public
officer or creditor in any bank notes of a less denomination than $5,
and, except when it may be otherwise prescribed by law, after the 4th of
July next not to receive or pay on account of the Government any bank
notes of a less denomination than $10.

All the deposit banks are requested to supply themselves with such a
quantity of American gold coin as to be able to pay, and when a public
officer or creditor prefers it, and his demand does not exceed $500, to
pay at least one-fifth of such demand in that coin. It is also requested
that the deposit banks will not after the 4th of July next issue any
notes of a less denomination than $5, and that after the 3d of March,
1837, they will not, unless the subject be otherwise regulated by
Congress, issue any notes of a less denomination than $10. It is
believed that the amount of gold which by that time shall be coined at
the Mint will be sufficient to admit of the convenient substitution of
it for small notes in a much greater extent than at present; and it is
deemed reasonable that while the deposit banks have the use, without
interest, of unusually large sums of the public money they should make
some further temporary sacrifices to obtain and circulate gold and in
other respects to enlarge the specie basis of our circulating medium.

From these considerations and from the liberal spirit evinced by most
of the public depositories in a late correspondence with them on this
subject, it is confidently expected that in this state of things they
will cheerfully comply with the above requests and with all others which
have been made by the Department with a view of improving the currency;
nor will it, I trust, be considered unjust or impolitic, while the
deposit banks shall continue to enjoy great privileges from the
Treasury, to regard a neglect or refusal by any of them to comply with
those requests as sufficient cause for discontinuing the employment of
such banks as fiscal agents.

At a proper time it will be decided under what circumstances and at what
periods these restrictions on the agents and officers of the Treasury
shall be extended to notes of any denomination under $20.

This communication is made with the sanction of the President of the
United States, and it is hoped that till otherwise prescribed by
Congress or by this Department these requirements and requests will be
faithfully complied with by all the fiscal agents of this Department and
all the collecting and disbursing officers of the Government.

LEVI WOODBURY,
  _Secretary of the Treasury_.



[From Senate Doc. No. 15, Twenty-fourth Congress, second session.]

CIRCULAR FROM THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RECEIVERS OF PUBLIC MONEY
AND TO THE DEPOSIT BANKS.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, _July 11, 1836._

In consequence of complaints which have been made of frauds,
speculations, and monopolies in the purchase of the public lands, and
the aid which is said to be given to effect these objects by excessive
bank credits and dangerous, if not partial, facilities through bank
drafts and bank deposits, and the general evil influence likely to
result to the public interests, and especially the safety of the great
amount of money in the Treasury, and the sound condition of the currency
of the country from the further exchange of the national domain in this
manner, and chiefly for bank credits and paper money, the President of
the United States has given directions, and you are hereby instructed,
after the 15th day of August next, to receive in payment of the public
lands nothing except what is directed by the existing laws, viz, gold
and silver, and in the proper cases Virginia land scrip: _Provided_,
That till the 15th of December next the same indulgences heretofore
extended as to the kind of money received may be continued for any
quantity of land not exceeding 320 acres to each purchaser who is an
actual settler or _bona fide_ resident in the State where the sales
are made.

In order to insure the faithful execution of these instructions, all
receivers are strictly prohibited from accepting for land sold any
draft, certificate, or other evidence of money or deposit, though
for specie, unless signed by the Treasurer of the United States in
conformity to the act of April 24, 1820; and each of those officers is
required to annex to his monthly returns to this Department the amount
of gold and of silver, respectively, as well as the bills, received
under the foregoing exception; and each deposit bank is required to
annex to every certificate given upon a deposit of money the proportions
of it actually paid in gold, in silver, and in bank notes. All former
instructions on these subjects, except as now modified, will be
considered as remaining in full force.

The principal objects of the President in adopting this measure being
to repress alleged frauds and to withhold any countenance or facilities
in the power of the Government from the monopoly of the public lands in
the hands of speculators and capitalists, to the injury of the actual
settlers in the new States and of emigrants in search of new homes, as
well as to discourage the ruinous extension of bank issues and bank
credits by which those results are generally supposed to be promoted,
your utmost vigilance is required and relied on to carry this order
into complete execution.

LEVI WOODBURY,
  _Secretary of the Treasury_.



[From American State Papers, Military Affairs, Vol. VII, p. 554.]



HERMITAGE, _September 7, 1836._

General J.E. WOOL,
  _East Tennessee_.

SIR: Your letter of the 30th ultimo has just been handed to me by Mr.
Rogers, the express. Being in a state of preparation for setting out for
Washington and surrounded by much company, I have but a moment to reply
to it.

In relation to your observations respecting the apportionment of the
10,000 volunteers, I need not say more here than that the requisition on
the governor of the State was a sufficient guide for the organization
of the part allotted to Tennessee. This requisition was for 2,500 men,
to be raised in two brigades, one in the East and the other in West
Tennessee, and there could be no authority to muster more into the
service. The remainder of the 10,000 had been required from other
States and Territories.

I have turned to the letter of the Adjutant-General to which you have
called my attention. You will find, I think, that it relates to the
volunteers called for agreeably to the requisition on the governor of
Tennessee for 2,500. I can not suppose that it was expected of you to
receive a greater number than this into the service.

As you have the treaty before you and the instructions of the Acting
Secretary of War, I do not see that I can add anything more on this
subject at present. The treaty is to be religiously fulfilled. You may
assure all concerned that no modification or alteration in it will be
made by me. Of this Mr. John Ross is fully advised. His friend, Mr.
Standefer, who waited upon me at Washington and made the inquiry whether
I would agree to a supplemental article admitting the Rosses and their
delegation in as chiefs, was informed that I would not. You will
therefore make known to the Cherokee people that no alteration in the
treaty will be made, but that all its terms and conditions will be
faithfully and fully executed. Should you find any evil-disposed white
man in the nation exciting the Indians not to comply with the treaty,
you will forthwith order him or them out of the nation, and if they
refuse to go, the facts being thoroughly established, you will take the
steps necessary to put them out. Such characters must be considered in
the light of intruders, prohibited by the treaty from living within the
limits of the nation.

You will caution John Ross from calling any council of the Cherokee
people with the view of opposing or altering the treaty. He knows that
there will be no further negotiation on the subject; that the Cherokees
are to emigrate in two years from the ratification of the treaty, and
will be obliged to go within that period; that the collisions between
them and the whites have been too long continued for the gratification
of himself at the expense of the poor in the nation.

I have had a letter from Governor Carroll. He will leave Pontotoc at as
early a moment as he can, and expects to meet Governor Lumpkin early in
October next.

With these hasty remarks, I remain, your obedient servant,

ANDREW JACKSON.



[From Congressional Globe, Vol. VII, Appendix, p. 245.]

DEPARTMENT OF STATE, _Washington, December 7, 1837._

SIR:[179] In the course of the contest which has commenced in a portion
of the territory of Great Britain between portions of the population and
the Government some of our citizens may, from their connection with the
settlers and from their love of enterprise and desire of change, be
induced to forget their duty to their own Government and its obligations
to foreign powers. It is the fixed determination of the President
faithfully to discharge, so far as his power extends, all the
obligations of this Government, and that obligation especially which
requires that we shall abstain under every temptation from intermeddling
with the domestic disputes of other nations. You are therefore earnestly
enjoined to be attentive to all movements of a hostile character
contemplated or attempted within your district, and to prosecute without
discrimination all violators of those laws of the United States which
have been enacted to preserve peace with foreign powers and to fulfill
all the obligations of our treaties with them.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

JOHN FORSYTH.

[Footnote 179: Sent to the United States attorney at Rockingham, Vt.,
and to the district attorneys for the northern district of New York and
the Michigan district.]



[From Congressional Globe, Vol. VII, Appendix, p. 245.]

DEPARTMENT OF STATE, _Washington, December 7, 1837._

His Excellency WILLAM L. MARCY,
  _Governor of the State of New York._

SIR: A contest having commenced in a territory of Great Britain
adjoining the United States between portions of the population and
government, during which attempts may be made to violate the laws of the
United States passed to preserve the relations of amity with foreign
powers and to fulfill the obligations of our treaties with them, by the
directions of the President I have the honor to request the attention
of your excellency to any movements of that character that may be
contemplated in the State of New York and your prompt interference to
arrest the parties concerned if any preparations are made of a hostile
nature against any foreign power in amity with the United States.

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

JOHN FORSYTH.

[Sent also to the governors of Vermont and Michigan.]



[From House Ex. Doc. No. 163, Fiftieth Congress, first session, p. 6.]

EXECUTIVE ORDERS TOUCHING DISPOSAL OF FLAGS CAPTURED IN WAR WITH MEXICO.

DECEMBER 26, 1848.

Pursuant to the second section of act approved April 18, 1814, directing
that all flags, standards, and colors taken by the Army and Navy of the
United States from their enemies be preserved and displayed under the
direction of the President of the United States in such public place as
he shall deem proper, the Secretary of War is directed to take measures
to cause the flags, standards, and colors taken by the Army of the
United States from their enemies in the recent war with Mexico to be
deposited for the purpose specified in the act in the Military Academy
at West Point.

JAMES K. POLK.



[From official records, War Department.]

WASHINGTON, _September 11, 1861._

Major-General JOHN C. FRÉMONT.

SIR: Yours of the 8th, in answer to mine of the 2d instant, is just
received. Assuming that you, upon the ground, could better judge of the
necessities of your position than I could at this distance, on seeing
your proclamation of August 30 I perceived no general objection to it.
The particular clause, however, in relation to the confiscation of
property and the liberation of slaves appeared to me to be objectionable
in its nonconformity to the act of Congress passed the 6th of last
August upon the same subjects, and hence I wrote you expressing my wish
that that clause should be modified accordingly. Your answer, just
received, expresses the preference on your part that I should make an
open order for the modification, which I very cheerfully do. It is
therefore ordered that the said clause of said proclamation be so
modified, held, and construed as to conform to and not to transcend the
provisions on the same subject contained in the act of Congress entitled
"An act to confiscate property used for insurrectionary purposes,"
approved August 6, 1861, and that said act be published at length with
this order.

Your obedient servant,

A. LINCOLN.



[From McPherson's History of the Rebellion, p. 248.]

DEPARTMENT OF STATE, _Washington, December 4, 1861._

Major-General GEORGE B. McCLELLAN,
  _Washington._

GENERAL: I am directed by the President to call your attention to the
following subject:

Persons claimed to be held to service or labor under the laws of the
State of Virginia and actually employed in hostile service against the
Government of the United States frequently escape from the lines of the
enemy's forces and are received within the lines of the Army of the
Potomac.

This Department understands that such persons afterwards coming into the
city of Washington are liable to be arrested by the city police upon the
presumption, arising from color, that they are fugitives from service or
labor.

By the fourth section of the act of Congress approved August 6, 1861,
entitled "An act to confiscate property used for insurrectionary
purposes," such hostile employment is made a full and sufficient answer
to any further claim to service or labor. Persons thus employed and
escaping are received into the military protection of the United
States, and their arrest as fugitives from service or labor should be
immediately followed by the military arrest of the parties making the
seizure.

Copies of this communication will be sent to the mayor of the city of
Washington and to the marshal of the District of Columbia, that any
collision between the civil and military authorities may be avoided.

I am, General, your very obedient servant,

WILLIAM H. SEWARD.



[From McPherson's History of the Rebellion, p. 252.]

WAR DEPARTMENT, _Washington City, July 3, 1862._

Major-General B.F. BUTLER,
  _Commanding, etc., New Orleans, La._

GENERAL: I wrote you last under date of the 29th ultimo, and have now to
say that your dispatch of the 18th ultimo, with the accompanying report
of General Phelps concerning certain fugitive negroes that have come to
his pickets, has been considered by the President.

He is of opinion that under the law of Congress they can not be sent
back to their master; that in common humanity they must not be permitted
to suffer for want of food, shelter, or other necessaries of life; that
to this end they should be provided for by the Quartermaster's and
Commissary's departments, and that those who are capable of labor should
be set to work and paid reasonable wages.

In directing this to be done the President does not mean at present to
settle any general rule in respect to slaves or slavery, but simply to
provide for the particular case under the circumstances in which it is
now presented.

I am, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant,

EDWIN M. STANTON,
  _Secretary of War._



[From official records, War Department.]

WASHINGTON, _May 1, 1863._

Major-General WOOL,
  _Commanding at New York_:

By virtue of the act of Congress authorizing the President to take
possession of railroad and telegraph lines, etc., passed February 4,
1862, the President directs that you take immediate military possession
of the telegraph lines lately established between Philadelphia and
Boston, called the Independent Telegraph Company, and _forbid_ the
transmission of any intelligence relating to the movements of the Army
of the Potomac or any military forces of the United States. In case this
order is violated arrest and imprison the perpetrators in Fort Delaware,
reporting to the Department. If the management of the line will
stipulate to transmit no military intelligence without the sanction of
the War Department, they need not be interfered with so long as the
engagement is fulfilled. This order will be executed so as not to
interfere with the ordinary business of the telegraph company.

By order of the President:

E.M. STANTON,
  _Secretary of War._



[From McPherson's History of the Rebellion, p. 436.]

Hon. ANDREW JOHNSON,
  _Military Governor of Tennessee_:

You are hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary
and proper to enable the loyal people of Tennessee to present such a
republican form of State government as will entitle the State to the
guaranty of the United States therefor and to be protected under such
State government by the United States against invasion and domestic
violence, all according to the fourth section of the fourth article of
the Constitution of the United States.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

SEPTEMBER 19, 1863.



[From official records, War Department.]

GENERAL ORDERS, No. 329.

WAR DEPARTMENT,
  ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE,
    _Washington, October 3, 1863._


Whereas the exigencies of the war require that colored troops should be
recruited in the States of Maryland, Missouri, and Tennessee, it is--

_Ordered by the President_, That the chief of the bureau for
organizing colored troops shall establish recruiting stations at
convenient places within said States and give public notice thereof,
and be governed by the following regulations:

First. None but able-bodied persons shall be enlisted.

Second. The State and county in which the enlistments are made shall be
credited with the recruits enlisted.

Third. All persons enlisted into the military service shall forever
thereafter be free.

Fourth. Free persons, and slaves with the written consent of their
owners, and slaves belonging to those who have been engaged in or given
aid and comfort to the rebellion may be now enlisted, the owners who
have not been engaged in or given aid to the rebellion being entitled to
receive compensation as hereafter provided.

Fifth. If within thirty days from the date of opening enlistments,
notice thereof and of the recruiting stations being published, a
sufficient number of the description of persons aforesaid to meet the
exigencies of the service shall not be enlisted, then enlistments may be
made of slaves without requiring consent of their owners; but they may
receive compensation as herein provided for owners offering their slaves
for enlistment.

Sixth. Any citizen of said States who shall offer his or her slave for
enlistment into the military service shall if such slave be accepted
receive from the recruiting officer a certificate thereof and become
entitled to compensation for the service or labor of said slave, not
exceeding the sum of $300, upon filing a valid deed of manumission and
of release and making satisfactory proof of title; and the recruiting
officer shall furnish to any claimant a descriptive list of any person
enlisted and claimed under oath to be his or her slave, and allow anyone
claiming under oath that his or her slave has been enlisted without his
or her consent the privilege of inspecting the enlisted men for the
purpose of identification.

Seventh. A board of three persons shall be appointed by the President,
to whom the rolls and recruiting lists shall be furnished for public
information, and on demand exhibited to any person claiming that his or
her slave has been enlisted against his or her will.

Eighth. If any person shall within ten days after the filing of said
rolls make a claim for the service of any person so enlisted, the board
shall proceed to examine the proofs of title, and if valid shall award
just compensation, not exceeding $300, for each slave enlisted belonging
to the claimant, and upon the claimant's filing a valid deed of
manumission and release of service the board shall give the claimant a
certificate of the sum awarded, which on presentation shall be paid by
the chief of the bureau.

Ninth. All enlistments of colored troops in the State of Maryland
otherwise than in accordance with these regulations are forbidden.

Tenth. No person who is or has been engaged in rebellion against the
Government of the United States, or who in any way has given or shall
give aid or comfort to the enemies of the Government, shall be permitted
to present any claim or receive any compensation for the labor or
service of any slave, and all claimants shall file with their claim an
oath of allegiance to the United States.

By order of the President:

E.D. TOWNSEND,
  _Assistant Adjutant-General._



[From McPherson's History of Reconstruction, p. 122.]

WASHINGTON, _March 3, 1865--12 p.m._

Lieutenant-General GRANT:

The President directs me to say to you that he wishes you to have no
conference with General Lee unless it be for the capitulation of General
Lee's army or on some minor and purely military matter. He instructs me
to say that you are not to decide, discuss, or confer upon any political
question. Such questions the President holds in his own hands and will
submit them to no military conferences or conventions. Meantime you are
to press to the utmost your military advantages.

EDWIN M. STANTON,
  _Secretary of War_.



[From McPherson's History of Reconstruction, p. 13.]

EXECUTIVE OFFICE, _August 16, 1865_.

O.O. HOWARD,
  _Major-General, Commissioner Freedmen's Affairs_:

Respectfully returned to the Commissioner of Bureau Refugees,
Freedmen, etc. The records of this office show that B.B. Leake was
specially pardoned by the President on the 27th ultimo, and was
thereby restored to all his rights of property except as to slaves.
Notwithstanding this, it is understood that the possession of his
property is withheld from him. I have therefore to direct that General
Fisk, assistant commissioner at Nashville, Tenn., be instructed by the
Chief Commissioner of Bureau of Freedmen, etc., to relinquish possession
of the property of Mr. Leake held by him as assistant commissioner,
etc., and that the same be immediately restored to the said Leake.
The same action will be had in all similar cases.

ANDREW JOHNSON,
  _President United States_.



[From McPherson's History of Reconstruction, p. 12.]

CIRCULAR No. 15.

WAR DEPARTMENT,
  BUREAU REFUGEES, FREEDMEN, AND ABANDONED LANDS,
    _Washington, D.C., September 12, 1865_.

I. Circular No. 13, of July 28, 1865, from this Bureau, and all portions
of circulars from this Bureau conflicting with the provisions of this
circular are hereby rescinded.

II. This Bureau has charge of such "tracts of land within the
insurrectionary States as shall have been abandoned or to which the
United States shall have acquired title by confiscation or sale or
otherwise," and no such lands now in its possession shall be surrendered
to any claimant except as hereinafter provided.

III. Abandoned lands are defined in section 2 of the act of Congress
approved July 2, 1864, as lands "the lawful owner whereof shall be
voluntarily absent therefrom and engaged, either in arms or otherwise,
in aiding or encouraging the rebellion."

IV. Land will not be regarded as confiscated until it has been condemned
and sold by decree of the United States court for the district in which
the property may be found, and the title thereto thus vested in the
United States.

V. Upon its appearing satisfactorily to any assistant commissioner that
any property under his control is not abandoned as above defined and
that the United States has acquired no title to it by confiscation,
sale, or otherwise, he will formally surrender it to the authorized
claimant or claimants, promptly reporting his action to the
Commissioner.

VI. Assistant commissioners will prepare accurate descriptions of all
confiscated and abandoned lands under their control, keeping a record
thereof themselves and forwarding monthly to the Commissioner copies of
these descriptions in the manner prescribed in Circular No. 10, of July
11, 1865, from this Bureau.

They will set apart so much of said lands as is necessary for the
immediate use of loyal refugees and freedmen, being careful to select
for this purpose those lands which most clearly fall under the control
of this Bureau, which selection must be submitted to the Commissioner
for his approval.

The specific division of lands so set apart into lots and the rental or
sale thereof, according to section 4 of the law establishing the Bureau,
will be completed as soon as practicable and reported to the
Commissioner.

VII. Abandoned lands held by this Bureau may be restored to owners
pardoned by the President by the assistant commissioners, to whom
applications for such restoration should be forwarded, so far as
practicable, through the superintendents of the districts in which the
lands are situated.

Each application must be accompanied by--

First. Evidence of special pardon by the President or a copy of the oath
of amnesty prescribed in the President's proclamation of May 29,
1865,[180] when the applicant is not included in any of the classes
therein excepted from the benefits of said oath.

Second. Proof of title.

Officers of the Bureau through whom the application passes will indorse
thereon such facts as may assist the assistant commissioner in his
decision, stating especially the use made by the Bureau of the land.

VIII. No land under cultivation by loyal refugees or freedmen will be
restored under this circular until the crops now growing shall be
secured for the benefit of the cultivators unless full and just
compensation be made for their labor and its products and for their
expenditures.

O.O. HOWARD,
  _Major-General, Commissioner_.

Approved:

ANDREW JOHNSON,
  _President of the United States_.

[Footnote 180: See Vol. VI, pp. 310-312.]



[From McPherson's History of Reconstruction, p. 8.]

WAR DEPARTMENT,
  ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE,
    _Washington, April 17, 1866_.

Major-General N.A. MILES,
  _Commanding, etc., Fortress Monroe, Va._:

_Ordered_, That Clement C. Clay, jr., is hereby released from
confinement and permitted to return to and remain in the State of
Alabama and to visit such other places in the United States as his
personal business may render absolutely necessary, upon the following
conditions, viz, that he takes the oath of allegiance to the United
States and gives his parole of honor to conduct himself as a loyal
citizen of the same and to report himself in person at any time and
place to answer any charges that may hereafter be prepared against him
by the United States.

Please report receipt and execution of this order.

By order of the President of the United States:

E.D. TOWNSEND,
  _Assistant Adjutant-General_.



[From McPherson's History of Reconstruction, p. 198.]

GENERAL ORDERS, No. 46.

WAR DEPARTMENT,
  ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE,
    _Washington, July 13, 1866_.

_Ordered_, That all persons who are undergoing sentence by military
courts and have been imprisoned six months, except those who are under
sentence for the crimes of murder, arson, or rape, and excepting those
who are under sentence at the Tortugas, be discharged from imprisonment
and the residue of their sentence remitted. Those who belong to the
military service and their term unexpired will be returned to their
command if it is still in service, and their release is conditional upon
their serving their full term and being of good behavior.

By order of the President of the United States:

E.D. TOWNSEND,
  _Assistant Adjutant-General_.



[From Senate Ex. Doc. No. 82, Forty-ninth Congress, second session,
pp. 3-5.]

Whereas, pursuant to the convention between the United States and Spain
for the adjustment of the question of reclamation arising from the
capture of the _Virginius_, entered into upon the 27th February,
1875, and duly ratified upon the 11th day of March, 1875, the Spanish
Government engaged to deliver to the United States the sum of $80,000,
or 400,000 pesetas, for the purpose of the relief of the families of
those of the ship's company and of such of the passengers as were
citizens of the United States who were executed, and to afford
compensation to such of the ship's company and to such passengers as in
like manner were citizens of the United States who were detained and
suffered loss, excluding from any participation therein all individuals
indemnified as British subjects; and

Whereas it was therein further provided that when such amount should
have been received the President of the United States would proceed to
distribute the same among the parties entitled thereto, in the form and
manner which he may judge most equitable; and

Whereas such amount has been duly paid at Madrid and the proceeds
thereof are now in possession of the Government of the United States:

Now, therefore, pursuant to the provisions of article 3 of said
convention, I, Ulysses S. Grant, President of the United States, do
hereby direct that such amount so received shall be distributed among
the parties entitled thereto in the following amounts and proportions
and pursuant to the following rules:

I. The amounts allowed are determined with a general reference to
the rates of wages of officers and crew. All of the ship's company
(constituting the crew) are to be regarded and considered as American
seamen; but inasmuch as the British Government has demanded and received
from Spain certain indemnity and promises of further conditional
indemnity for and on account of certain of the crew as being British
subjects, those of the crew or passengers who were British subjects, or
who have been claimed as such by the British Government, and for whom
the British Government demanded or received indemnity from Spain, are to
be excluded from the distribution to be made of the indemnity above
referred to.

II. Distribution will be made on account of those who were executed as
follows:

For each one (being thirteen in number) of the ship's company rated or
serving as fireman, mariner, cook, cabin boy, or otherwise than as one
of the officers or petty officers hereafter mentioned, who was executed,
and excluding those referred to above, and also to each passenger who
was executed, being at the time an American citizen, the sum of $2,500.

For each assistant engineer, second, third, fourth engineer or third
mate, 40 per cent in addition to the above sum; that is to say, $3,500
each.

For the first mate and first engineer, 80 per cent in addition to the
said above-mentioned sum; that is to say, $4,500 each.

For the captain, 150 per cent in addition to the said above-mentioned
sum; that is to say, $6,250.

III. The several amounts allowed as above are to be paid to the widow,
children, parents, or brothers and sisters of the deceased, as follows:

(1) To the widow of the deceased.

(2) If no widow, to the children of the deceased in equal shares.

Where such children shall be minors, the same shall be paid to a legally
appointed guardian.

(3) If no children, then to the father; if no father, to the mother.

(4) If no father or mother, then to the brothers and sisters in equal
shares.

(5) If the deceased shall have left no widow, child, parent, brother, or
sister, no amount is to be paid on his account.

There shall be allowed to each of the ship's company and to such of the
passengers as were citizens of the United States who were detained and
suffered loss, to be paid on the conditions hereinafter provided, as
follows:

To each of the ship's crew who was under the age of 21 years at the time
of the capture, or who was reported at the time as under that age, and
to each passenger who was an American citizen, the sum of $250.

To each of the ship's crew who was over the age of 21 years, and who was
rated as being a fireman, mariner, cook, cabin boy, or otherwise than as
one of the officers or petty officers hereafter mentioned, 40 per cent
in addition to the above-allowed sum; that is to say, $350 each.

To any engineer, second or other assistant engineer, mate, purser,
assistant purser, or surgeon, 86 per cent in addition to the
above-allowed sum; that is to say, $450 to each.

In case any of such persons so entitled to payment shall have died, such
amount shall be paid to the family of the deceased as provided in
Article III.

IV. The proofs as to all the necessary facts in each case, including
identity, relationship, and citizenship, shall be made to the
satisfaction of the Department of State as a condition of payment, and a
naturalized citizen, where proof of citizenship is necessary, shall
produce his certificate of naturalization and furnish satisfactory
proof, if required, as to residence and his right, to such certificate.

V. Payments will be made to the parties entitled thereto through the
Department of State, or in checks to their order, and will not be made
to attorneys.

VI. Prior to any payment being made the party entitled thereto shall
sign and duly acknowledge before some competent officer a receipt and
release, stating that the sum so paid is received in full satisfaction
of any claim or reclamations of any sort which may exist or which might
be advanced against the Spanish Government by reason of the capture of
the _Virginius_ or the acts of the Spanish authorities connected
therewith.

VII. Should any further order or direction be required, the same will
hereafter be made as an addition hereto.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, at the city of
Washington, this 21st day of July, A.D. 1875, and of the Independence of
the United States of America the one hundredth.

U.S. GRANT.



[From Letters and Messages of Rutherford B. Hayes, pp. 19-22.]

WASHINGTON, _April 2, 1877_.

The Honorables CHARLES B. LAWRENCE, JOSEPH R. HAWLEY, JOHN M. HARLAN,
JOHN C. BROWN, AND WAYNE MACVEAGH, _Commissioners_.

GENTLEMEN: I am instructed by the President to lay before you some
observations upon the occasion and objects which have led him to invite
you as members of the commission about to visit the State of Louisiana
to undertake this public service.

Upon assuming his office the President finds the situation of affairs in
Louisiana such as to justly demand his prompt and solicitous attention,
for this situation presents as one of its features the apparent
intervention of the military power of the United States in the domestic
controversies which unhappily divide the opinions and disturb the
harmony of the people of that State. This intervention, arising during
the term and by the authority of his predecessor, throws no present duty
upon the President except to examine and determine the real extent and
form and effect to which such intervention actually exists, and to
decide as to the time, manner, and conditions which should be observed
in putting an end to it. It is in aid of his intelligent and prompt
discharge of this duty that the President has sought the service of this
commission to supply by means of its examination, conducted in the State
of Louisiana, some information that may be pertinent to the
circumspection and security of any measure he may resolve upon.

It will be readily understood that the service desired of and intrusted
to this commission does not include any examination into or report upon
the facts of the recent State election or of the canvass of the votes
cast at such election. So far as attention to these subjects may be
necessary the President can not but feel that the reports of the
committees of the two Houses of Congress and other public information at
hand will dispense with and should preclude any original exploration by
the commission of that field of inquiry.

But it is most pertinent and important in coming to a decision upon the
precise question of Executive duty before him that the President should
know what are the real impediments to regular, legal, and peaceful
procedures under the laws and constitution of the State of Louisiana by
which the anomalies in government there presented may be put in course
of settlement without involving the element of military power as either
an agent or a makeweight in such solution. The successful ascertainment
of these impediments the President would confidently expect would
indicate to the people of that State the wisdom and the mode of their
removal. The unusual circumstances which attended and followed the State
election and canvass, from its relation to the excited feelings and
interests of the Presidential election, may have retarded within the
State of Louisiana the persuasive influences by which the great social
and material interests common to the whole people of a State, and the
pride of the American character as a law-abiding nation, ameliorate
the disappointments and dissolve the resentments of close and zealous
political contests. But the President both hopes and believes that the
great body of the people of Louisiana are now prepared to treat the
unsettled results of their State election with a calm and conciliatory
spirit. If it be too much to expect a complete concurrence in a single
government for that State, at least the President may anticipate a
submission to the peaceful resources of the laws and the constitution of
the State of all their discussions, at once relieving themselves from
the reproach and their fellow-citizens of the United States from the
anxieties which must ever attend a prolonged dispute as to the title and
the administration of the government of one of the States of the Union.

The President therefore desires that you should devote your first and
principal attention to a removal of the obstacles to an acknowledgment
of one government for the purpose of an exercise of authority within
the State and a representation of the State in its relations to the
General Government under section 4 of Article IV of the Constitution
of the United States, leaving, if necessary, to judicial or other
constitutional arbitrament within the State the question of ultimate
right. If these obstacles should prove insuperable, from whatever
reason, and the hope of a single government in all its departments
be disappointed, it should be your next endeavor to accomplish the
recognition of a single legislature as the depositary of the
representative will of the people of Louisiana. This great department of
government rescued from dispute, the rest of the problem could gradually
be worked out by the prevalent authority which the legislative power,
when undisputed, is quite competent to exert in composing conflict in
the coordinate branches of the government.

An attentive consideration of the conditions under which the Federal
Constitution and the acts of Congress provide or permit military
intervention by the President in protection of a State against domestic
violence has satisfied the President that the use of this authority in
determining or influencing disputed elections in a State is most
carefully to be avoided. Undoubtedly, as was held by the Supreme Court
in the case of Luther _vs._ Borden, the appeal from a State may
involve such an inquiry as to the lawfulness of the authority which
invokes the interference of the President in supposed pursuance of the
Constitution; but it is equally true that neither the constitutional
provision nor the acts of Congress were framed with any such design.
Both obviously treated the case of domestic violence within a State as
of outbreak against law and the authority of established government
which the State was unable to suppress by its own strength. A case
wherein every department of the State government has a disputed
representation, and a State therefore furnishes to the Federal
Government no internal political recognition of authority upon which the
Federal Executive can rely, will present a case of so much difficulty
that it is of pressing importance to all interests in Louisiana that
it should be avoided. A single legislature would greatly relieve this
difficulty, for that department of the State government is named by the
Constitution as the necessary applicant, when it can be convened, for
military intervention by the United States.

If, therefore, the disputing interests can concur in or be reduced to a
single legislature for the State of Louisiana, it would be a great step
in composing this unhappy strife.

The President leaves entirely to the commission the conciliatory
influences which, in their judgment formed on the spot, may seem to
conduce to the proposed end. His own determination that only public
considerations should inspire and attend this effort to give the
ascendency in Louisiana to the things that belong to peace is evinced
by his selection of commissioners who offer to the country in their
own character every guaranty of the public motives and methods of the
transactions which they have undertaken. Your report of the result of
this endeavor will satisfy the President, he does not doubt, of the
wisdom of his selection of and of his plenary trust in the commission.

A second and less important subject of attention during your visit
to New Orleans will be the collection of accurate and trustworthy
information from the public officers and prominent citizens of all
political connections as to the state of public feeling and opinion in
the community at large upon the general questions which affect the
peaceful and safe exercise within the State of Louisiana of all legal
and political rights and the protection of all legal and political
privileges conferred by the Constitution of the United States upon all
citizens. The maintenance and protection of these rights and privileges
by all constitutional means and by every just, moral, and social
influence are the settled purpose of the President in his administration
of the Government. He will hope to learn from your investigations that
this purpose will be aided and not resisted by the substantial and
effective public opinion of the great body of the people of Louisiana.

The President does not wish to impose any limit upon your stay in
Louisiana that would tend to defeat the full objects of your visit. He
is, however, extremely desirous to find it in his power at the earliest
day compatible with a safe exercise of that authority to put an end to
even the appearance of military intervention in the domestic affairs of
Louisiana, and he awaits your return with a confident hope that your
report will enable him promptly to execute a purpose he has so much at
heart.

The President desires me to add that the publication of the results of
your visit he shall hope to make immediately after their communication
to him.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.



[From Letters and Messages of Rutherford B. Hayes, p. 25.]

EXECUTIVE MANSION, _Washington, April 20, 1877_.

Hon. GEO. W. McCRARY,
  _Secretary of War_.

SIR: Prior to my entering upon the duties of the Presidency there had
been stationed, by order of my predecessor, in the immediate vicinity
of the building used as a statehouse in New Orleans, La., and known as
Mechanics' Institute, a detachment of United States infantry. Finding
them in that place, I have thought proper to delay a decision of the
question of their removal until I could determine whether the condition
of affairs is now such as to either require or justify continued
military intervention of the National Government in the affairs of
the State.

In my opinion there does not now exist in Louisiana such domestic
violence as is contemplated by the Constitution as the ground upon which
the military power of the National Government may be invoked for the
defense of the State. The disputes which exist as to the right of
certain claimants to the chief executive office of that State are to be
settled and determined, not by the Executive of the United States, but
by such orderly and peaceable methods as may be provided by the
constitution and the laws of the State.

Having the assurance that no resort to violence is contemplated, but, on
the contrary, the disputes in question are to be settled by peaceful
methods under and in accordance with law, I deem it proper to take
action in accordance with the principles announced when I entered upon
the duties of the Presidency.

You are therefore directed to see that the proper orders are issued for
the removal of said troops at an early date from their present position
to such regular barracks in the vicinity as may be selected for their
occupation.

R.B. HAYES.




EXPLANATORY NOTES TO SPECIAL MESSAGES, VOLUMES I AND II.


Message of February 8, 1792, Vol. I, p. 116: Transmitting an account of
John B. Cutting for expenditures incurred in liberating seamen of the
United States in British ports during the impressments by the British
Government in 1790.

Message of February 7, 1794, Vol. I, p. 151: Extraordinary commission of
Guadaloupe apply to Congress for aid in men, provisions, and ammunition.

Message of March 18, 1794, Vol. I, p. 152: Transmitting an application
by the minister of France for an advance of $1,000,000 on account of the
debt due by the United States, correspondence between the Secretary of
State and the minister of France relative thereto, etc.

Message of February 4, 1795, Vol. I, p. 175: Transmitting letters from
the Secretaries of State and the Treasury concerning the negotiation of
a loan in Holland.

Message of January 5, 1798, Vol. I, p. 260: Transmitting a report of
the Secretary of War stating that the five clerks in his office were
insufficient to transact the business and asking a larger appropriation
to enable him to increase the number.

Message of March 5, 1798, Vol. I, pp. 263-264: Transmitting a message
of the Executive Directory of France to the Council of Five Hundred and
decree of that council of January 11, 1798, declaring neutral vessels
laden with English merchandise lawful prize.

Message of January 28, 1799, Vol. I, pp. 281-282: Edict declaring that
"every individual, native of friendly countries allied to the French
Republic, or neutral, bearing a commission granted by the enemies of
France or making part of the crews of ships of war, and others, enemies,
shall be by this single fact declared a pirate and treated as such
without being permitted in any case to allege that he had been forced
into such service by violence, threats, or otherwise."

Message of January 13, 1800, Vol. I, p. 301: Relating to the Military
Academy and the reorganization of the Army.

Message of January 14, 1800, Vol. I, pp. 301-302: Letter from John
Randolph, jr., demanding that certain officers of the Army or Navy be
punished for grossly and publicly insulting him for advocating in the
House of Representatives a reduction of the military establishment.

Message of April 20, 1802, Vol. I, p. 341: Relating to spoliations
committed on the commerce of the United States under Spanish authority
and to the imprisonment of the American consul at St. Jago de Cuba.

Message of December 22, 1802, Vol. I, p. 346: Transmitting letters
from the governors of the Mississippi Territory and of Kentucky, etc.,
relative to the prohibition by authorities of Spain to land American
cargoes at New Orleans, in violation of treaty rights.

Message of December 31, 1804, Vol. I, p. 375: Relating to the
bombardment of Tripoli, vessels engaged, number of men, etc.

Message of December 30, 1808, Vol. I, p. 458: Resolutions of the
legislature of Pennsylvania expressing confidence in the General
Government in its attitude toward foreign powers, indorsing the embargo
as a wise measure, etc.

Message of June 4, 1809, Vol. I, p. 471: Transmitting resolutions of the
Pennsylvania assembly protesting against the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Gideon Olmstead.

Message of December 16, 1809, Vol. I, p. 478: Transmitting documents
connected with the arrangement between D.M. Erskine, minister
plenipotentiary of Great Britain, and the Secretary of State of the
United States, making reparation for the attack on the _Chesapeake_
and providing for the suspension of the embargo and nonintercourse laws
and the withdrawal of the orders in council, etc.

Message of January 31, 1811, Vol. I, p. 489: Transmitting documents
relative to negotiations with France for the repeal of decrees violating
the neutral commerce of the United States, etc.

Message of December 27, 1811, Vol. I, p. 497: Transmitting resolutions
of the legislature of Pennsylvania expressing confidence in the wisdom,
patriotism, and firmness of the President and Congress relative to
affairs with Great Britain and pledging support in case of an appeal
to arms.

Message of September 26, 1814, Vol. I, p. 551: Transmitting
correspondence relative to an order of the British admiral, Alex.
Cochrane, "to destroy and lay waste such towns and districts upon the
coast as may be found assailable," in retaliation for acts of the United
States Army in Upper Canada.

Message of February 5, 1821, Vol. II, p. 83: Transmitting correspondence
with Great Britain relative to the commercial relations between the
United States and the British colonies in the West Indies and in North
America, etc.

Message of February 3, 1823, Vol. II, p. 200: Transmitting a memorial
of the legislative council of Florida relative to the expediency and
necessity for further legislative provision for the government and
improvement of Florida.

Message of February 17, 1825, Vol. II, p. 284: Transmitting
correspondence with France relative to the interpretation of the eighth
article of the treaty for the cession of Louisiana.












End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Compilation of the Messages and
Papers of the Presidents, by James D. Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS ***

***** This file should be named 14584.txt or 14584.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/5/8/14584/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

