The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898
       Volume XI, 1599-1602

Author: Various

Release Date: January 13, 2005 [EBook #14685]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders Team





THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898

Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
close of the nineteenth century,



Volume XI, 1599-1602



Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
Bourne.



Contents of Volume XI



    Preface      9
    Documents of 1599

            Ordinances enacted by the Audiencia of Manila
            (_concluded_). Francisco Tello, and others;
            Manila, June, 1598-July, 1599      21
            The hospital for Indians at Manila. Domingo
            de Santiago and Antonio Valerio; Manila,
            July 3      82
            Letters from the royal fiscal to the
            king. Hieronimo de Salazar y Salcedo; Manila,
            July 21      86
            Letter from the king of Borneo to Governor
            Tello. Soltan Adil Sula; [June?] translated
            July 27      120
            Letters to the king. Francisco Tello; Manila,
            July 14 and August 7      123
            Letters to Tello. Felipe III; Denia, August
            16  129

    Documents of 1600

            The pacification of Mindanao. [Unsigned and
            undated; 1600?]      135
            Oliver van Noordt's attack on Luzon. Francisco
            Tello, and others; Manila, October-December
            140

    Documents of 1601

            Report to the governor, on the battle
            with the Dutch. Antonio de Morga; Manila,
            January 5.  173
            Annual letters from the Philippine
            Islands. Francisco Vaez, S.J.; [Manila?],
            June 10.  191
            Letter to Felipe III. Diego Garcia, S.J.;
            Manila, July 8.  223
            Letter from the fiscal to Felipe III. Hieronimo
            de Salazar y Salcedo; Manila, July 16.  228
            Complaint of the cabildo of Manila against
            Morga. Gonzalo Ronquillo de Vallesteros,
            and others; Manila, July 20.  235
            Letter to Felipe III. Antonio de Morga;
            Manila, July 30.  251
            Grant to Jesuit school in Cebu. Council of
            Indias; Valladolid, December 11.  257

    Documents of 1602

            Instructions to Pedro de Acuna. Felipe III;
            Zamora, February 16.  263
            Two royal decrees. Felipe III; Zamora,
            February 16.  289
            Pintados menaced by Mindanao pirates. Juan
            Juarez Gallinato, and others; off Mindanao,
            May 29-June 4.  292
            Letters to Felipe III. L. P. Dasmarinas,
            and others; Manila, June 8-July 10.  302

    Bibliographical Data.  317





Illustrations



    Title-page of _De rebus Iaponicis_, compiled by John Hay,
    S J. (Antverpiae, M. DC. V); photographic facsimile, from copy
    in Library of Congress.  187
    Title-page of _Relatione breve_, by Diego de Torres (Milano,
    MDCIII); photographic facsimile, from copy in library of
    Harvard University.  189





Preface


During the three years or more covered in this volume (1599-1602),
the most notable occurrence is the coming to the archipelago (in 1600)
of the fleet commanded by the Dutch adventurer Oliver van Noordt,
bent on plunder and the damage of the Spanish settlements there:
but he is defeated and driven away, although with heavy loss to the
Spaniards. This event, with the quarrels which it arouses in Manila,
and fears of like danger in the future, disturb the colony for several
years. The people, both Spaniards and Indians, are also in constant
dread of the Moro pirates, who ravage the coasts of the Pintados
(Visayas) Islands, encouraged to commit these depredations by the late
withdrawal of Spanish troops from Mindanao. In the face of all these
difficulties, the government is also embarrassed by the poverty of
the local treasury; its funds are wasted by unnecessary expenses and
salaries, and lessened by frauds in the customs duties, and by other
violations of the laws regarding trade. There are too many officials,
both secular and religious; and the former are often incompetent or
corrupt. The Indians are demoralized by having learned the use of
the white men's money; their native industries are neglected, which
causes scarcity and high prices of goods and supplies. New impulse
and wider scope are given to the missions conducted by the Jesuits,
who begin the task of gathering the scattered Indian converts into
mission villages, thus more easily to civilize and christianize the
natives. A new governor for the islands is appointed, Pedro de Acuna.

In this volume is completed the document begun in _Vol_. X, "Ordinances
of the Audiencia enacted in 1598-99;" here are presented those for the
first half of the year 1599. The alcaldes-mayor must, in collecting the
taxes, observe the royal tariffs. To remedy the exorbitant charges for
fees in the inferior courts, all suits appealed to the Audiencia must
be accompanied by a sworn statement of the fees thus paid. The bonds
accepted in law-suits must be more reliable. Auditors are given special
powers in expediting the cases of persons imprisoned. Interpreters
are not allowed to trade with the natives, except in the presence of
a magistrate. The accounts of guardians of minors shall be examined
by the probate judge. Attorneys are restricted in bringing new suits
between Indians. Goods sold at auction for the benefit of the royal
treasury must be knocked down to the highest bidder, and for cash
only. Lawyers are ordered to follow the customs of the natives,
where these are involved in lawsuits. Collection of tributes shall
not be made by the alcaldes-mayor; and appointments for the post of
collector must be approved by the Audiencia. Various acts prescribe
the duties of officials of the Audiencia, and its procedures in
certain cases; also limits of action by attorneys. The officials
of the Audiencia shall give bonds each year. Cases involving twenty
pesos or less shall not be brought to trial. Directions are given for
the trial of suits between Indians. The alguazils-mayor must make
the rounds of the city at night. All accounts due to or from the
royal treasury shall be closed up and balanced within the next four
months. Officials of the Audiencia shall not go outside of the city
without permission. Certain punishments are prescribed for the Chinese
inhabitants--for vicious practices, for making or clipping coin,
and for buying stolen goods from Indians. All natives residing in
Manila who have not some employment are ordered to leave the city at
three days' notice. The duties of the late Alvaro Cambrano, deceased,
are to be assumed by others of the auditors. Provision is made for due
inspection, appraisal, and sale of merchandise brought from China. All
Indians belonging to the royal encomiendas must pay their tributes,
even when they reside in Manila. The sum of three hundred pesos is
appropriated to furnish and adorn the chapel of the Audiencia. The
Chinese are forbidden to have godchildren, a practice which has led to
many evils; and the Christians are ordered to follow the occupations
which they had exercised before their conversion. Officials whose
terms of office expire must furnish residencia before receiving any
further appointment.

On July 3, 1599, one of the Franciscans in charge of the hospital for
the Indians at Manila writes to the king, asking further grants of
aid for its work. The governor and bishop are directed by the king
to advise him as to the needs of the hospital. A letter from the
royal fiscal to the king (July 21) displays the needs of the royal
exchequer in the islands, and suggests means for supplying these. He
complains of the burden imposed on the colony by the support of an
archbishop and three bishops. Much is wasted in salaries, for useless
or nominal services. Salazar y Salzedo advises that the offices and
their salaries be both reduced. Especial loss and injury to the royal
income arises from the frauds and violations of law which are practiced
in the Mexican trade. The payment of tributes by the Indians in money
is demoralizing them; they no longer pursue their former usual labors,
and their products are now scarce and high-priced. They ought to be
compelled to work, at agriculture, stock-raising, and mining. The
treasury needs more money, and more Indians should be assigned to the
crown. Encomiendas are fraudulently assigned by the governors. The
erection of wooden churches in the encomiendas is another source
of useless expense; these should be built of stone or brick. Certain
offices should be taken from their present incumbents, and conferred on
men of character and standing. The fiscal complains of lax management
of the treasury by its officials, and calls for an investigation;
and the same with the cabildo of Manila. Other charges where public
moneys are involved should be inspected by the crown, and the waste
of those funds should be checked. Even all these reforms will not
provide all the funds for necessary expenses; the fiscal therefore
proposes that the crown monopolize the trade in spices and raw silk,
which would bring immense profits to the royal treasury. Another letter
from the fiscal to the king, of the same date, makes recommendations
as to certain affairs of government. He urges that the auditors
should make regular official inspection of the administration of
justice throughout the islands. He complains that the profits of
trade are absorbed by the officials and their dependents, leaving
the citizens poor. Offices and other sources of profit must not be
bestowed on those dependents, but on the citizens; and the officers
of the ships that carry goods to Nueva Espana should not be appointed
there, but in the islands. The ships should be more strictly inspected.

The ruler of Borneo sends (June. 1599) to Governor Tello a gift,
accompanied by a letter in which he expresses firm friendship for the
Spaniards. In a letter dated July 14, Tello complains that Morga is
hostile to him, and even writes anonymous letters against the governor;
the latter defends himself against these attacks. On August 7 he
reports to the king the arrival of English ships at Maluco, and his
intention of sending reenforcements to the Spanish fort there, and
to that in Cebu. He is asking aid from the viceroy of Nueva Espana,
and is trying to manufacture more artillery at Manila. Two letters
from Felipe III to Tello are dated August 16, 1599. The king commends
his proceedings in certain matters, and orders the viceroy of Nueva
Espana to send hereafter only useful colonists to the Philippines. He
also desires Tello to advise him whether the duties on Chinese goods
can be increased.

A brief account of the pacification of Mindanao (1600?) furnishes
some additional information as to events there, up to 1600. The
troops have been withdrawn from this island, owing to an alarm
of danger from English pirates; but these prove to be peaceable
Dutch merchants. In October of that year, certain foreign vessels
(thought to be English) enter the bay of Albay, and Antonio de Morga
is ordered by the Audiencia to fortify the port of Cavite and pursue
the enemy. Instructions for this latter proceeding are furnished to
him by the governor (December 10). He in turn gives instructions
to his admiral, Joan de Alcega. Then follows an account not only
of the battle between the Spanish and the Dutch fleets, but also
of Van Noordt's entire voyage to the Philippines. The battle ends,
on the whole, disastrously for Van Noordt. Among the plunder found
on the Dutch ships is a commission granted to Esaias de Lende as a
privateer against the Spaniards in the Indias. Suit being brought
against the admiral Alcega for deserting the flagship in the battle
with Van Noordt, Morga presents therein his version of the affair
(January 5, 1601)--throwing the blame for the loss of the flagship
on Alcega's disobedience to the orders previously given him by Morga.

Francisco Vaez reports (June 10, 1601) to the general of the Jesuit
order the status of Jesuit missions in the islands. He relates
the deaths of certain priests and brethren while engaged in the
performance of their duties, and proceeds to a detailed report of
each mission station. The Jesuit church at Manila has been ruined by
earthquakes. The fathers of the college there are accomplishing much
good by their labors, especially among those in prison, the soldiers,
and the children. Several instances of the devotion and piety of
converts are related. The losses and calamities which have befallen
the people have made them more inclined to religion. The sodalities
introduced among the natives arouse their devotion and enthusiasm. At
Antipolo a hospital has been begun, as well as a school for boys. At
Cebu also a school has been opened; and the labors of the Jesuits are
highly acceptable to the people, and commended by the bishop. Many
Indians are being converted by them. Connected with the residence
at Cebu is that of Bohol. Here Father Valerio Ledesma has persuaded
the savages to leave the mountains and settle near the river, under
the care of the missionaries; they have built a church, and are fast
becoming converted. Other missionaries in Bohol report many hundreds
of baptisms. Various miraculous cures of illness are related. Good
news comes from Samar also; nearly four thousand have been baptized,
nearly all adults. In Dulac a boys' school has been established, and
many conversions have occurred. At Alangala there are three Indian
chapels. Vaez asks for more missionaries in this so promising field. A
few days later (July 8) the official visitor of the Jesuit missions,
Diego Garcia, writes to Felipe III. He recommends that seminaries
for the instruction of heathen boys be stablished as a means for
hastening the conversion of the natives; and that the Indians be
gathered into settlements. Garcia asks that the Jesuit college at
Manila be authorized to graduate students from its classes; and closes
by recommending to the king's favor Morga and other officials.

The fiscal, Salazar y Salcedo, declares (July 16, 1601) that Tello
is shielding Morga, and despatches to the king a full report of the
investigation which he has made of the conflict with the Dutch. A
memorial to the king is sent (July 20, 1601) by the cabildo of
Manila, making various complaints in regard to the conduct of Doctor
de Morga. The order given by him and Tello for the abandonment of
Mindanao has caused the natives of that region to commit piracies in
the islands under Spanish rule. Morga has obtained official positions
for his relatives and friends, contrary to the royal ordinances. One
of these men, being utterly incompetent, has failed to drive back the
Mindanao pirates, who have consequently inflicted much damage. Through
various machinations, Morga succeeded in depriving Ronquillo of
the command of the fleet, in the battle with Van Noordt; but in the
conflict he showed himself incompetent to command the troops, and a
coward at the approach of danger; and, in consequence, his flagship
was wrecked, with the loss of many Spaniards and of valuable military
supplies. Moreover, the enemy being allowed to escape, the islands are
more exposed to future attacks from them. The writers of this letter
are sending documents to prove their charges; they also accuse Morga of
writing anonymous letters. A letter from Morga to the king (July 30)
relates his services in the naval battle, and the unfaithfulness of
Joan de Alcega to his trust in that and other instances. Morga asks
to be relieved from his post in the Philippines, and sent to some
other country. On December 11, 1601, the Jesuit school at Cebu is
aided by a royal grant for the erection of buildings.

Governor Tello is superseded by Pedro de Acuna, and the latter is
provided with instructions (February 16, 1602) by the king. He must
consult with the viceroy of Nueva Espana regarding the measures
to be taken for the settlement of the islands; and the viceroy has
been ordered to aid the governor therein. Acuna is directed to look
after the defense of the coasts, and the maintenance of a garrison
in Mindanao. He must do what he can to dispense with offices and
salaries which are superfluous, for which the king makes various
recommendations. The frauds which have been committed in the shipment
of goods to Nueva Espana, and in the payment of duties thereon, must
be stopped. Irregularities and frauds in the assignment of encomiendas
must also cease. These and various other matters are discussed by the
king, in pursuance of the recommendations made by the royal fiscal
in July, 1599. Official inspection of affairs in the islands must
be made by the auditors; and the royal officials must put a stop to
the importation from America of money for investment in the China
trade. The cathedral at Manila must be completed, and the hospitals
aided; and nuns will be sent for Santa Potenciana. The Jesuit seminary
for Indian boys should be cared for; and Acuna is to ascertain its
condition and needs. He must investigate the question of abolishing
the Parian, and see that religious teachers are provided for the
natives of the Ladrones Islands. Agriculture must be encouraged in
the Philippines. Two royal decrees (dated February 16) command the
viceroy of Nueva Espana to send to the Philippines more colonists,
who shall be persons of good character; and two nuns, to take charge
of the seminary of Santa Potenciana at Manila. Captain Gallinato
sends to the governor at Manila (June 4, 1602) warning of a large
plundering expedition which is about to sail from Mindanao to ravage
the Pintados Islands. The Joloans are also hostile, and ready to attack
the Spaniards; and the natives of Terrenate are aiding the Mindanaos.

Luis de Dasmarinas writes to Felipe III (June 8, 1602), urging that the
Spaniards reconquer the fortress of Maluco, to protect the Philippines
from attack by "those demons of English and Dutch heretics." Doctor
de Morga again informs the king (June 30) of his services in the
conflict with Van Noordt, and in still another letter (July 8) of
the attacks which his enemies are making upon him in regard to that
affair. The Augustinian officials at Manila notify the king (July 4)
of the election of Pedro Arce as provincial of their order in the
islands; and explain their refusal to receive a visitor recently sent
to the islands from Nueva Espana. A letter from the fiscal details
(July 10) the measures taken to compel payment by Governor Tello of
the debts owed by him in Sevilla; he has property in Nueva Espana,
but none in the islands.

_The Editors_

December, 1903.





Documents of 1599



    Ordinances enacted by the Audiencia of Manila
    (_concluded_.) Francisco Tello, and others; January-July, 1599.
    The hospital for Indians at Manila. Domingo de Santiago and
    Antonio Valerio; July 3.
    Letters from the royal fiscal to the king. Hieronimo de
    Salazar y Salcedo; July 21.
    Letter from the king of Borneo to Governor Tello. Soltan Adil
    Sula; [June?] translated July 27.
    Letters to the king. Francisco Tello; July 14 and August 7.
    Letters to Tello. Felipe III; August 16.



_Sources_: All these documents save one are obtained from MSS. in the
Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla; the second of the king's letters
(August 16) is from the "Cedulario Indico" in the Archivo Historico
Nacional, Madrid.

_Translations_: The first of these documents is translated by Arthur
B. Myrick, of Harvard University; the second, by Emma Helen Blair;
the third, and part of the sixth, by Robert W. Haight; the fourth,
by James A. Robertson; the fifth, by Norman F. Hall, of Harvard
University, and Jose M. and Clara M. Asensio; the first letter in
the sixth, by Alfonso de Salvio, of Harvard University.





Ordinances Enacted by the Audiencia of Manila (_concluded_)



_An act ordering the alcaldes-mayor and their officials to observe
the royal tariff._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas, in the
collection of taxes by the alcaldes-mayor of the provinces of these
islands, and by their notaries and officials, there is great excess
and disorder, from failing to observe his Majesty's royal tariffs,
whence arise many difficulties and obstacles to the service of God
our Lord, and of his Majesty: therefore, to remedy these evils,
they ordered, and they did so order, that all the alcaldes-mayor,
both now and henceforth, in all of the provinces of these said
islands, shall observe and cause to be observed the royal tariff of
his Majesty and his royal Audiencia; and, in conformity with it,
shall levy and cause to be levied the taxes to them appertaining,
as also shall their notaries and officials--levying on the natives
a third less than on the Spaniards, according to the declaration
thereof in the said tariff; and that each one of them shall have a
copy of this tariff. They shall neither use nor levy the said taxes
by any other tariffs, under penalty of a fine of one hundred pesos
for the treasury of his Majesty and the expenses of justice. By this
act they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez de Almazan_
The licentiate _Zambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_Proclamation_: In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, who signed their
names to the above act, declared and proclaimed it in public session.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that there shall be no suits without the filing of
a sworn memorandum of the fees that the parties have paid._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia, Court, and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas it has come to their knowledge that certain
persons--not only Spaniards, but Indians and Sangleys--who bring
suits in this royal Audiencia and outside of it, in the provincial
and ordinary tribunals, complain of the large sums that are charged
by the courts, in great excess of what they are ordered to charge
by the royal tariffs; and that the notaries of the said tribunals,
contrary to orders, send the appealed suits to this royal Audiencia,
without placing at the end of them the fees they have paid; therefore,
in order to remedy the aforesaid evil, and to put an end to complaints
of similar acts of injustice, they ordered, and they did so order, both
the officials of this royal Audiencia and the others in the provincial
and the ordinary tribunals, and those outside of this city, now and
henceforth, not to bring or send any suit to be reviewed in the court
of this royal Audiencia, unaccompanied by a memorandum, signed and
sworn to by the parties to the suit, of what they have spent thereon,
and to what persons they have given the money; and not to bring any
suit for revision in any other manner, under penalty of a fine, for
each time when they shall disobey this order, of ten pesos for his
Majesty's treasury, to be equally divided between the treasury and the
court--to which, from that moment, they are considered as condemned. By
this act they so provided and ordered, and they signed the same.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Alvaro Zambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_Proclamation_: In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second day of
the month of January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine,
the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria
of these Philipinas Islands, who signed their names to the above act,
declared and proclaimed it in public session.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the clerk of court who receives the bonds
of suitors shall accept only reliable bonds, and at his own risk;
and that his residencia in regard to the said office shall be taken._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in the
suits that are brought and considered in this royal Audiencia it
is sometimes necessary to order the parties to give bonds, which
are accepted by the clerk of court of this royal Audiencia, without
his knowing whether they are good or not: therefore as some trouble
and annoyance might result from this, and it is expedient to avoid
this, and, where bonds are concerned, to require the residencia, they
ordered, and they did so order, that now and henceforth the said clerk,
in all suits in which bonds are ordered to be given, shall accept only
honest, reliable, and valuable bonds, under the penalty of having them
charged to his own account and risk if they are not so. He shall give
reliable bonds therefor, and shall likewise undergo the residencia of
his said office; and shall pay whatever is adjudged and decided against
him, and any public demands which shall be lodged against him, as he
is obliged to do by law. Thus it was provided, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Albaro Cambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_Proclamation_: In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second day of
the month of January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine,
the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria
of these Philipinas Islands, who signed their names to the above act,
declared and proclaimed it in public session.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the auditors who regularly review the charges
against prisoners may make what decisions shall be necessary in
the suits of prisoners por sala, until their sentences shall be
pronounced._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas, in despatching suits of the prisoners in the royal prison of
this court, there might be some delay on account of there being many
persons imprisoned _por sala_ who are never released during the review
of cases made, from which they receive great harm by protracting their
release: therefore, the president and auditors agreed, and they did so
resolve, that, now and henceforth, when they shall review the cases in
the royal prison of this court, on the Saturdays appointed therefor,
they may release those who were arrested _por sala_, if arrested
therein by alcaldes of the court; and that, likewise, they may issue
the acts which shall seem fitting to them concerning the regulation
of criminal cases, until they are definitely concluded by sentence,
so that the cases of the said prisoners may be despatched with the
greater celerity.

By this act they so ordered, provided, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Alvaro Cambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_Proclamation_: In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second day of
the month of January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine,
the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria
of these islands, who signed their names to the above act, declared
and proclaimed it in public session.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the interpreters shall not trade or traffic
with the natives._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas it has come to their knowledge that the interpreters, as a
result of their occupation as interpreters, and being for the most part
friendly to the natives, seek and attempt to acquire, with trinkets
and other illegal means, jewels, slaves, and other things, at lower
prices than they are valued by the said natives: therefore, in order
to put a stop to the aforesaid evil by applying a remedy for it, they
resolved, ordered, and decreed, that now and henceforth, no interpreter
shall buy from the said natives any jewels, slaves, or other valuables,
except in the presence of the magistrate, under penalty of confiscation
of what shall have been bought by the interpreter violating this law,
half of which is immediately to be applied to his Majesty's treasury,
and the other half to the expenses of justice; and furthermore, he
shall not be allowed to exercise the said office any longer. By this
act they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Cambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second day of the month of
January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and
auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas
Islands, who signed their names to the above act, declared and
proclaimed it in public session. Diego de Mercado and Juan Garcia,
interpreters, were present and were notified.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the probate judge shall examine the accounts
of guardians of minors in this court._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared
that, whereas in this court there are many minors--encomenderos,
and others--whose property and effects are in charge of guardians
and curators; and because the said property might be spent and
dissipated without these guardians being able afterward to give
an account thereof to their said minors, which would result to
the great harm and prejudice of the latter: therefore, to remedy
the aforesaid, they resolved, and they did so resolve and decree,
that the common probate judge, now or hereafter, in these islands be
empowered to examine, not only in trust but on the party's petition,
the accounts of all the guardianships and curatorships of minors in
this court, and of the administration and conservation of the same;
and he may proceed against those of whom he may be suspicious, or who
administer and manage dishonestly, or waste, the goods and effects of
the said minors; and may make in the case all the inquiries suitable
and necessary, until he shall hand down a definite decision in such
cases--for which, and for everything annexed to and pertaining to it,
they gave him the requisite power and authority, in the sufficiency
required by law. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Cambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that no one shall keep on his hat or sit down,
while the auditor is taking his deposition._

In the city of Manila, in the Philipinas Islands, on the seventh of
January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and
auditors of the royal Audiencia of the said islands declared that,
whereas certain persons have been imprisoned in the royal prison of
this court, for criminal cases, who, when their depositions were being
taken, sat down and remained with their heads covered, which is in
disrespect of royal justice; and as it is fitting to apply a remedy to
the aforesaid, now and henceforth, therefore, they ordered, and they
did so order, that each and every one, of whatever rank and condition,
who may be imprisoned on criminal charges, shall, when his deposition
is being taken before any auditor of this royal Audiencia, stand
and bare his head, until such time as his deposition is ended. And,
in order that this may come to the knowledge of everyone, it shall be
made known to the commissioners and attorneys of this royal Audiencia,
who shall give notice of the provisions of this act to such persons,
whenever occasion shall arise, so that it may be observed. By this
act they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Cambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that no attorney shall enter a petition in a new
suit between Indians, without first communicating it to the auditor
for that week._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in this
royal Audiencia there are brought and considered suits and causes for
small amounts among the natives of these islands, in which they incur
heavy costs, whereby they receive great injury and vexation: therefore,
they ordered, and they did so order, that no prosecuting attorney of
this royal Audiencia shall bring therein a new suit or petition for
an Indian, without first and foremost bringing it before this royal
Audiencia, or before the auditor for the week, in order that the latter
may determine whether the suit be a proper one--under a penalty of a
fine of six pesos of common gold, immediately upon the conviction of
anyone who may disobey this decree; one-third to go to the receiver of
fines, another third to the royal hospital, and the other third to the
poor in the prison. By this act they so declared ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the royal officials, in the sale of gold and
other goods, from the royal exchequer, see that it be done for cash,
and not auctioned to creditors of the exchequer, in order that the
latter may receive their money_.

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas on account
of his Majesty's royal exchequer of these islands being, as it now is,
embarrassed with many debts, it cannot succeed in paying its creditors
what it thus owes them--which results from the fact that some of the
said creditors, in order to have their accounts paid to them, present
themselves at the royal auctions which are held for the sale of gold,
cotton cloth, and other goods collected from the tributes pertaining
to the royal crown, and bid on such articles, at higher prices than
would be given if they were paying in cash, in order to receive what
the royal exchequer owes them; and that if such things as this were
allowed to continue, the said royal exchequer would not be able to meet
certain necessary matters which continually occur in the service of
the king, our sovereign, and of which consideration should be taken:
therefore, they declared that they ordered, and they did so order,
the official judges of the royal exchequer of the king our sovereign
in these islands, that now and henceforth, in the auctions and sales
which may be made of any royal property, it shall be made over to the
person or persons who bid the highest, being knocked down to them
and paid for immediately. They shall admit or receive in no other
way any other bid which may be made by the said creditors. By this
act they so declared and ordered, and signed the same.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Albaro Cambrano_


Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the advocates and attorneys of this royal
Audiencia shall follow the customs of the natives._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in suits
brought by natives of these islands, wherein they consider in this
royal Audiencia questions of slavery, divisions of inheritances,
slaves, marriage-dowries, and other things, it is fitting that the
advocates and attorneys of this royal Audiencia follow the customs
of the said natives, observed formerly and now in the said suits:
therefore, in order that they may be observed as his Majesty orders,
and that to that end they may keep a copy in their possession, in order
that they may know and observe them, they ordered, and they did so
order, that the said advocates and attorneys in all suits at present
pending in this royal Audiencia, as in those which shall be brought
and continued henceforth, touching the said natives, shall approve and
adhere to the said customs which the Indians were thus accustomed to
follow and do follow; and they shall take a copy of the said customs
which are set down in the books [1] of the royal Audiencia resident in
these islands. They ordered that all the aforesaid persons should be
notified of this act, in order that they may observe and execute it,
under penalty of the loss to the parties; and, besides that, their
consciences were charged with it, and it was declared that they would
be judged guilty for any laxity or neglect which should thus occur. By
this act it was so decreed, and they ordered it to be registered.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Albaro Cambrano_


Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act declaring that no use shall be made of the tariff made by
this royal Audiencia._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas it has been
provided and ordered that the court clerk and other officials of the
Audiencia and ordinary courts shall collect their fees in conformity
with the tariff of the royal Audiencia of the City of Mexico in Nueva
Espana: therefore, they ordered, and they did so order, that this be
observed and executed exactly as the king, our sovereign, commands;
and that the said officials may not use the tariff which the Audiencia
made concerning the said fees, which is to be withdrawn. No one of
the persons herein mentioned shall collect fees in conformity with
it, under the penalties imposed upon those who collect excessive
fees. This act shall be made known to all the officials whom it
concerns. So they declared, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the alcaldes-mayor shall not make collections,
nor shall they be given to the official judges; and that the collectors
appointed must be approved by this royal Audiencia._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas,
on account of the alcaldes-mayor of the provinces of these islands
collecting, personally or by their agents, the tributes from the
natives in their jurisdiction who pertain to the royal crown,
by commission granted therefor by the officials of the royal
exchequer, there have resulted many injuries and inconveniences,
both to the said natives and the said royal exchequer: therefore,
because it is necessary to avoid the said injuries, and apply a
remedy to the aforesaid evil, they ordered, and they did so order,
that the officials of the royal exchequer of the king our sovereign
should be notified, so that in no way or manner, now and henceforth,
shall they grant the collections, directly or indirectly, to the said
alcaldes-mayor, nor shall the latter have any part of that which is
granted to the collectors. Therefore, the said collectors shall take
oath in due legal form, that they will make the said collection,
taking it for themselves alone, without granting any part to the
said alcaldes-mayor. The latter shall not collect the tribute under
penalty of deprivation of their offices. The said collectors shall
deliver in kind to the royal exchequer the tributes that they shall
collect from the said natives, unless the said officials shall order
otherwise, for the augmentation of the royal exchequer. And in order
that the collectors sent may be fit and proper persons, it is ordered
that those appointed to the office by the said royal officials shall
present themselves before this royal Audiencia, in order that they
may be there approved. The said royal officials shall cause this to be
done, under a penalty of a third part of their salary for that year,
which must be paid immediately upon conviction of disobedience to
this decree. The said collectors shall be vested with the authority
of justice. By this act it was so declared, ordered, and decreed.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Albaro De Cambrano_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_


Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the attorney for minors shall not bring a suit,
without first communicating it to the judge for minors._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh of January, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in this
court there are many minors, whose goods and property are in the
charge of their guardians, who might spend and dissipate the said
goods beyond the use and profit of the said minors, which would be to
their great injury: therefore, because by the attorney and defender
of the said minors entering any suits and petitions with regard to
the aforesaid minors without giving notice thereof, or communicating
with the judge for minors, many inconveniences may result, as a remedy
for this, they resolved and ordered that the said attorney for minors
shall bring no suit for a minor against his guardian, without first
communicating it to the judge who sits or shall sit for minors, that
the latter may order what he deems advisable. By this act it was so
ordered, ordained, and decreed.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_
The licentiate _Albaro Cambrano_


Before me:    _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act decreeing that all the officials, both of this royal Audiencia
and the ordinary courts, shall be present at the review of charges
against prisoners._

In the city of Manila, on the seventh day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, declared that,
whereas by the absence of the alcaldes-in-ordinary of this city, and
of the clerk, reporter, alguazils-mayor, attorneys, commissioners,
notaries-public, and other officials, not only of this royal Audiencia
but of the lower court of this city, from the review of charges against
prisoners, many prisoners are not at liberty--from which it follows
that they are vexed and annoyed by long imprisonments and other great
injuries and inconveniences; besides the fact that, in many suits,
they are unable to administer and provide justice on account of not
being present at the said review: therefore, because it is advisable
to institute a reform in this matter, they ordered, and they did so
order, that now and henceforth, every week on the days set apart for
the review of prison charges, the said alcaldes-in-ordinary, the
alguazils-mayor of the court and the city, the clerk and reporter
of this royal Audiencia, the attorneys and commissioners thereof,
the solicitors of the royal offices, the native interpreters, and
the notaries-public, bailiffs, alguazils, and other officials of
this royal Audiencia and the ordinary court, shall be present at
the said review with all punctuality--except the reporter of this
royal Audiencia, who is not obliged to be present at the said review,
unless he has no suit to attend to--under a penalty of a fine of one
peso for every offense, for each one of the aforesaid officials, as
soon as they declared him convicted and did convict him. They ordered
that the receiver of fines of this royal Audiencia shall observe the
aforesaid most carefully for the proper execution and fulfilment of
this act--which, in order that no one may pretend ignorance of it,
shall be made known to all the persons whom it concerns. By this act
it was so provided, ordered, and affirmed.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_
The licentiate _Albaro Cambrano_


Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the royal official judges in the fulfilment of
their duties shall observe the instructions, decrees, and ordinances
of his Majesty._

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas by the ordinances, decrees, and instructions of his Majesty,
orders have been given to the official judges of the royal exchequer
of these islands, regarding their obligations in the exercise
and discharge of their duties, and, because it is fitting that
his Majesty's orders in those decrees be observed and fulfilled,
they ordered, and they did so order, that the said royal officials
should be notified that in the exercise of their offices they should
observe the said royal ordinances, decrees, and instructions of the
king our sovereign, who has given them, as they are held, exercised,
and observed, and as they must be exercised and observed, by the royal
official judges of the City of Mexico in Nueva Espana, especially
section seventeen of the said royal ordinance. By this act they so
provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me: _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act ordering the commissioners to be present at all sessions of
the Audiencia._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Filipinas Islands declared that, whereas,
although by the royal ordinances the commissioners of this royal
Audiencia are obliged to be present at the assemblies, they are not
there; and thus many cases that come up, both civil and criminal,
are delayed in settlement, so that considerable harm and annoyance
result to the parties concerned; and furthermore, that official
and fiscal cases are delayed, because the said commissioners to all
appearances do not employ therein the necessary diligence: therefore,
to remedy this condition of affairs, they decreed and ordered that,
now and henceforth, all the said commissioners, unless they have
legitimate occupation or obstacle, shall be present without fail
in the hall at all the sessions of the Audiencia with the greatest
punctuality, so that in all matters there may be the prompt action
which is desirable, under penalty of a fine of one peso from him who
shall disobey this decree, the fine to be applied immediately upon
condemnation, in this manner--six reals to the poor in the prisons,
and two for the bailiff who has to execute the decree. By this act
they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:    _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_







_An act decreeing that orders shall be given regarding the sworn
memoranda of the collector of fines._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas Pedro Fernandez de Sanctofimia, attorney in the cases of
the Audiencia, is appointed by this royal Audiencia to collect its
fines, and ordered to assess the fines imposed upon its officials and
other persons who do not observe the royal ordinances, and all other
ordinances, decrees, and provisions, to the amount that must be levied
for each fine--for, by not executing the penalties thereof daily,
there are many oversights and no little remissness in the fulfilment
of each one's obligations: therefore, in order that the requisite
system be observed in everything, they decreed that, by giving the
said Pedro Fernandez de Sanctofimia the present sworn memorandum
of fines to be imposed upon everyone, he shall immediately receive
his orders thereby regarding what he is commanded to levy for each
fine. The latter he shall do immediately, as the said memorandum shall
indicate, without any investigation or mandate preceding. The orders
that he shall so give shall be executed by the bailiff or alguazil
of this royal Audiencia, whenever they shall be issued. Whatever
the latter shall collect he shall deliver to the said collector of
fines, who shall take charge of it, and enter it carefully in a book,
that he may give strict and clear account of each fine collected. And
they charged each other's consciences with the fulfilment of all the
above. By this act they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:    _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_






_An act decreeing the making of a book in which shall be entered
the decrees sent and to be sent by his Majesty to these islands,
in order that they may be observed and executed._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas the king our sovereign, by his royal ordinances,
ordains and orders a book to be made, in which to inscribe the decrees
that he has sent, and shall send, to these islands, and that it contain
an account of their execution: therefore, they thereupon ordered, and
they did so order, the said book to be made, and entrusted it to the
clerk of the court. He shall inscribe therein all the decrees that
the king our sovereign has sent and will send to these islands, so
that henceforth a detailed account of their observation and execution
shall be kept, as his Majesty orders. By this act they so provided,
ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_That interlocutory decisions shall be concluded at one demand from
each party._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands declared
that, whereas his Majesty ordains and commands by one of the royal
ordinances for this royal Audiencia, that interlocutory decisions
shall be concluded, in trial and review, at one demand from each of
the parties, and that the clerk of court receive [no] other demands:
therefore, in order that the aforesaid be exactly executed, they
ordained and decreed that the attorneys of this royal Audiencia shall
conclude the said interlocutory decisions in trial and review, at one
demand from each party, without giving or presenting more demands,
with the warning that any others presented shall not be admitted. The
clerk of court is warned in the present that he shall not receive
them under penalty of a fine of two pesos, to be employed as it shall
seem proper, and delivered into the charge of the collector of fines
of this royal Audiencia, upon whom the execution of the above shall
be most carefully charged. And they ordered it to be proclaimed,
and especially to the said attorneys. So they provided, ordered,
and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act providing that no proceedings shall be conducted in suits
between Indians, without a decree from this royal Audiencia._

On the twenty-first of January, one thousand five hundred and
ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia
of the Philipinas Islands, declared that, whereas, in one of his
royal ordinances, the king, our sovereign, commands the aforesaid
president and auditors that, in suits and civil and criminal cases
between Indians, the usual proceedings shall not be conducted or
issued, except in cases decreed and ordered by an act of this royal
Audiencia: therefore, in order that the aforesaid shall be exactly
fulfilled, they ordained and decreed that it should be communicated
to the said attorneys of this royal Audiencia, that when, in the name
of any natives, they shall bring suits against other natives, before
bringing these suits they shall notify this royal Audiencia--in order
that, if thought best, they may be docketed, and if not, that the cost
and expense may be avoided. Those which shall be prosecuted shall be
docketed by formal decree of this royal Audiencia, and in no other
manner. They must strive to be brief and precise in everything. The
notaries both of this royal Audiencia and the other jurisdictions
thereof are ordered, in the collection of fees from said natives,
to employ great moderation, and to despatch their business promptly,
in order that all his Majesty's orders and decrees may be observed
and fulfilled. Moreover, they commanded that the aforesaid notaries
be notified of this act. So they provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the attorneys shall go, within three days, to
the office of the clerk of court, to settle suits that are concluded._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas, on account of the non-appearance of the attorneys of this
royal Audiencia at the office of the clerk of court for this royal
Audiencia, to settle and otherwise regulate suits and cases which are
concluded, in order that they may be reviewed and decided, there is
great delay in their revision and decision, so that the interested
parties are subjected to great harm and annoyance: therefore,
to remedy this, they ordered, and they did so order, that all the
attorneys of this royal Audiencia shall be notified that, whenever
the said suits are concluded, wherever they shall be brought, within
the three days first following they shall appear at the office of
the above-mentioned clerk of court, and there settle and dispose of
them, so that there shall be nothing wanting, and that they may have
the necessary despatch--being warned that, if they do not thus come
within the said term, the said clerk can settle the said processes,
and send them to the reporter for him to review them in court. And if,
by the said attorneys' negligence, the parties suffer any harm, the
said attorneys shall pay them for it in their persons and goods. By
this act they so declared, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the notaries shall not collect their fees
entirely from each of the parties, but that each one shall pay the
part he owes._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas it has come to their knowledge that both the
notaries and the reporter [_relator_] [2] of this royal Audiencia and
of the other jurisdictions of this court, collect fees for the trial of
suits and other acts thereof in entirety from each of the parties at
whose petition they may take action, saying that they should pay them
entirely: therefore, because the aforesaid proceeding is to the great
harm and damage of the parties, to make them thus pay what they do not
owe, and since the aforesaid evil should be remedied, they ordered,
and they did so order, now and henceforth, that the said notaries
and reporter, or either of them, shall not collect in any way, or in
any case, the fees owed by one of the said parties from the others,
but that each one shall pay what he owes. On account of not paying the
total fees, the party who would wish his suit to be tried, shall not
have it delayed; but, as soon as he has paid his share, his suit shall
be despatched with all celerity. And they declared that they charged,
and they did so charge, their consciences with this; and furthermore,
that whoever shall disobey this decree shall be convicted and sentenced
to pay a fine four times as great as the sum thus exacted, for his
Majesty's treasury, in addition to the fines which those who exact
excessive fees incur. By this act they so declared, ordered, and
decreed; and that this act shall apply to any person whom it concerns.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the attorneys shall not speak in suits wherein
they shall not have been authorized to do so._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas the attorneys of this royal Audiencia often take
it upon themselves to speak and make allegations in suits in which they
have no authority, and in which they have not appeared as parties to
the said case, certain nullifications can be created--for which reason
the said case may be brought again, and the parties thereto subjected
to considerable injury and expense: therefore, to obviate the said
injuries and other inconveniences of reconsideration, they ordered,
and they did so order, that, now and henceforth, neither the said
attorneys nor any one of them shall take it upon himself to speak,
nor shall they speak in any suit or case, unless authorized therefor
by the party in whose favor they shall speak, or unless he has proved
himself to be a party to the suit--under penalty that he who shall
disobey this decree shall incur a fine of four pesos of common gold,
as soon as he shall be judged guilty thereof; three of them to be given
to the royal hospital for Spaniards, and one to the bailiff in charge
thereof. And under the said penalty, the clerk of court is ordered
not to give any one of the said attorneys any suits or petitions,
unless empowered thereto by the parties concerned. By this act they
so ordered, declared, and decreed.

Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the evidence that the clerk of court cannot
take be entrusted by commission of this royal Audiencia, and assigned
by the members thereof, to the notarial commissioner of examinations._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas, conformably to the royal ordinances, all
the evidences in suits and cases pending in this royal Audiencia,
are committed to the clerk of court; and whereas, on account of the
volume of business incumbent upon his said office, he cannot receive
them all, and commits them to the notaries: therefore, because the
aforesaid taking of evidence cannot be done unless authorized by this
royal Audiencia, under the direction of its members, they ordered,
and they did so order, that in regard to evidence which the said clerk
of court cannot take immediately in interrogatories and petitions,
by virtue of which such evidence must be taken, an act be passed by
which his duty may be committed by this royal Audiencia and assigned by
its members to a commissioner of examinations, the latter to receive
and examine the said evidence, and to take the oaths of witnesses
thereto. The said commissioner shall give a receipt to the parties for
the fees which he shall collect from them for said evidence, and at
the foot of the evidence he shall in like manner sign his name. The
clerk of court shall not receive any fees for such evidence; and
under no circumstances whatever shall the said evidence be taken in
any other way, except as herein stated, under penalty that evidence
given in any other way shall be null and void; and the commissioner
receiving it shall incur a penalty of one hundred pesos of common gold,
as soon as he shall have been judged guilty, the fine to be applied
in equal parts to the royal treasury and court-rooms of this royal
Audiencia. By this act they so declared, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act decreeing that the officials of this royal Audiencia shall give
bonds at the beginning of every year, and that likewise, they shall
give them for the time during which they have already held office._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas, in order to conform to the decrees and provisions of his
Majesty, and to be just with the parties entering suits, the officials
of this royal Audiencia are under obligation to give bonds that they
will undergo residencia for the right exercise and discharge of their
duties, at the beginning of each year: therefore, because hitherto they
have not given bonds for the time while they have exercised their said
offices, and because they should give them, both for the aforesaid time
and for the future, they resolved and ordered that the commissioners
of examination, attorneys, assessor of taxes, collector of fines,
deputies of the alguazil-mayor, and the prison warden of this court,
shall each one of them, within fifteen days after being notified of
this act, give safe and reliable bonds, before the undersigned clerk
of court, that they will undergo residencia for the use and exercise
of their offices, and pay everything which may be adjudged against
them in the matter, and also in the suits which may be instituted
against them. They are also warned that after the said term of office
has expired, they shall exercise the said offices no longer, which
shall be immediately declared vacant, and other persons appointed
thereto. Likewise, within the said term and under the said penalty,
they shall give bonds for all the time during which they have already
exercised the said offices in the royal Audiencia, for which they have
not given them. In the future, they shall be notified and ordered to
renew the said bonds at the beginning of every year, under the said
penalty. By this act they so provided, enacted, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that cases of twenty pesos or less shall not be
brought to trial; and that the notary shall not take a larger fee
than one-half peso from each party._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas so many suits involving twenty pesos or less
are wont to be begun, and as much time is consumed therein as if they
were affairs of greater magnitude, whence there results to the parties
concerned great harm and damage by reason of the great cost and expense
wasted therein, beside the long and tedious delays in the collection
of their debts: therefore, to remedy that, they agreed and ordered
that, now and henceforth, no trial shall be made of cases amounting to
twenty pesos or less, unless they are briefly and summarily disposed
of; and that the notary before whom they are brought shall not take
for his fee more than four reals only from each party, even if they
make many investigations in the matter--under penalty that all that
they take above that sum they shall return to the parties concerned,
together with four times as much for his Majesty's treasury. By this
act they so provided, ordered, and decreed; and the notaries whom
its fulfilment concerns shall be notified.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act concerning the order that the alcaldes-mayor are to follow
in trying Indian suits._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of these Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas his
Majesty has ordered, in his royal decrees and ordinances, that the
suits of the Indians shall be treated summarily, and that processes
issued within the limit of the law shall not be so conducted that
the said Indians waste their substance by incurring too heavy costs:
therefore, in order that the royal will of the king our sovereign
might be exactly fulfilled, they resolved and ordered that the
alcaldes-in-ordinary and the alcaldes-mayor and other magistrates and
notaries, in suits of the Indians, shall observe their instructions
and the following articles.

First, when any Indian--whether man or woman--shall enter suit for
liberty, or any other matter, against another Indian without giving
a _traslado_, [3] the said magistrate shall order the Indian sued
to appear before him and take oath as to the truth of the demands
of the plaintiff. If he shall confess it, justice shall be done by
settling the case; and if he deny it, the case shall be reserved for
evidence within a short time, with obligation for publication and
conclusion. The said magistrates shall order that, as soon as both
parties name their witnesses, the latter shall be brought into court,
and an oath taken from them to tell the truth, and they shall cause
them to tell by word of mouth what they know. After they have thus
testified, the substance of their depositions shall be recorded,
in this form: "So and so of such an age, capable or incapable as a
witness, said so and so under oath;" and the same shall be done with
the other witnesses in the same order. The evidences of both parties
being taken, and the time-limit having expired, a just finding shall
be determined. If either of the parties appeal, the alcaldes-mayor
shall hear them in the court of appeals; and the witnesses named by
either party shall be subpoenaed, and shall give their evidence in the
same form as set forth above, the case being admitted to trial within
a short time, with obligation for publication and conclusion--at the
expiration of which the process shall be sent to this royal Audiencia
to be settled, the original parties being summoned for all trials,
the time and place being appointed by the court.

Second. _Item_: If the suit be a criminal suit, the complaint and
charge shall be received. If there is guilt, the person shall be
arrested, and the prisoner's declaration taken. The charge shall
be formulated against him, and the case admitted to trial within a
short period, with obligation for publication and conclusion; and
within the probatory limit the testimonies given in the preliminary
process shall be verified, other new ones received, if there be any,
and the defendant's plea taken. The time having expired, the case
shall be decided. If any of the parties shall appeal, the original
process shall be sent to the Audiencia; because in this way the said
natives will avoid heavy expense and cost, and the cases will be more
quickly decided. In criminal cases, no other form of process shall
be used than that which is appointed for civil cases.

Third. _Item_: If the suit be to the amount of three pesos, or
less, the judgment shall be so summary that only the substance of
the whole matter is to be written, together with the decision, in a
report. The original shall be retained by the notary, and if either
of the parties shall desire an authenticated copy, it shall be given
them as a safeguard of their rights. And in suits for the said amount,
only one real, and no more, may be collected between judge and notary.

Fourth. _Item_: That if the judge shall attest the testimonies in any
civil or criminal suit by flourishes and signatures that he may make,
he cannot collect any fees; since there are none due him except for
the acts that he shall draw up and sign.

Fifth. In order that the said instructions be exactly observed and
fulfilled, they declared that they order, and they did so order, the
alcaldes-in-ordinary and the notaries-public to be informed thereof,
and testimony thereof to be sent to all the alcaldes-mayor, whose
consciences they declared they charged, and they did so charge, with
the fulfilment thereof. Furthermore, in the residencias which shall
be taken from them, he who shall not have fulfilled this decree, or
caused it to be fulfilled, shall be punished and with great rigor. So
they provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act decreeing that the alguazils-mayor and their deputies shall
make the rounds every night._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands
declared that, whereas it has come to their knowledge that neither
do the alguazils-mayor of this court and city, nor their deputies,
make their rounds throughout the city, as they are under obligation to
do--as a result of which, murders, robberies, and other lawless acts
and crimes occur daily, to the great injury of the citizens: therefore,
to remedy this state of affairs and provide this community with the
necessary guard and order, they ordered, and they did so order, the
said alguazils-mayor and their deputies to be notified that they must
make their rounds during the night, as they are under obligation to do
in this city, without fail, under penalty of a fine of ten pesos of
common gold--to be applied, as soon as anyone shall be condemned for
disobeying this decree, in equal shares to the two royal hospitals
of this city--for the Spaniards and for the natives--in addition to
the loss and interest to any parties which may result and occur. By
this act, they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that there shall be in the courtroom, a list of
the charges fixed by the royal tariff, and that each notary shall
keep one in his house._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the king our sovereign, in his royal ordinances, decrees
and orders that a list of the charges fixed by the royal tariff be
placed in the court-room, and that likewise each notary whom it shall
concern shall keep a copy in his house, for its better observation
and execution: therefore, in order that the aforesaid may be exactly
fulfilled, they ordered, and they did so order, a complete copy of
the said royal tariff to be made by this royal Audiencia. It shall
be set forth in a list, and placed in the court-room; and all the
notaries and persons mentioned therein, and those whom it may concern,
shall make a copy, and keep the same in their houses and affixed to a
tablet in some public place, where it may be seen by those transacting
business. This they shall do and fulfil within one week after this
act shall have been made known to them, under penalty of a fine of
six pesos of common gold; and anyone incurring this penalty shall
pay this sum immediately--half of which shall be set aside for the
poor in the prisons, and the other half for the Spanish hospital in
this city--beside incurring and undergoing the penalties contained
in the said royal ordinances. By this act they so provided, ordered,
and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that within four months the royal officials shall
close up the accounts held by the royal treasury._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas it has come to their knowledge that in the royal accountancy
of the king our sovereign there are, at this very day, many accounts
to be balanced and closed of individuals who owe the royal treasury a
large sum of gold pesos, and others to whom money is due--whence has
resulted, and results, the lack therein of the system and management
which should be observed in the said royal exchequer: therefore,
in order that on this account no losses may result, and that the
matter may receive its due consideration, they ordered, and they
did so order, that the official judges of the royal treasury of
the king our sovereign, in these islands, within the four months
first following the day on which they shall have been notified of
this act, shall balance and close each and every account that the
royal treasury holds with any individuals of these islands. They
are warned that whoever shall not so fulfil and execute his orders,
after the expiration of said time, will be charged with everything,
and ordered to pay all accounts not balanced and liquidated. By this
act they so declared, ordered and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that all the officials of the royal Audiencia shall
take copies of the royal ordinances._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of January,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas, in one of the royal ordinances, it is ordered that all the
officials of this royal Audiencia, and other persons whom they concern,
shall keep in their possession a copy of the said ordinances; therefore
they ordered, and they did so order, that within thirty days after the
publication of this act, each of the said officials shall take a copy
of the said royal ordinances and keep it in his possession; and each
one, so far as he is concerned, shall observe and execute them, as his
Majesty orders therein, under the penalties therein contained--under
the penalty that if, after the expiration of said time, the said copy
has not been made, they shall be immediately convicted and fined in
the sum of six pesos of common gold, the latter being applied to the
court-rooms of this royal Audiencia. By this act they so declared,
ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that no alcalde-in-ordinary, notary, commissioner,
attorney, or any other official of this royal Audiencia, or of the
ordinary court, shall go outside this city without license._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-first day of the month of
January, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and
auditors of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared
that, whereas the alcaldes-in-ordinary of this city, notaries,
commissioners, attorneys, and other officials, both of this royal
Audiencia and of the ordinary court, whenever they see fit, leave
the city without license--whence results much harm to the litigants,
on account of the delay and unsatisfactory conduct of their business,
beside many other inconveniences resulting therefrom: therefore, to
remedy this evil, they decreed and ordered that, now and henceforth,
no alcalde-in-ordinary, commissioner, attorney, notary-public,
or other official of this royal Audiencia or of the ordinary court,
shall go anywhere outside of this city, without the express permission
of this royal Audiencia, under a penalty of a fine of six pesos of
common gold, in which sum anyone adjudged guilty of the contrary shall
be immediately fined--one-half for the poor in the prison, and the
other half for the poor in the Spanish hospital--beside the loss and
interest which may result to the parties concerned on account of the
delay in justice. By this act they so proclaimed, ordered and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_Ordinances and laws for the Sangleys._

We, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria
of these Philipinas Islands. Whereas it has been learned by experience
in this city that the Sangleys residing in the islands and their
neighborhood have had and maintain among them a custom of practicing,
and they do practice an abominable sin against nature, not only with
the Chinese, but with the Moro and Indian boys of these islands,
by which God, our Lord, is greatly disserved; and, whereas, the said
Chinese have had and have the habit and custom of bringing from China,
or making in this city, money of base metal, and they pare and clip the
royal money, to the great fraud and injury of the royal exchequer; and
although they have seen that some are punished for this, they have not
taken warning; and whereas, the said Sangleys, who are infidels, ally
themselves with the Christian Indian women, and have lawless carnal
intercourse with them; and whereas, besides the aforesaid crimes, the
said Sangleys are wont to buy from slaves and Indians golden jewels,
trinkets, clothes, and other articles which are stolen: therefore,
to supply a remedy for all that, and in order that such crimes and
disorders shall cease, now and henceforth, we command the following
orders to be observed in everything.

_Laws._--First, we ordain and command that none of the said Chinese
Sangleys, or any other persons whatsoever, shall commit or practice
the said abominable sin against nature, or try to commit it. Whoever
shall do so shall incur the penalty of being burned alive by fire,
beside having all his goods confiscated to the treasury of his Majesty.

_Item_: We ordain and command that none of the said Sangleys shall
dare to make or coin any sort of silver or gold money, or of any other
metal, nor shall they clip or scrape money already made, or make use
of it, under the penalties contained in the above ordinance.

_Item_: We ordain and command that none of the aforesaid shall cohabit
or have carnal intercourse with any [Spanish?] woman or Christian
Indian woman, under the penalty that, in such case, he shall incur
a punishment of two hundred lashes and ten years in the galleys,
as criminals sentenced to row, without pay, and of the confiscation
of one-half his property, to be applied as above stated.

Further, we ordain and command, that none of the said Sangleys,
for any reason or consideration, shall buy from negro slaves or
freemen, Indians or mulattoes, any gold jewels, trinkets, garments,
or any other articles which they sell; but when the said Sangleys go
to them, they shall arrest them and take them before the magistrate,
under penalty that whoever shall disobey this decree shall fall under
and incur the penalties incurred by robbers, and said penalties will
be rigorously executed on their persons and goods.

And in order that the aforesaid shall be observed and executed without
remission of penalty, and so that no one may pretend ignorance, we
order that these ordinances shall be publicly proclaimed in the public
square, in all other public places of this city, in the Sangley Parian,
and in the village of Tondo, in order that everyone may know of them;
and in each one of the said places a copy of them, written in the
Chinese language, shall be posted. No person shall dare to remove the
said placards, under penalty of two hundred lashes. We order all the
alcaldes-mayor of the environs of this city to have them published and
made known to the natives. We request and charge all the religious to
give instructions to the said Indians, and cause them to understand
these laws and ordinances, and the penalties attached thereto. Given
in the city of Manila, on the twenty-sixth of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_
The licentiate _Albaro  Cambrano_

By order of the royal Audiencia:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_That the official judges shall not grant collections to any collectors
who have not rendered an account and payment of collections that have
been in their charge._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-seventh of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas it has come
to their knowledge that the official judges of the royal exchequer
of the king our sovereign, in these said islands, grant commissions
to certain collectors to make collections from the encomiendas that
pertain to his Majesty's royal crown, who, by virtue thereof, make the
collections; and that it often happens that, without their rendering
any account and payment of them, the said officials again grant them
commissions to make the collections, to the great harm and prejudice
of the royal exchequer, from which many difficulties may result:
therefore, in order to correct the aforesaid evil, they ordered,
and they did so order, that the official judges, now and henceforth,
shall under no consideration grant commissions to any collectors to
make any collections for the royal exchequer and crown, without their
having rendered account and payment of former collections entrusted
to them--under penalty of paying out of their own pockets what such
collectors shall appear to owe the royal estate, as soon as such is
evident, besides undergoing and incurring a fine of two hundred pesos
of common gold (this fine to be applied to the royal treasury of the
king our sovereign), to which sum, from that moment, they declared that
they condemned, and they did so condemn, any one who should disobey
this decree. By this act it was so provided, ordered, and affirmed.

_Don Francisco Tello_

The other honorable auditors signed the above.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that the clerk of court shall bring to the first
meeting a minute of the fiscal suits._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-eighth of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in the
archives of the office of the present clerk of court, many fiscal suits
are pending, as well as others which have been concluded, in which
his Majesty's royal office is interested; but, not knowing which ones
are concluded, the others are not concluded and finished: therefore,
in order that those that are concluded may be known and settled,
they ordered, and they did so order, me, the undersigned clerk of
court, to bring a copy and minutes of those that are concluded, and
[of the suits now pending,] to the next session which shall be held,
in order that they may examine them and provide what is most advisable
therein. By this act it was so provided, ordered, and decreed.

_Don Francisco Tello_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that a book be made in which to enter the fines
applied to the poor of the prison and other pious works, and to the
courts, and the manner of their distribution._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-eighth of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the aforesaid Audiencia imposes certain fines of small amounts,
some of which are applied to the poor of the prison, and others to the
courts and other pious works: therefore, because it is advisable that
there should be an account and report of these moneys, and of their
source and the manner of their distribution, they ordered, and they
did so order, a book to be made in which to enter the said penalties,
applied as aforesaid, with the day, month, and year, in what cases
they are imposed, and likewise a report of how they are expended and
distributed; and this shall be done with all clearness, so that the
aforesaid may be evident for all time. This act is to be placed at
the beginning of said book. So they provided, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing the collection of all the debts which are in any
way owed to the royal treasury of the king our sovereign._

In the city of Manila, on the thirtieth of January, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president, and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas
the licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salzedo, fiscal of this royal
Audiencia for his Majesty, has made them a report, declaring that the
royal treasury of the king our sovereign, in these islands, cannot
succeed in paying many of its debts, on account of failure to collect
many that have been due it for some time past; and has besought and
supplicated them to order that the royal official judges shall, within
twenty days, exert all possible diligence to collect everything that
is due the said royal treasury for any reason whatever: therefore,
in order to provide a remedy for the aforesaid difficulty, they
ordered, and they did so order, that the said official judges should
be notified that, within the two months next following the date on
which this act shall be made known to them, they shall collect all the
debts that are in any manner owed to the royal treasury, from all and
any persons whatsoever, and from their goods, exerting therein all
necessary diligence. They are to proceed with the necessary rigor
to do this effectively, being warned that if they do not collect
the said debts, to be liquidated within the said period, all that
shall remain uncollected they will be obliged to pay out of their
own property. For the debts which shall not have been liquidated,
they shall observe and execute the act of this royal Audiencia, which
has been made known to them, under the penalty thereof. By this act
they so provided, ordered, and decreed.

[No signature.]




_An act decreeing that it shall be proclaimed in this city, in the
public places thereof, that within three days all natives residing
therein, not servants or otherwise employed, shall leave this city._

In the city of Manila, on the eleventh of February, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas the
licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salzedo, his Majesty's fiscal in
this royal Audiencia, protector of the natives of these said islands,
has made a report to the effect that there are many natives who are
vagabonds in this city, as a result of which they fall into various
vices dangerous to this community; and that rice and other provisions
have become high-priced and scarce; and as a remedy, he has requested
and petitioned the aforesaid president and auditors to provide in
this regard what is most advisable: therefore, they declared that they
ordered, and they did so order, that, within three days from the date
of this act, it shall be proclaimed to all and whatever natives are and
reside in this city, who are not employed as servants to the Spaniards,
or in some known occupation, that they must leave the city and return
to their own villages, to remain and live therein. Nor shall any other,
now and henceforth, remain in this city, under penalty, to anyone who
shall disobey this decree--for the first time, of one hundred lashes;
and for the second offense, one year of service at the oar in his
Majesty's galleys, without pay--on whom they declared that, as soon as
they condemned them (and they did so condemn them), the said penalty
shall be executed without leniency. In order that it may come to the
notice of all the said natives, and that no one may pretend ignorance,
this act shall be proclaimed in the Tagal language, in this city, in
the public places thereof, and in the hamlet of Tondo, and testimony
shall be taken thereof. Thus they declared, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act concerning the order which the alcaldes-in-ordinary and the
alguazil-mayor of this court must observe in their seats._

In the city of Manila, on the fifth of March, one thousand five hundred
and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia of
the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas some dissensions and
difficulties have occurred between the alcaldes-in-ordinary of this
city and the alguazil-mayor of the court of this royal Audiencia, in
the churches and public places where they have met, in regard to the
seats and places which each shall occupy, and their precedence--so
that it has resulted in their coming to blows, to the great scandal
and indecorum of their offices, and particularly in contempt of this
said royal Audiencia: therefore it is necessary in this matter to
provide some regulation to be kept and observed in like cases by the
aforesaid officials, so that the said disturbances shall cease. In
order that the said alcaldes-in-ordinary of this city shall keep
their known seats and places, and that they may be separate from
the said alguazil-mayor and from the ministers of this said royal
Audiencia, they declared that they ought to order, and they did so
order, that, when the alguazil-mayor of this court shall be present
in any of the churches of this city, without the president, auditors,
and fiscal, or any others whom he might join, he shall not take any
seat or bench belonging to the alcaldes-in-ordinary or regidors (nor
shall any other individuals occupy them, or sit in them, or intrude
themselves among them in any part or place that shall be given them),
but shall place and keep his chair and seat in some distinct and
fitting place, as does the president, the Audiencia, or any of the
members thereof. Likewise, in the processions and parades through the
streets, funerals, betrothals, passage of retinues, and other like
occasions on which the towns-people gather, the said alguazil-mayor of
the court, finding himself alone, without any of the aforesaid persons
whom he might accompany, shall refrain from going in company with them
[the alcaldes] in any manner--whether invited, or of his own accord;
whether the city's alcaldes go as a municipal body, or as individuals
to such functions; or whether they are not present at them. Meantime
the question is being considered and consulted as to what is to be
done and observed in all the above matters, and what it is advisable
to do in the future, and whether this royal Audiencia should make any
further provision. All the above shall be observed and fulfilled by
the said alguazil-mayor of the court, and the alcaldes-in-ordinary
of this city, without their having any wrangling or differences, or
any scandal--being warned that, if they do so, proceedings will be
instituted against the guilty persons who violate the order; and they
shall be punished to the full extent of the law. By this act they so
voted, ordered, and decreed.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_


Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the taxing officer of this royal Audiencia shall
be notified to fix the costs in the suits, either personally, or by
some other intelligent person whom he shall name for this purpose._

In the city of Manila, on the sixteenth of March, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas it has
come to their notice that the taxing officer of this royal Audiencia
does not fix the costs in the suits that are brought there: therefore,
because it is advisable that the above officer fulfil the obligation
of his office, as his Majesty ordains and commands, and that the
inconveniences which arise from this be avoided, they ordered, and
they did so order, that the said taxing officer should be notified
that, now and henceforth, in whatever processes shall be brought for
consideration in this royal Audiencia, whether definitive or under
any plea whatever, the costs shall be fixed by him (thus complying
with the tenor of the royal ordinance treating of this matter),
either personally, or by some other intelligent person whom he shall
designate for the said purpose, and shall appoint in his place, who
shall be a person fit for the said service. They ordered the clerk
of court of this royal Audiencia to be present at those suits which
shall be brought for consideration in the manner above mentioned,
before the said taxing officer, in order that he may fix the costs
therein; and, regarding the aforesaid, they charged one another's
consciences. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that Doctor Antonio de Morga shall take the
residencia, for the months of January and February, of the deputy
regidors, within the limit of ten days._

In the city of Manila, on the sixteenth of March, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas,
for the past months of January and February of the present year,
up to the present time, no residencia for the use and exercise of
their offices has been taken of the deputy regidors of this city,
it is fitting and necessary that it be taken immediately: therefore
they appointed, and they did so appoint, Doctor Antonio de Morga,
auditor of this royal Audiencia, for a term of ten days, to take the
said residencia for the said months of the said appointed regidors,
who have filled their said offices, proceeding therein as the king
our sovereign decrees and commands in his royal ordinance. For this
they granted him the authority and commission as fully as is required
by law. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_.




_An act decreeing that Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor of this
royal Audiencia, shall audit the accounts of the city for the past
year, 1598._

In the city of Manila, on the sixteenth day of the month of March,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the auditing of the accounts of this city for the past year,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, was committed to the
licentiate Albaro Cambrano, late auditor of this royal Audiencia
(whom may God keep in His holy glory!), and because by his end and
death the auditing, continuation, and balancing of the accounts,
as his Majesty orders and commands in his royal ordinance, have
been neglected: therefore, they appointed, and they did so appoint,
in place of the said licentiate Alvaro Cambrano, Doctor Antonio de
Morga, auditor of this royal Audiencia, to audit the said accounts,
and to continue and finish them according to the order given to the
said licentiate Albaro Cambrano--for which, they granted, and they
did so grant, him authority and commission as fully as is required
by law. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that, on account of the end and death of the
licentiate Albaro Cambrano (whom may God keep!), the licentiate
Tellez Almacan is to continue, close, and complete the accounts of
the royal exchequer._

In the city of Manila, on the sixteenth of March, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the licentiate Albaro Cambrano, late auditor of this royal
Audiencia (whom may God have in His holy glory!), to whom was assigned
the auditing of the accounts of his Majesty's royal exchequer--which
are at present being audited by the royal judicial officials--is now
dead and passed from this present life: therefore, in order that on
this account the auditing may not be delayed and fail of prosecution,
as is fitting, and as the king our sovereign commands in his royal
ordinance, in place of the licentiate Albaro Cambrano they appointed,
and they did so appoint, the licentiate Tellez de Almacan, auditor
of this royal Audiencia, to continue, close, and finish the said
auditing, according to the commission given to the said licentiate
Albaro Cambrano, for which they gave him commission in legal form. By
this act, they so voted, ordered, and decreed.


Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the city shall give information regarding its
place of seating in the cathedral of this city._

In the city of Manila, on the sixteenth of March, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
in order to assign to the cabildo, magistracy, and administration of
this city the place of seating that it must keep in the cathedral:
in order to ascertain the custom hitherto followed in the aforesaid
matter, and in order to provide what is necessary concerning it,
they ordered, and they did so order, the said cabildo, magistracy,
and administration of this city to give an account of the part and
place in which it has been regularly seated in the cathedral of this
city--both in the time when the royal Audiencia formerly resided in
these islands, and after his Majesty ordered it to be suppressed--in
order that, upon examination, the necessary provisions may be made. By
this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.


Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act concerning the royal magazines._

In the city of Manila, on the eighteenth of March, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands, having
examined the opinion of the official judges of the royal exchequer
of these islands, on the question of building magazines in which
to store the merchandise coming from China to this city, and having
investigated other matters connected with the aforesaid, and further
matter which is contained in the decree of the king our sovereign,
ordering that this said Audiencia attend to the matter: they declared
(in conformity with the opinion of Joan de Bustamante, accountant of
the royal exchequer) that at present, and until experience further
shows what it is most advisable to enact in this matter, the said
Chinese merchandise shall be registered and appraised on the same
vessels on which it was brought, as has been done hitherto. In order
that there may be good accounts and reports, and less opportunity for
fraud in the royal customs, they ordered that the official judges of
his Majesty in these islands, as soon as each ship enters this harbor
and anchors therein, shall go out to inspect it, registering and
appraising all the merchandise and other things in the cargo. They
shall exert diligence in the matter and make their inspection with
the punctuality advisable, so that the said merchandise, or any part
of it, may not be discharged or concealed. In order that this may
be enforced more effectually, the necessary guards shall be placed
on the said ships and in the bay, who are to be trustworthy persons,
to the satisfaction of the said president and auditors of this royal
Audiencia, by whom they shall be approved and appointed, The said
official judges shall have, as a reward for their occupation and
labors, one third part of the confiscations which are levied upon any
merchandise found and seized because it had been hidden on the said
ships, or withdrawn from them without registration or appraisal. They
shall also be charged that they shall not allow or consent that,
while the said merchandise is on the said ships, either the royal
officials or their assistants, or any other person--Spanish, Sangley,
or native--shall take, buy, or transport the said merchandise in large
or small quantities, for cash or on credit; but that the merchants
thereof, who brought the merchandise from China on the said ship,
after making registry and appraisal, may take them ashore freely and
where they will, without any obstacle or hindrance from anyone--with
the warning that, if any one of them do not so observe and fulfil
this act, he shall be proceeded against with the full rigor of the
law. They ordered that a commission, in due form, be given to the said
guards, both in order that they may wield the authority of justice,
and that there be no other guards but those who are so nominated by
this royal Audiencia; those hitherto acting as guards shall exercise
the said duty no longer, under the penalties incurred by those who
so act without power or commission in the matter. This act shall be
made known to his Majesty's officials, and the chief clerk of mines,
and the regidors, for those who are at present guards; and it shall
be added to the other acts and investigations made by virtue of the
said royal decree of his Majesty. By this act, they so voted, ordered,
and decreed.


Before me:     _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that tribute be collected for the king, our
sovereign, from all the Indians found settled and dwelling in this
city and within its bounds, who belong to his Majesty's encomiendas._

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-second of March, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands examined the
petition of the licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salzedo, fiscal for
his Majesty in this royal Audiencia, that the collectors of the royal
tributes of the king our sovereign, in this city and its environs,
may collect tribute from all the Indians who are found therein,
notwithstanding any obstacle or excuses whatever which may be offered
by the said Indians, or by any encomenderos. Considering that for
many years the Indians have dwelt and resided in this city, and that
their tribute belongs and pertains to his Majesty, they declared
that they ordered, and they did so order, that the collectors of
the royal tribute shall collect their tributes from all the Indians
found settled and dwelling in this city and within its bounds, who
belong to the encomiendas of his Majesty. The said Indians shall
not pay other encomenderos, nor shall such encomenderos collect any
tribute from them, under penalty of returning to the said Indians what
they shall have collected from them. In order that the provisions
of this act be observed, enforced, and executed, they ordered it
to be publicly proclaimed in this city and its limits, in both the
Tagal and the Castilian languages. They committed the execution and
enforcement of it to the official judges of the king our sovereign
in these islands. The aforesaid president and auditors also ordered
that, if any persons claim to have any right contrary to the matter
herein contained, they are to appear before this royal Audiencia,
to petition before it for whatever is fitting in their case. By this
act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.


Before me:    _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the alguazils, as soon as they arrest
delinquents, shall give notice thereof to one of the auditors and to
the commissioners, who shall formulate their cases and bring them to
the office of the clerk of court._

In the city of Manila, on the third of April, one thousand five hundred
and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia
of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas it is continually
happening that the alguazils of this court arrest delinquents whose
cases the notaries and commissioners undertake, and, without giving
notice to the aforesaid president and auditors, or taking such cases
to the office of the present secretary, they allow them to remain in
their possession, and the said prisoners to remain in jail, without any
note or account of their imprisonment, whence result vexations to the
said prisoners, and the said alguazils and commissioners do not fulfil
the obligation which rests upon them: therefore, to find a remedy
for this and other annoyances which may result from it, they ordered,
and they did so order, that now and henceforth, as soon as the said
alguazils shall arrest any delinquent, they shall give notice thereof
to one of the above-mentioned persons, in order that he may take the
fitting action in regard to the said imprisonment. Any commissioner
who shall undertake the cause of said prisoner or prisoners shall
immediately take it to the office of the present clerk of court,
so that in this manner there may be the necessary system. Whatever
one or the other may do shall be despatched with all promptness and
punctuality, and no favor--under penalty of a fine of six pesos for
anyone who shall disobey this decree, to be given the poor in the
prison. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.


_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_


Before me:


_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_




_An act decreeing that the royal officials shall give Doctor Antonio
de Morga three hundred pesos from treasury fines, for ornaments and
other things necessary for the chapel._

In the city of Manila, on the tenth of May, one thousand five hundred
and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia
and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands, being in session, declared
that, whereas the chapel of this royal Audiencia is in great want and
need of many things that are very necessary and indispensable, for
its vestments, decoration, and furniture; and whereas, through lack
of money, the said needs have not as yet been supplied: therefore,
to make provision for them, they ordered, and they did so order, that
the official judges of the royal exchequer of the king our sovereign,
in these islands, shall, from any treasury fines in their charge,
immediately give and deliver to Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor
of this royal Audiencia, three hundred pesos of common gold, which
he shall expend in providing the said chapel with the things most
necessary for it, systematically and carefully. They ordered that he
be given a warrant for the said purpose, in due form. By this act,
they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:


_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_An act decreeing that secretaries of this court and government may
be attended by slaves with swords._

In the city of Manila, on the thirteenth of May, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas,
in conformity with the decrees and ordinances given by his Majesty
for his royal Chancilleria of Nueva Espana, residing in the City of
Mexico, and for other audiencias throughout the Yndias, he orders
that secretaries of the court and the government shall have, as a
retinue and guard, slaves with swords, conformably to the dignity
and gravity of their office: therefore, in order that the same be
done in this court, in regard to the secretaries of this court and
government, and in order to preserve the preeminence and exemptions
which they may and should enjoy here, they ordered, and they did so
order, that, now and henceforth, the said secretaries of this court
and government may freely bring into this court, as their retinue,
the said slaves with swords, according to the usual custom in the said
royal Chancilleria of the City of Mexico, and other chancillerias of
the Yndias, without the interposition--by any person, of whatever
estate, quality, or rank--of any hindrance or impediment whatever,
under the penalties provided by law. Thus they voted, and ordered it
to be recorded as an act, and signed it in my presence.


_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that the Sangleys shall not be allowed to have
godchildren, on account of the injury which may result therefrom._

In the city of Manila, on the seventeenth of May, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the
royal Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands, having examined the
information which was referred to this royal Audiencia by Estevan
de Marquina, alcalde-mayor of the village of Tondo and its presidio,
regarding the custom which the Christian Sangleys of that jurisdiction
have among themselves, of receiving and having a great number of
godchildren, both Christian and infidel, in order to have them
ready for any emergency that may arise, and to employ them as false
witnesses--to which they lend themselves with great facility, and at
little cost--and for other evil purposes and intents, exchanging with
them favors and assistance in their affairs; and whereas, on account
of these and other causes which have come to light, and as is quite
evident from the said information, that district is ruined and divided
into factions, and that it would be advisable, for its reform, to
suppress this custom of having godchildren, and that they should not
continue it, under severe penalties: therefore, they declared that
they ordered, and they did so order, that, now and henceforth, the
Sangleys of these islands shall in no manner have or avail themselves
of the said godchildren; nor use their names, nor those of any others,
in order to have them for their partisans or accomplices in any kind of
transaction which might occur, as they have been wont to do hitherto;
nor shall they regard them as such, or receive others in their place;
and they shall give up immediately all those that they had. The others
who are infidels shall do the same, so that there shall remain no
remembrance of the said intercourse--under penalty that any Sangley,
of any rank whatever, who shall be known to have continued it and to
have the said godchildren or godparents, shall be condemned to row
in the galleys for four years, in a place prescribed, without pay,
as soon as they are adjudged guilty thereof. The said alcalde-mayor
of Tondo and its presidio, and all other magistrates whatever, are
ordered to take especial care in the fulfilment and execution of this
act. They shall cause it to be published, in order that all persons
may know of it, and none plead ignorance--for which purpose an order
shall be given in due form, and this act inserted therein. Thus they
voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:


_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that the Christian Sangleys, and all those who
may become Christians in the future, shall practice and exercise the
occupations that they had before they became Christians._

In the city of Manila, on the seventeenth of May, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia, Court, and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands, having
examined this information which was remitted to this royal Audiencia
by Estevan de Marquina, alcalde-mayor of the village of Tondo and its
presidio, concerning the advisability and importance that the Christian
Sangleys living in the said village of Tondo, and in the other villages
of its jurisdiction, and those who become Christians in the future,
shall not abandon the occupations which they had before they became
Christians, as they have been accustomed to do, but shall continue
to exercise and practice them in the same manner as before--for,
by thus abandoning their occupations, that people are unoccupied
and slothful, and spend their time in games and vicious amusements,
whence result the harm and trouble which may be considered: they
declared that, in order to remedy that state of affairs, they ought
to order, and they did so order, that, now and henceforth, the said
Sangleys shall practice and exercise the occupations which they had
practiced and exercised before they became Christians, and shall,
under no consideration, abandon them--this being understood to apply
to those becoming Christians in the future, and to those who have
been Christians for six years previous to the present--under penalty
that whoever disobeys this decree shall be sentenced to row in the
galleys for four years, in a place prescribed, without pay, to which
they declared that they delivered them, and they did so deliver them,
immediately as condemned persons. They declared that they ordered,
and they did so order, the alcalde-mayor of Tondo and of the Parian,
and other magistrates of this city and of these islands, to take great
care in the execution and fulfilment of the aforesaid, under penalty
of being punished. Thus they voted, ordered, and decreed. They ordered
that the said magistrates, each in his own jurisdiction, should make
the necessary inquiries, in order to ascertain who are the Sangleys
that come under the provisions of this act, and the occupations which
they follow.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_



_An act decreeing that no alcaldes-mayor or other magistrates shall
leave their jurisdictions without undergoing residencia; and that
those who shall not have done so, or given a report of the convictions
and fines and tenths of gold which shall have been in their charge,
shall not be appointed._

In the city of Manila, on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that they have been
informed that it is customary to appoint as alcaldes-mayor, and
to other offices of justice, some persons who have not undergone
residencia for offices that they have held before, or who have not
rendered account of the treasury fines and expenses of justice and
war which have been in their charge; also that other persons come to
this city after their terms of office have expired, without waiting
to furnish the said residencias, or being present at them, as is
required--whence it results that his Majesty's royal exchequer is
defrauded, since it does not have the income of the said fines and
tenths of gold. On the other hand, the said residencias not being
taken, as is required, nor the public claims before them paid to
their owners, and many other annoyances resulting, of some importance:
therefore, since it is advisable to remedy the aforesaid condition,
they ordered, and they did so order, now and henceforth, the decree
according to the laws of these realms, providing that no persons who
have held other offices be appointed to offices of the justiciary,
until they have furnished residencia of those that they previously
held, which shall have been examined and passed upon; and that such
persons shall have deposited, first and foremost, in his Majesty's
royal treasury, all the fines and condemnations which shall have
been in their charge, with tenths of gold and other things of which
they must give account, together with the payment of these and of
any other sums which they shall have been sentenced to pay in their
residencias. In order that they may furnish these, they must be present
in person, during the time prescribed by law, without leaving their
jurisdictions--being warned that if any person absent himself from
the jurisdiction where he holds office, without first furnishing
residencia, it will not be received or heard by the prosecutor, and
he will be compelled to return to furnish it in his own person. In
order that the provisions of this act may be strictly enforced,
they ordered that his Majesty's fiscal register the letters-patent
which shall have been given to the said offices of justice; so that
whatever is ordained by the said royal laws, and provided by this
act, he may claim when the officials shall be appointed, and the
necessary residencias be taken. Likewise there is to be delivered
to the government secretary of these islands a copy of this act, so
that in the patents of those who shall be appointed the fulfilment
of what is herein contained shall be formally inserted as a clause,
and his Majesty's said fiscal shall register the said patents. They
cannot continue to exercise their offices without first making the said
investigation, exactly observing the provisions of this said act; and
the accountant of the royal exchequer shall likewise register it; so
that whoever shall not have given an account of the said fines, tenths
of gold, and other matters which shall have been in his charge, shall
not take his office. By this act, they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

In the city of Manila, on the thirteenth of July, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, I, Pedro Hurtado Desquibel, clerk of court
for the royal Audiencia, Chancilleria, and Court of these Philipinas
Islands, certify and attest that, from the eighth of June, of the past
year, one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, to the present day,
the date of this testimony, the president and auditors of this said
royal Audiencia, have from time to time agreed upon and enacted the
acts [4] which are herein copied, for good government, both officially
and at the petition of his Majesty's fiscal, as in them and each one
of them is declared. The copies are true and exact, and, in order
that it may be evident that it is by order of the aforesaid, I gave
the present copy--the witnesses to its transcription, correction, and
revision being Pedro Munoz de Herrera, Joan de Harana, and Alonso de
Saavedra, citizens of this city. In witness of which, I have affixed
my seal in witness of the truth.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

[_Endorsed_: "Filipinas, 1599." "Acts for the good government of
those islands."]




The Hospital for Indians at Manila


May Jesus, our salvation, dwell in the soul of your royal
Majesty. Although I am but wretched dust and ashes, I make bold to
write this letter since I am, in company with two other religious of
the Order of our seraphic father St. Francis, appointed to minister
in this royal hospital of your royal Majesty (which is called the
hospital of Sancta Ana) for the natives; in it all the natives of all
these islands are cared for, and it is situated in this city of Manila.

Favors were granted to this hospital by our most Catholic king and
sovereign, never sufficiently to be praised, your royal Majesty's
father, Don Phelipe (whom may God keep in His heaven!); he allowed it
one thousand five hundred fanegas of rice, one thousand five hundred
fowls, two hundred pieces of cloth from Ylocos, five hundred ducados
in money, and four toneladas of freight--this last being worth, one
year with another, four hundred pesos. With this income (and we have
no other), usually as many as two hundred poor persons are supported
and cared for in this hospital; besides these, there are three or
four religious who care for the sick and administer the sacraments,
and a considerable number of other people who are in the service of
the hospital. So small is the income, sacred Majesty, and so many are
the poor who come for help, that often we suffer great hardships; for
it is the glory of this hospital not only to belong to your Majesty,
but also not to turn away any one who comes to it to be treated.

For this reason we religious who are in this hospital, as servants of
the poor who are cared for in it, entreat your royal Majesty with the
utmost humility that you will grant us aid so that we can treat these
poor people with somewhat more convenience; and we especially entreat
your royal Majesty that you will favor us by commanding that the said
four toneladas of freight be continued to us, as we are accustomed
to ship the goods free of customs duties or any other dues, whether
in this city of Manila or in Nueva Espana, or in any other parts of
your Majesty's realms where your ships enter.

In this your royal Majesty will render a great service to God our
Lord; and may He preserve for us your royal Majesty, with increase
of His holy grace, and life and prosperity, as your loyal servants
desire. At Manila, July 3, 1599. Your royal Majesty's humble servant,

_Domingo de Santiago_.

[_Endorsed_: "Manila; to his Majesty; Domingo de Santiago, for the
hospital of Santa Ana at Manilla. Referred by his Majesty, who directs
that the archbishop and governor shall send information regarding
the treatment of the sick in this hospital, and whether its income
is sufficient for its needs. They shall also ascertain how its funds
are disbursed, and if the accounts are audited; and if anything is
lacking that is absolutely necessary, let them advise what and how
much should be provided, in their opinion."]


Catholic and Royal Majesty:

Antonio Valerio, steward of the royal hospital which the discalced
religious of our seraphic father St. Francis founded in the city of
Manila, with royal expenditures and some alms, for the cure and healing
of all these natives of all these Philipinas Islands which belong
to your royal Majesty. I declare that although in this hospital we,
three religious and myself, serve for the love of God our Lord--by our
services saving the salaries of physician, surgeon, apothecary, and
other officers; and I performing the duties of steward, and the said
religious treating, as they do, all the sick, besides administering the
sacraments--the work of this hospital is continually increasing to such
an extent, by its aiding so many sick persons, and from so many places,
that although the gifts which your royal Majesty has made to this your
hospital are great, they are not sufficient to meet the necessary
expenses to which the said hospital is liable. For the usual number
of those who are cared for in it ranges from one hundred and sixty
to two hundred poor persons; besides, most of the poor people of this
city are provided from this hospital with ointments and medicines for
their ailments. On account of these expenses the hospital is unable
to accomplish many works which should be done--for instance, a house
for the workmen and servants, the improvement of the vegetable-garden,
and other things necessary for the treatment of the sick.

For these reasons I entreat and supplicate your royal Majesty, with the
utmost humility, on my own part and on that of the said poor who are
treated in the hospital, that you will do us the favor of adding some
further charity to the grants which you have made to this hospital, for
the supply of the many wants which arise every day and are increasing.

Still further, I entreat and supplicate your royal Majesty that the
favor which the Catholic and royal Majesty, Don Phelipe our lord,
the father of your royal Majesty (whom may God our Lord keep in His
heaven!), granted to us, by commanding that we be allowed to send
four toneladas of freight in his royal ships, be also continued to
us free from customs duties and any other dues which pertain to your
royal Majesty, whether in this city of Manila or in Nueva Espana,
or in any other part of your realms.

Moreover, since the minister of this hospital is always a father who
is a priest, who will administer the sacraments not only to the sick
who come to the said hospital for treatment, but to all the people
who serve therein or who reside on the stock-farm which belongs to
the hospital, as well as to many other people in all this city and
in the islands who usually come to this hospital for confession;
and besides this, your Majesty pays from his royal treasury the
archbishop, qura, and canons of the cathedral of Manila for their
labors in ministering to the Indians, in all matters for which the
tithes are not sufficient--I entreat your royal Majesty to command
your royal officials in this city of Manila that they recompense
the said archbishop, cura, and canons in such manner that they shall
not enter the stock-farm of the said hospital to collect tithes and
firstfruits, since hitherto they have never entered there. And in
all things I entreat the royal Majesty of your royal Majesty, etc.





Letters from the Royal Fiscal to the King



Sire:

After having given an account to your Majesty, in so far as concerns my
office of fiscal of this royal Audiencia of these Philipinas Islands,
of the affairs of justice, by another letter which accompanies this,
it seemed best to me to give one concerning those things which touch
the royal exchequer, in the following manner.

1. The royal exchequer of your Majesty in these islands is not
sufficient by a large sum to supply the salaries and expenses which are
here paid out and incurred. For before the royal Audiencia came here,
the archbishop and bishops drew from Mexico fifteen, twenty, and some
years thirty thousand pesos apiece; but, even with all this, all those
who had to draw money from the royal treasury were complaining and
irregularly paid. Many works were neglected, and necessary expenses
were abandoned. With the new stipends and salaries of an archbishop,
three bishops, four auditors, and a fiscal, which amount to twenty-four
thousand pesos, we must cut down much more. All that sum, which is
the salary of powerful people, must be maintained; and therefore we
must suffer wretched service, and abandon, as has been done, works
and affairs in which there should be no lack. For some remedy and
alleviation of this difficulty, I will point out some expedients which,
in my opinion--as one who understands the present state of affairs, and
has some knowledge of the country--your Majesty, if you are so pleased,
can use, employing such of them as appear to be most expedient.

2. I find no basis on which people could rest their opinion that
there should be in these islands the said archbishop and bishops;
for the population of them all does not exceed six hundred Spanish
citizens, and the one bishop who was in this city was sufficient. One
is sufficient for all matters which might arise of which the prelates
take cognizance, or which are necessary, for they are very few and
unimportant; and those who appeal to the metropolitan go to Mexico
and return in one year. The three provinces in which were lately
erected the three bishoprics are so near this city that one can come
from them in ten or twelve days; and in the one which has the largest
settlement of Spaniards there are not more than a hundred citizens,
or even so many--namely, in Zubu. The other two, which are Camarines
and Cagayan, do not amount, each one, to seventy Spaniards. In
each one there is a curate, who administers the sacraments to
the Spaniards; and convents of friars, who administer them to the
Indians who live in the said villages and their neighborhood. If the
prelate who is chosen in Manila is a religious of proved integrity,
and industrious, he can very well attend to these matters easily,
and without overwork. Whatever has been said or may be said to your
Majesty to the contrary, either arises from ignorance of the matter
or from private designs, and does not aim at expediency.

[_In the margin_: "There is nothing to answer."]

3. By a decree of your Majesty which came in the past year,
ninety-eight, the governor of these islands was commanded to
discontinue a number of false musters which were being paid, and
additions to the expenses of the royal treasury. Without mentioning
the decree, he pronounced an edict in which he commanded the officials
of the royal exchequer of your Majesty to erase them from the royal
books, and pay them no more. Afterward, with different pretexts and by
various means other salaries and additional expenses were incurred,
which it had never been customary to pay--as, for instance, paying
salaries to the captains, alferez, and other officers of war for the
citizens in the villages. The governor appointed, as alferez of the
captain of the town of Arevalo, Don Juan Fajardo; and designated as
his salary that of the post of musketeer, for which he served in the
said post of alferez. Having appealed it before the Audiencia, after
examination and review there, he was commanded to pay the said salary
for the time while he had served in the post of alferez. Captain
Francisco Rrodriguez, as he was of the troops from Zubu, when he
was alcalde-mayor there was ordered by the said governor to give
a hundred pesos of additional cost. He appealed from this, and his
case is pending in the Audiencia. Although these things appear of
little importance, so far as events hitherto are concerned, they
may be very important for the future; for, as they are said to be
confirmed by the Audiencia the governors will take it as a precedent,
in order to be able to make the same move with the other captains
and alferezes. The expenses of the royal treasury will thus suffer
a large increase, and in matters which never have been done nor are
now necessary. It would be well, if your Majesty were so pleased,
to command that all the wages, salary, and additional expenses which
have been given in the said manner be returned to the royal treasury
by the person who ordered them, and that henceforward none should
by any means be granted; and, if it be expedient to give any, your
Majesty should be informed and a royal order for that purpose awaited.

4. In some provinces where there was one alcalde-mayor only, they
have been so multiplied that now there are three, and each one with
a deputy--all with salaries from the royal exchequer. To some of them
the governors give, beside the salary, additional expenses, amounting
to a hundred pesos; because such alcaldes-mayor are captains of the
citizens, in the manner explained in the clause before this. Likewise
some of the said alcaldes-mayor have Spanish alguazils, although not
with salaries, and although there are royal decrees directing the
governor to check this, and not allow offices to increase. It would
be fitting for your Majesty to command, if you so please, that these
alcaldes-mayor be reduced to the following:

In the province of Laguna, one alcalde-mayor with three hundred
pesos of salary, which is the ordinary amount. On the opposite coast
of Mauban, one corregidor; this is the district next to the said
Laguna. He should have two hundred pesos of salary. In the province
of Camarines, another alcalde-mayor, with the same salary of three
hundred pesos. Another alcalde-mayor, who has recently been appointed
in the said province for the island of Catanduanes, should be removed;
and the said alcalde-mayor of Camarines should care for that, as
he used to do. In the province of Cagayan, another alcalde-mayor,
with the same salary. In that of Ylocos, another alcalde-mayor, with
the same salary. In Pangasinan, another alcalde-mayor, with the said
salary. In the province of Panpanga, another alcalde-mayor, with the
proper salary, who should administer the jurisdiction of the district
of Bulacan, which borders upon it; all this was formerly under one
alcalde. The one who was lately added in Bulacan should be removed.

In the village of Tondo and the bay of this city of Manila (all of
which is the suburbs and outskirts of the city), the governors keep
another alcalde-mayor and lieutenant, although the whole of it is
within the five leagues which, by your Majesty's grace, this city
of Manila has as a jurisdiction--whose alcaldes-in-ordinary used to
administer justice in all the districts of the said alcaldia-mayor
of Tondo. Now they have no more than within the walls of the city,
although they are vested with authority and can make arrests
outside. It would be well, if such be your Majesty's pleasure, to
discontinue this alcaldia-mayor of Tondo, and let it be served by
the two alcaldes-in-ordinary from this city of Manila, each one six
months of the year, while the other one is present in this city. In
this way, with the provincial judge, there will be quite sufficient
people to administer justice in the civil cases; and in the criminal
cases there are the auditors and the said alcalde-in-ordinary. In this
way the salary of the alcalde-mayor of Tondo will be saved, which is
now paid from the royal treasury; and this city will consider it as a
singular grace and favor. So likewise will the Indians, for they will
be better treated and less annoyed by this form of government; because
the man who is appointed to the said alcaldia must make his living from
it, and on that account must do things which are illegal--but, as he
is usually a retainer of the governor, the latter shields him in the
matter. This will cease with the alcaldes-in-ordinary, for they perform
their duties without any selfish considerations, being always men of
honor and rich, who do not seek the offices through greed for money.

In the province of Zubu there used to be only one alcalde-mayor;
but about two years ago another was added in the islands of Leyte,
Camar, and Babao, which are close to Zubu. It was done to the great
displeasure of the citizens of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus, which was
the first city founded and settled in these islands; for the said
three islands were under the jurisdiction of the alcalde-mayor
resident in the said city, and with the other one they would be
greatly annoyed and molested, since most of the citizens who reside
in the said city are encomenderos in the said islands of Leyte,
Camar, and Babao. The alcalde-mayor of these islands takes them from
the said city and enters suits against them. He takes them to the
said islands as prisoners; and, as they have their property there,
and must needs go there every year for the collection of tributes
from their encomiendas, they cannot refuse to go; and thus the said
alcalde-mayor molests them as encomenderos, and he of Cubu, on the
other hand, as citizens. As this is so, if your Majesty be pleased,
the said alcalde-mayor of the said three islands might be removed,
and they put under the jurisdiction of the said island of Cubu,
whose alcalde-mayor could very well serve all of them.

On the river of Butuan, which is on the confines of this island of
Zubu and close to the island of Mindanao, is another corregidor, with
a salary of two hundred pesos. In the island of Calamianes is another
corregidor, with the ordinary salary. In the district of Oton is an
alcalde-mayor, with a salary of three hundred pesos. In Panay is a
corregidor, with two hundred pesos salary. All the alcaldes-mayor
and corregidors besides those mentioned should be done away with;
and no alcalde-mayor or corregidor should have a deputy except when
he is absent, and such deputy should not be given a salary.

[_In the margin_: "If there is any reform to be made, have the new
governor act therein, and advise us of his action. _Idem. Idem. Idem_
in this matter."]

5. One of the things in which, I have understood, the royal exchequer
of your Majesty has been the most defrauded and the citizens of these
islands the most aggrieved, is in the freighting and despatching of
vessels which go from here to Nueva Espana with merchandise; for the
governors have, for some years past, assigned to this duty various
special friends and confidants of themselves, and even at times their
own servants. The said persons lade in the ships their own property,
and even that of their relatives and friends--and likewise, it is
said, of any person who will pay them for it. This transaction and
negotiation is of great profit for them, and a great fraud upon the
royal exchequer; for all the merchandise which they lade in this way,
outside of the amount allotted, goes without paying your Majesty the
royal duties, and is not a part of the cloth which is assigned to the
citizens in the general allotment which is made to them. As a remedy
for this, it will be well that in the future, when the allotment
of the cloth is made, there should be present and superintend it,
besides the governor and the other persons who are appointed, an
auditor and royal official in rotation, each year, commencing with
those longest here. As soon as the said allotment shall be finished,
the royal official shall take a copy of it, and the persons to whom
allotment is made of the said cloth shall come with their invoices, to
bale it and pay the royal duty in the presence of the royal officials,
who should give warrants for it. One or two of the officials should be
present at the port of Cavite, which is the landing-place of ships,
two leagues from this city; and there should be also present on the
ship, during its lading, the freighters who are ordinarily appointed,
and an auditor, so that no cloth will be allowed to be laded except it
be that contained in the said allotment. That which is thus authorized
shall be vouched for by warrants from the said royal officials that
the duties are paid. So great has been the irregularity in this
matter that, by having it checked by these strict methods, there
would probably be a great gain to the royal treasury.

[_In the margin_: "Write to the new governor about the information
given in this letter, and the complaints that are made; and have him
remedy this evil, appointing for this persons who are of satisfactory
record, and taking care that all this be done with justice--and,
if it seem best to him, being sometimes present in person at the
inspection."]

6. From the payment of tributes by the Indians in the usual currency
there have resulted and still result many inconveniences, losses,
injuries, and diminutions to the royal exchequer; for formerly they
paid the eight reals of tribute each year in kind, which they gathered
on their lands. A short time ago they were given the alternative of
paying it in coin if they wished; and since then they have ceased
to cultivate the land, make linen fabrics, raise fowls and cattle,
or obtain gold from the mines and rivers, with which articles they
used to pay the said tribute. A great part of those articles usually
remained with them, because they had all the year for trading and
labor, by which the country was supplied with many provisions at a low
cost, and clothing of various kinds of linen, with which they were
dressed. The encomenderos sailed with these things to Nueva Espana;
and it was not necessary to pay the Chinese what was brought thence in
return, and have them carry it off to their country, as they now do,
in exchange for the said cloths which they sell. There was a great
quantity of gold which was also taken to Nueva Espana, and from that
your Majesty was paid the tenths, which amounted each year to six
or eight thousand pesos--not counting another larger quantity which
was paid by the tributaries of the encomiendas which are under the
royal crown. By reason of the said Indians not paying in kind, so
little gold has come to be mined, that in the past year, ninety-eight,
from tributes and tenths even, the amount which was collected on your
Majesty's account was not a thousand pesos. From this there follows
another inconvenience, in that, as the natives of these islands are
inclined to laziness and to the vices attendant upon that, since
they can easily pay the tribute for one year with ten reals in coin,
they seek and pay it, and dress themselves with two or three pieces
of cloth, which cost somewhat more. As they find these for sale by
the Chinese, they themselves do not manufacture them. It would be
expedient, in order that these inconveniences may cease, as well as
others which may be seen to result from this matter, that henceforth
these Indians should be compelled to agricultural labors and the
raising of cattle, according to the conditions of the provinces where
they live, and to taking gold from the mines and rivers. If this were
put in force, a great deal would be gained by it; for there is a large
quantity in the said mines, rivers, and placers. In this way a great
part of the trade with the Chinese would cease, and the returns from
what was carried to and sold in Nueva Espana, from both gold and cloth,
would remain in this country, and would not be taken away to China,
as it now is. The said Indians would be compelled to this, in such
manner that, with the practice and profit which they would get from
it, in a few years they and their descendants would do it of their
own will, without compulsion. The principal thing to be done in order
to start the Indians to do this is, to have them pay the tribute in
the kind which they raise and harvest.

[_In the margin_: "With this report write to the new governor to
call together the Audiencia, the ecclesiastical prelates who are
present in Manila, and the superiors of the religious orders; and
have him communicate with those who could not conveniently go there,
getting their opinion in writing; and have all of them confer as to
what is expedient and ought to be done in this matter--taking into
consideration the fact that the Indians should not be annoyed or
aggrieved; and that their object should be the cultivation of crops
and other things which the land bears; and that for this purpose
the tribute should be paid in kind, and the valuation should be as
equitable as possible. Whatever they may resolve in regard to this
matter, the governor shall cause to be executed, and advise us as to
what he does, seeing to it that the Indians labor and are not idle."]

7. With the reestablishment of the said royal Audiencia, the expenses
of the royal treasury have been increased by more than sixteen
thousand five hundred pesos in the salaries of four auditors and one
fiscal. Wherefore it would be well, were your Majesty so pleased,
to command that the encomiendas or repartimientos of Indians which
may in the future be vacated, up to the amount of ten thousand pesos,
be placed under the royal crown, as an aid to the payment of the said
salaries; and that, until these are so placed, the governors shall not
be able to assign any person an encomienda or repartimiento of Indians.

[_In the margin_: "Have the governor and Audiencia send an information
in this matter, and the archbishop a separate one."]

8. I have understood that the governors have been accustomed to
assign encomiendas in this country in a manner to suit their own
purposes. Thus, if any person possesses an encomienda which ends
with his life, they add a reserve in such wise that they make
the encomiendas hereditary and perpetual for their relatives, so
that they may resign them, and allow the governor to assign them to
whomsoever they will. On the other hand, they have an agreement with
the governor that he shall assign it to the person designated by the
one who resigns it. That this matter may be the better understood,
I shall relate a case in which it happened. A certain captain, Juan
Maldonado Borrocal, one of the conquerors of these islands, holding a
repartimiento as an encomienda, went from here to the court in Spain;
and there married a widow, and returned with her to these islands. He
died, and conformably to the law of succession, the wife succeeded
to the encomienda. The latter had a son by her former husband,
and as, on her death, the said encomiendas would remain vacant, she
resigned them, and the governor assigned them anew to the son, who
was a boy. Neither he nor his father had served in these islands. It
is easy to imagine how this pleased the old soldiers who had shed
their blood on the said encomiendas to conquer them, and some were
eager for that repartimiento. Accordingly it is easy to see how much
remedy there was left, when the governor granted the said encomiendas
contrary to what your Majesty has ordered. To correct this, it would
be fitting that your Majesty order that such resignation should not
be made in any manner; and that in such cases the governor cannot
assign any repartimiento of Indians.

[_In the margin_: "Have the decrees which are despatched for the
settlement of these matters duplicated, also those that direct that
appointments cannot be made by resignation and renunciation of the
said encomiendas; order that these be exactly observed and complied
with; and let it be again ordered that encomiendas which have been
resigned shall not be filled by the governor, but that he shall
advise his Majesty, who may order according to his pleasure in the
matter. If he appoints to them, they shall be null and declared void;
and the fiscal shall advise concerning them."]

9. In the building of churches on the encomiendas of these islands
your royal treasury is subjected to excessive expenses by their being
made, as they are, of wood. Your Majesty pays, for those which stand
on the encomiendas belonging to your royal crown, two-thirds of the
cost--one-third as encomendero, and another as king and lord. In those
possessed by private citizens you pay one-third as king. As woods in
this country decay very easily, they rot within five or six years,
and it is necessary to build the said churches over again. Besides, it
often happens that when they are finished they are soon burned down. It
would be well for the said churches henceforth to be built of stone
or brick; for, with little more than what it costs to build them of
wood, they can be built of stone or brick and will last for many years.

[_In the margin_: "Let the Audiencia investigate this."]

10. The custom has been introduced of supplying wine for the
celebration of the mass to the priests of all the orders--not only to
those which are in the encomiendas of the royal crown, but to those in
private ones. As I understand it, your Majesty is under no obligation
to furnish it, except to those who minister in the four convents of
Manila, and to the curates of Spaniards and Indians there, and to those
who are in your Majesty's missions; and the encomenderos are obliged
to furnish them with the said wine on their own encomiendas. Your
Majesty will order the action in this matter which is most fitting
to your royal service.

[_In the margin_: "Write to the governor to order that the secular
clergy, and those who give instruction in private encomiendas, are
not to be given wine on his Majesty's account for the celebration
of mass."]

11. During the time of the last royal Audiencia, several offices of
regidor were sold; but of those who bought them at that time two
only have come here. Governor Gomez Perez, by virtue of a clause
of his instructions, appointed, above those which had been bought,
enough to amount in all to twelve regidors, from the worthiest men
of this city. Some of them left in his time, and others in the time
of his son, and finally in that of Governor Don Francisco Tello;
others the latter removed. Thereupon he appointed to several of the
said offices unsatisfactory persons, for his own interests. Some
of these despise the said offices. As it is understood that these
appointments were not by honorable means, it would be well if these
offices were sold--not by auction, but putting upon them a moderate
price, and having them given, with the supervision and approval of
the Audiencia, to the men of most merit and best character. There
should not be more than eight regidors; for, with the other persons
who, by reason of their offices, have votes in the cabildo--namely,
the three royal officials, the two wardens of the fortresses, and the
alguacil-mayor of the city--there are fourteen votes, which, in a place
of three hundred citizens, is a sufficient number. As those appointed
understand that they must pay money for the appointments and gifts,
in this way they will be given to suitable persons; and this should
always be done, so long as they are appointed here, and are not free
to attend to their duties as they should--because the governors have
had the power to take their offices away without cause, whenever it
might appear best to them. The most just way would be to sell them,
and use the proceeds to aid the royal treasury in its needs.

[_In the margin_: "Have this sent to the new governor, so that the
regidors who were appointed wrongly, or are not proper persons,
may be removed; and let others be appointed (such as possess the
qualifications and capacity), up to the number of eight in all. Let
him advise us of his action."]

12. After Governor Gomez Perez Dasmarinas came, there was offered from
the royal exchequer of your Majesty to the accountant Andres Cauchela
(who was proprietary), and to Captain Gomez de Machuca--who, on the
death of Juan Baptista Rroman, treasurer and factor, was appointed to
the said offices by the said Gomez Perez--to these two was assigned
the making of a report on all matters which concerned the treasury,
to bring before the said governor. It is understand that there were
some matters needing correction, for those same officials have written
this. This also appears probable from the manner in which the person
who was appointed for that office by the said governor conducted
himself. He signed the account without seeing or examining the reports,
or even noticing whether the charges were made, and if everything had
been collected that should be, nor that which concerned the merchandise
and the royal warehouses. Nor did he afterward audit any account. For
this reason, and because he grew rich during the time while the said
offices were held, it would be well to inspect them, and again take
charge of said accounts of money, and audit those of merchandise
which still remain to be examined. If your Majesty be so pleased,
a warrant might be sent to make the said investigation from the time
when Licentiate Geronimo Erbez del Corral took the account. It could
be entrusted to one of the auditors of this royal Audiencia; but the
fact must be considered that Doctor Antonio de Morga is a great friend
of Captain Gomez de Machuca, who was factor and treasurer, and who
would have to be investigated by him. Likewise it would be expedient
to send a warrant for an accountant to audit and revise the accounts.

[_In the margin_: "A person shall be named by the lord president of
the Audiencia to investigate these officials; and the governor shall
name, with the consent of the investigator, an accountant to examine
the accounts."]

13. Your Majesty commanded by a decree that the office of treasurer
of the royal exchequer of these islands be abolished, as it entails
no duties whatever, and the two offices of factor and accountant are
sufficient; accordingly, the duties of the treasurer were performed
by the factor. On account of the death of Juan Baptista Rroman, who
exercised these offices, your Majesty again appointed to the said
office of treasurer Captain Hernando Davila. So far as I know, your
Majesty was not made aware that a command had been issued to abolish
it, since no mention of that is made in the commission of Captain
Hernando Davila. The office is a superfluous one, and, as I say, has
no duties; for everything which has to be done here pertains to the
offices of factor and accountant. It would be well, if your Majesty
is so pleased, to command that when this office of treasurer shall
become vacant, in whatever manner, no other person shall be appointed
to it; but that it shall be merged with that of the factor, as was
formerly done. In this way the royal treasury will be relieved from
paying two thousand pesos, which the said treasurer draws as a salary.

[_In the margin_: "Let the new governor inform us concerning this."]

Governor Gomez Perez Dasmarinas established a monopoly on cards,
so that the proceeds therefrom could be used to fortify this city;
and the cabildo of the city collected that, along with the rest of
its property, and expended it in other matters, and not in that for
which it was imposed. Accordingly, in this tax, as well as in the
administration of the said monopoly, there have been interests of
great importance for those who had the power in this community, as
will be evident when it is inspected and investigated. For three years
past nothing of importance has been done on the wall, although there
were many places which needed repairing and finishing, which would
be a great detriment and danger in time of war. It would likewise
be well to send a warrant to make investigations and audit accounts,
concerning both the said monopoly and the other properties of the city.

[_In the margin_: "Let the person who is charged with the residencia
of the governor be entrusted with that of the cabildo, and see that
that is taken and an account of everything. He shall give an account
to the governor of all which results from this, and of the amount
of this impost, so that it may be converted to the use for which it
was imposed."]

15. By an ordinance of this royal Audiencia the president and two
auditors thereof are commanded to audit, at the beginning of each
year, the accounts of the royal officials, and to finish them in
two months, with the additional amount, for expenses, of twenty-five
thousand maravedis for each auditor. In the time of the former royal
Audiencia this was done; and they named an accountant each year,
to whom they gave fifty thousand maravedis beside. Since that time,
what has happened is as follows: Governor Gomez Perez Dasmarinas,
at the beginning of the year ninety-five, without an order from
your Majesty, created an accountant-in-ordinary of accounts for this
purpose, with a salary of five hundred pesos, and a secretary with two
hundred and fifty pesos, for which they were to secure the approval
of your Majesty--which they have not done in the past. The accounts
were audited in two months--or at the most, in three. Accordingly it
is not necessary, for so small an account as we have here, to incur
a thousand pesos of expense each year to audit them. It could be done
for a hundred thousand maravedis, as was formerly done. Your Majesty
will command in this as is most fitting for the royal service.

[_In the margin_: "Send this to the new governor, that he may examine
into and adjust the matter as appears best to him, and advise us of
what action he takes."]

16 The office of secretary of the cabildo has been given by the
governors to whom they thought best. In this way they learn what
goes on in the cabildo, which is a great evil. It would be better to
have this sold; and accordingly, he who held it--being a proprietor,
and one who could not be removed during good behavior--would be free
to remain silent.

[_In the margin_: "Let the governor and Audiencia investigate this."]

17. The office of secretary of the registries has been held by the
secretaries of the governors. As a result of this, claims for justice
have been relinquished in several grievances of great importance,
to the loss both of the Chinese who come to trade here, and of the
citizens of the city. It would be well to sell this office, under
condition that he who buys it cannot be the secretary or in any wise
the servant of the governor at that time acting. As Rroque Espino de
Caceres, who is serving it at present, has begged for your Majesty's
confirmation, and is a person worthy of it, as appears from the
informations made in this royal Audiencia, in its opinion this favor
might be extended to him, as he seeks it, with the said condition,
and with that of a moderate price for the royal treasury.

[_In the margin_: "Tell the new governor that it is not expedient that
this office should be held by a secretary or servant of the governor,
or a subordinate of the auditors and ministers of the Audiencia;
and that from worthy persons there he shall appoint three, in whom he
believes is found the necessary ability for this office, so that his
Majesty may select the one who may seem best to him. In the meantime
let him appoint as best he can, and without inconvenience."]

18. In the island of Zubu there is a notary-public who bought the
office from your Majesty. The cabildo there have written to me that
there is need of still another, and that accordingly it might be
sold. Therefore, if your Majesty pleases, you might order another
notaryship sold in said island of Zubu.

[_In the margin_: "Have the governor and Audiencia send an information
regarding this, and what offices have been sold in those islands,
at what price, and to what persons."]

19. The city of Nueva Segovia, of the province of Cagayan, the chief
city of that bishopric, has no notary-public named by your Majesty,
but only one appointed by the governor, for the cases which there
arise. This is a great inconvenience, as wills and other writings
cannot be sworn to before him, from which results damage to the
citizens. It would be well, if your Majesty were so pleased, to sell
a notary-public's office there.

20. The office of depositary-general of this city of Manila, on
account of the governors having appointed to it persons who were their
confidants, is embarrassed with some difficulties, which would cease if
the office were sold, and the royal treasury would be benefited. Your
Majesty will command whatever is most expedient for your royal service.

[_In the margin_: "Let the governor and Audiencia inform us whether
it is well to sell the office, and who can be found for it; and,
in case that it is not well to sell it, what persons there are of
character, worth, and conscience which fit them to take the commission
for it. Let the royal officials also give information."]

21. About four years ago the preaching of the bulls was commenced here,
and the governor appoint a treasurer for them; and it is also said that
there came a decree from your Majesty directing that the account be
audited every year by a royal official, and that the proceeds from them
be remitted. Thus far, no royal official has taken the said accounts;
and I have been informed that in sending the proceed thereof there
has not been much punctuality, and that the money has been employed in
uses and investments for certain private persons. For the correction
of all this, it would be well that from now on an auditor should
audit the said accounts of the said treasurer, and cause the balance
which is found to be placed in the royal treasury, charging it as
a separate account to the royal officials; then, in the first ships
which leave, it may be sent to Nueva Espana, invested in merchandise,
whereby it will be doubled, with no more risk than if it were taken
in coin. The latter is never taken because what has to be sent is
invested, and turned into money in Mexico, and amounts to twice as
much. The profit which can be made in this way might better be, for
so good a work as that for which the alms of the said bulls is applied.

[_In the margin_: "Let a copy of this clause be given to Senor the
licentiate Valtodano, to be examined in the council for the crusade."]

22. Since, even if your Majesty should be pleased to command everything
done as above, it will still be necessary to bring money from Mexico
for the costs, expenses, and salaries incurred in these islands;
and as it is not well that, in order to cover them, it should be
necessary for your Majesty to employ more property than they amount to,
it has seemed best to me to seek some other methods for this--which,
if they should appear expedient for the service of your Majesty,
and can be carried out with no scruples of conscience, will not only
render unnecessary the bringing of money from outside these islands,
but even will make it possible to aid other great expenses which your
Majesty has. The means which I have found are the following. Your
Majesty pays a stipend to all the citizens and inhabitants of the
fortified town which you hold in the island of Tidore, which is one
of the Malucas Islands. In order to make these payments, aid is sent
every year from Yndia by a galleon; and a quantity of cloth is brought
from the royal customs treasury at Goa. With this the said citizens
are all given their "quarters," as they call them. [5] This cloth is
disposed of among the natives, who trade provisions for it.

It is a law of Yndia and of Maluco that no person can lade or take
away cloves from those islands in any manner, unless it be for your
Majesty, under penalty of loss of the ship and rigging; from which
the profit resulting to the royal exchequer amounts to a third of
what is laded, so great is the freight charge. Certain Portuguese
came to these islands in their own ships. They take away a quantity
of cloves and sell it to merchants, who in turn sell it to Chinese
and other persons, who secretly ship it to Nueva Espana--whence
it is taken to the provinces of Peru, the new realm of Granada,
Tierra Firme, Guatimala, and other regions. From this there result
three losses to the royal exchequer. In the first place, since the
cloves are carried from the Malucas by the hand of a third party,
your Majesty loses the third due on embarcation. In the second place,
it is laded here for Nueva Espana secretly, and without paying the
duties or freight charges. In the third place, when it has arrived
at Nueva Espana, Peru, and other regions, that which is brought from
the realms of Castilla loses its value.

All this expense which your Majesty suffers in providing for that
fortress, and these losses, could be remedied as follows. Your Majesty
has in the island of Panay, one of these Filipinas, which borders on
the Malucas Islands, a number of tributary Indians who pay the larger
part of their tribute in cleaned rice. After their harvest they have
a great deal of rice wine, which is made in these islands, and these
are the provisions necessary for the Malucas. If, conformably to
what has been said, there were built on your Majesty's account two
patages in the island of Panay--such as are commonly built in the
said island by the encomenderos, to sell to the said Portuguese in
these islands, and which cost about five hundred pesos--two thousand
fanegas of cleaned rice, and six hundred jars [_tinajas_] of wine could
be loaded in them. The rice would be collected for your Majesty from
your royal tributes, at two reals and six maravedis. Each tinaja of
wine, with cask and all, is valued at four reals, on board. Likewise
two hundred pesos of fine Sangley earthenware is sufficient, which is
to be used as follows. These two patages must, while going to Maluco,
of necessity take water at the port of La Caldera, and the earthenware
is to be left in the Spanish camp which is there, so that with it they
may buy from the natives five hundred quintals of cinnamon, taking
care to dry it. In the meantime the two patages resume their voyage,
having left this earthenware, and continue with the rice and wine to
the fortress of the said Malucas. They will deliver to the warden there
half of it, to pay those expenses or quarters to the citizens. With
the other half they will buy four hundred _baxes_ of cloves, making
two thousand four hundred quintals, at six quintals to the bax; [6]
this would be brought on your Majesty's account to these islands. Then
they are obliged to go back to the said port of La Caldera, where they
will take on the cinnamon bought with the earthenware; and all will
be brought to the port of Cavite, to be embarked on the ships which
your Majesty sends on the voyage from here to Nueva Espana. When they
have arrived there, the royal officials at the port of Acapulco will
send a third of the said cloves and cinnamon to Mexico, and two-thirds
to Piru and its provinces. If sold at retail, it would be worth three
hundred pesos a quintal; going to private persons, in quantity, it is
usually worth two hundred pesos; consequently, in this way there would
be a great profit gained. I am ready to say that it would be worth
to your Majesty almost as much as all the income from the customs
of all Portuguese Yndia. For this purpose your Majesty will have
to keep a factor in the said island of Panay, to collect tributes,
despatch the ships to La Caldera and Maluco, and receive them there;
and to correspond with the royal officials in this city so that they
may embark all this spice for Nueva Espana, and with the factor who
must be at Acapulco, so that he may make the distribution.

This transaction is so profitable that several of the governors who
have been in these islands have taken the trouble to send an armed
galley merely to make this purchase of cinnamon at the port of La
Caldera, until in the time of Doctor Santiago de Vera this trade
was abandoned. Being aware of the profit in it, Guido de Lavezaris
(who governed these islands on the death of the adelantado Miguel
Lopez de Legazpi) prohibited trading and trafficking in spices in
these islands for any person except the officials of your Majesty,
who were to receive, buy, and lade the spices for Mexico, all on the
account of your royal exchequer; this was done. In consequence of this,
he likewise forbade that any island or any province whatsoever where
there were cloves, cinnamon, or other spices should be assigned in
encomiendas. Accordingly, from that time on, the transportation of
spices by private persons to Nueva Espana was cut off. All this with
the lapse of time, and the interest of certain persons, has been
neglected, so that, it is understood, a great quantity of spice is
taken to Nueva Espana every year.

23. The other expedient which occurs to me is that the income from silk
to the kingdom of Granada is registered as seventy-two millions, with
the condition that no twisted or loose silk can be taken to the Yndias,
which does not come from the said kingdom--although, indeed, to fill up
this quantity, there is sometimes added silk from the kingdom of Murcia
and Andalucia; but it passes through the custom-house of Granada, pays
its duties, and is sealed there. In order that there may be no fraud in
this, there is in Sevilla an administrator and a commissioned judge,
who is ordinarily one of the alcaldes of the criminal court of the
royal Audiencia. From the kingdom of China a quantity of crude silk
is brought in bundles to these islands, and is taken to Nueva Espana,
where it is woven into fabrics, and part of it is dyed. This silk
is usually worth in this city a hundred and fifty pesos, although at
present it sells at two hundred and forty pesos a pico.

From the transportation of this silk the royal exchequer suffers
the following losses. In the first place, the silks brought from
Castilla, whether woven or loose, are worth less; and accordingly
the royal duties do not amount to so much. In the second place,
there are not so many silks brought as would come if these were
lacking. Although these pay duties, there is a loss in this, as
duties are not so great as those from Castilla pay. Crude silk is
neither necessary nor useful for ordinary maintenance or support;
and accordingly it seems best that your Majesty should, if such be
your pleasure, obviate these losses which are occurring, and obtain
satisfaction for them in some way and meet the great expenses which
you have here. Your Majesty should leave liberty, as you always have
done, for your vassals to trade in all merchandise with China in
all kinds of goods; but should have monopolized and forbidden this
trade in crude silk, commanding that no ship which comes from China
shall neglect to bring five picos of crude silk, which is a very
small quantity. They should be paid a reasonable price for it. In
this way there would be the profit which they make in bringing it
from China here, whence it is sent to Mexico; and, sold at retail,
there will be the profit on it of four hundred per cent. There come
usually from China to this city thirty ships and some years fifty,
so that the profit on this would be large; and there would remain to
the citizens of these islands a great deal of merchandise with which
to trade, without their missing these goods. There would be enough to
cover all the expenses, salaries, and other things which are necessary
in these islands, and must be paid from the royal treasury--which, with
all the money that is sent from Mexico, has not enough money to cover
all the very important expenses affecting the proper guard, protection,
and defense of these islands. This is all that occurs to me at present
to say concerning matters relating to the royal exchequer, for its
welfare. I shall continue always to watch for what is most fitting for
the royal service of your Majesty, and shall attempt to further it;
and such is always my desire. May God protect your Majesty many years,
with a greater increase of kingdoms and seigniories, according to the
needs of Christendom. In the city of Manila, which is in the island
of Luzon, the principal one of the Filipinas Islands. July 21, 1599.

The licentiate _Hieronimo de Salazar y Salcedo_




Sire:

Since I have given to your Majesty an account of the affairs of
the administration of justice and of the royal exchequer of these
Philipinas Islands by two other letters which accompany this, I
will here discuss affairs of government. The thing which seems to me
most necessary to do for the good government of these islands--and
especially for correcting the great excesses which are wont to be
committed by some of the religious who have Indian missions in their
charge; and by the alcaldes-mayor, corregidors, deputies, and other
magistrates, and the encomenderos of Indian repartimientos--is that,
at least every two years, an auditor of the royal Audiencia of these
islands, commencing with the oldest of them, should make a visitation
over all the country in his jurisdiction, as is provided by the
ordinances thereof, and in the form which I wrote to your Majesty in
July of the past year, ninety-eight. Although the auditors oppose this,
it is to avoid the great labor, expense, and danger to health, by sea
and enemies, which they must undergo and pass through. Accordingly,
if your Majesty pleases, a reasonable allowance for their expenses
might be made, and soldiers given them to accompany and guard them,
with good vessels, at the expense of the royal exchequer, if the
cost should not be covered by the penalties inflicted during the
visitation. Your Majesty will be pleased to order in this what is
most expedient.

[_In the margin_: "Write to the governor to have this visitation
carried out in the pacified country, and where there is no obstacle,
conformably to the ordinance. And have him see to it that they do
not send soldiers with the auditor, and that he does not take people
who would be oppressive to the Indians; and let him take care that
this visitation be effectual--for which purpose let him command to
be built, and furnished to the auditor, a vessel of suitable size,
to go outside of the island of Luzon, at his Majesty's expense. As
to the reimbursement which ought to be made beside what is conceded
to them by the ordinance, and the decrees of his Majesty, let him
inform us of his opinion." "Have sent a duplicate of the last decree
despatched in regard to this visitation."]

The main object of your Majesty's royal decrees, provisions, and orders
given to your governors of these islands, is the prosperity of the
citizens thereof; for in that way they become established and settled
and the islands populated. The governors have not always attended
to this as they should, for they have regarded this, which is their
principal obligation, as accessory and dependent upon their private
interests in order that they may become rich with what the citizens
are to gain, as is already well known. And so little is the profit,
and so poor the subsistence, of those who live here, and so much is
their living interfered with by the governors, and the relatives and
dependents whom they bring with them, that, as a result, so little is
left for the citizens that they cannot in twenty years make the profit
and gain which is acquired in a few years by some of those whom the
said governors bring with them. This has often been experienced. For
the remedy of this I suggest the following things.

The lading of the ships which go to Nueva Espana, the allotment of
space in them, and other matters touching this, should be conducted
according to, and after the manner directed by, clause five of the
letter which accompanies this, regarding matters which concern
the royal exchequer. No cloth should be laded except that which
goes according to the allotment; nor should the governor have any
authority therein, because, as the superintendents of lading are
persons appointed by him and in his confidence, with letters and
orders which he gives, much other cloth is laded after the allotment
is made. For the most part this belongs to persons who are underlings,
kinsmen, or creatures of the governor, and must necessarily occupy
space belonging to the cloth of the citizen, who is thus obliged to
give up his cargo. What I describe is the ordinary way that things go.

[_In the margin_: "This is provided for in the same clause; and let
the governor be charged particularly with the remedy of this."]

In the appointment of offices and means of gain, both of justice
and of war, and other offices in the country, the said governors
should observe what your Majesty has ordered in so many commands and
royal decrees--namely, that "they shall be given only to citizens;
and if he appoints to them his creatures or kinsmen, or those of
the auditors or fiscal, or of their wives, the royal Audiencia shall
check him without any reserve or hesitancy. The fiscal thereof shall
oppose him, and take all possible measures to this end." This should
be charged upon the consciences of all; and the government notary
should be ordered to put upon all commissions of offices of justice
or war, or of encomiendas of Indians, or of any other positions of
profit whatsoever, which are to be received, the reason therefor,
so that the said fiscal may know and understand whether there is any
objection to giving the said commission. If any such objection is made,
let it remain with the commission, and dispose of it by appealing
from the governor to the royal Audiencia, where the question will
be decided on examination and review. In the meantime the said title
shall not be assumed, for there are many people in these islands whom
we are bound to remunerate merely for their own services and those of
their fathers, because they are poor and needy, and what we have to
give is so little that, even if it were divided among the citizens,
many of them would have to remain unprovided for.

[_In the margin_: "Tell the governor that in this matter he must
observe exactly what is ordered by decrees and provisions; and,
according to his instructions, shall prefer the most deserving and
those longest in the country."]

By order of your Majesty, the viceroy of Nueva Espana appoints the
general, admiral, captains, masters, and other officers of the ships
which are despatched from here to that province with merchanise, at the
time when the said ships return thence. The persons so appointed bring
so large a quantity of money unregistered in the ships as, it may be
readily seen, they can do, with the power attached to their offices,
since they are the servants and underlings of the said viceroy;
accordingly, when they have arrived here they invest their money,
and lade the goods in the said ships, although they are prohibited
from doing so. This is another opportunity, almost equal to that of
the governors who come. That this may be used by the said citizens, it
would be fitting that the said general, admiral, masters, and officers
of the ships be appointed here, in the sessions of the Audiencia, by
vote of the president and auditors; and that those appointed should
be citizens of this city of Manila, or of some of the other towns of
these islands. The salaries which hitherto have been given to the said
general and admiral in Nueva Espana should be diminished. With the
little which is given here to those who are appointed, and from the
profits which they will make, there will result no little benefit;
since every year, in the ships which are to go, there would be five
or six men, and they would return with a profit large enough to
maintain themselves, and face the enemy. The ships would be better
administered and governed, by persons who understand that better,
through the continual practice which they have in these islands in
maritime and military affairs; for at times persons come in the said
offices who have no experience whatever in the one branch or the other,
which is ordinarily the cause of much loss.

[_In the margin_: "Place the decree with the letters of the governor
and Audiencia."]

The troops of war which are raised in Nueva Espana to be taken to
these islands would best be taken by the captains who levied them to
the port of Acapulco, one of the captains being commissioned for this,
with some moderate addition for expenses. In the said port they should
hand them over to the general of those ships, and the said captain
should not come to these islands. In this way would be obviated the
damage which is done by their bringing cargoes, and the cost of their
coming and returning, which are not necessary for so few troops as
come. When the troops arrive here they should be allotted among the
companies of infantry of this camp.

[_In the margin_: "Conformably to this, let the viceroy be ordered
to do so."]

There is great carelessness in appointing artillerymen for the said
ships, for a ship which carries one piece of artillery has had
six artillerymen appointed, whereas one ordinary gunner would be
sufficient. If your Majesty be pleased, it would be well to command
that for each piece of artillery no more than one artilleryman should
be appointed; because, besides their cost to the royal exchequer, they
are likewise a damage to this community, on account of the quantity
of money which they bring and carry back invested to Nueva Espana.

[_In the margin_: "Have a letter written to the viceroy together with
this report, that, if this be so, it appears excessive, and he shall
correct it."]

In the ships which come from Nueva Espana a great deal of money is
brought which is not registered. Beside not paying in Acapulco the
duties of two and a half per cent, which are due to your Majesty,
there results to this commonwealth a great deal of damage; for this
money belongs for the most part to merchants and citizens of Piru
and Mexico. Although in the sale which is made of the said ships,
when they arrive at the port of Cavite, investigation is made--as I
did this year, when I asked permission from the Audiencia to go to the
inspection of the ships which came--and although I went there, only a
very small quantity of this money was found, on account of the great
care which was taken to hide it. At times, it even belongs to the most
powerful people here; consequently those who are bringing it are very
bold, and it is necessary to inspect the vessels before they arrive
at the said port. It would be expedient for your Majesty to command
that the fiscal of the said Audiencia should always be present at
the making of this inspection, so that he can take all measures which
appear to him suitable for that purpose, and can make the inspection
before the ships arrive at the port, wherever he may wish. All the coin
or silver bullion which is seized for registry should be applied for
the royal treasury, some moderate portion being given to the person
who denounces the culprit, so that there may be persons to do this.

[_In the margin_: "Write to the governor that it is understood that
this practice has become established, and let him try to prevent
and correct it. Let the fiscal accompany the royal officials
in the inspection of those ships, at the point which may appear
most convenient to them, and let all which is discovered without
registration, and contrary to the decree, be rigorously confiscated;
and let them give to the informer such part as may seem best to
the Audiencia."]

At present nothing else occurs of which your Majesty should be advised
in matters concerning the government. I shall continually look out for
what is most expedient for it, and will advise you of what should be
done. May God protect your Majesty, according to His power, with a
larger increase of kingdoms and seigniories, according to the needs
of Christendom. Manila, July 21, 1599.

The licentiate _Hieronimo de Salazar y Salzedo_

[_Endorsed:_ "Examined and answered."]





Letter from the King of Borneo to Governor Tello


The contents of this letter, written this year, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, by the king of Burney to his Highness
Don Francisco Tello, knight of the Order of Santiago, governor and
captain-general of the Philipinas Islands for the king our sovereign,
and president of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria resident therein,
and translated by a good and exact interpreter, are as follows.

Soltan Adil Lula:

Letter of friendship sent by the king of Burney to Don Francisco Tello,
captain-general of the fortress of the city of Manila, because of the
information I have received that he governs that city exceedingly well,
not only for the service of God, but furnishing justice to the regions
about, with protection to the poor--whereat I have rejoiced greatly,
and all the nobles and natives of my kingdom have done the same.

I received the letter that your Lordship sent me through Hernando,
Don Francisco Tael, and Don Joan Solit. It gave me much happiness,
for I understood thoroughly the message conveyed by it to me from
your Lordship. I am exceedingly rejoiced in heart and mind, for I
desire fast friendship with the captain-general of Manila. Therefore,
I request that, when my vassals go to Manila, you will give them
kind treatment; and I shall do the same when men from Manila come
to my country. This is in token of friendship, and if this is always
observed, I shall be very glad, and likewise if you will have pity on
the Burneys. I received two Burneys, whom the Spaniards had captured;
they arrived at my court. And, inasmuch as your Lordship orders me,
in your letter that I receive, to send any Sangleys that I might
have here to Manila, I am now sending two who were captured by the
Camutones; one is named Bonzhuan and the other Adali. I am sending
them to your Lordship as a token of lasting friendship with the
Burneys. Furthermore, I am sending five taes of camphor, of Burney
weight, and three large Burney mats. And that your Highness may not
jest at my present, know that I am sending you a [_word uncertain
in MS_.]

The above translation was made by Constantino Xuarez and Miguel Yaat, a
native of Burney. They declared it to have been thoroughly and exactly
made, without any change of sense. They signed the same before me,
Estevan de Marquina, alcalde-mayor of Tondo and its district, for the
king our sovereign. July twenty-seven of the said year, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine. [7]

_Estevan de Marquina_

+

_Constantyno Xuarez_
[_Miguel Yaat_]


[_Endorsed_: "Original letter written by the king of Burney to Don
Francisco Tello, governor of the Phelippinas, translated from the
Burney tongue into Castilian."]




Letters from Francisco Tello to the King



Sire:

I have striven for your Majesty's service in this government to the
extent of my ability, and I have done my duty with much care and
diligence. I have punished certain individuals, as it seemed proper
to do; and hence it has resulted that I have rivals--as have all of
us who have governed, and are engaged in your Majesty's service in the
Indias. Although in all things I have always been favorable to Doctor
Morga--who was my lieutenant-general, and who is now auditor of this
royal Audiencia--I have been informed by many persons that he has
spoken ill of my proceedings, and has even opened the way for others
to write evil of me to your Majesty. I have never paid any attention
to this, since I felt that my actions proved my innocence; nor have I
ever thought it necessary to write to your Majesty about this matter,
although some things seemed to affect my honor; for, having been bred
in honor, I thought that in the end the truth must come to light,
and could not be obscured, [_MS. worn_] the royal service could not
be hindered here. [But now I feel] [8] myself compelled to speak of
this, because a letter was written [to] the auditor, Tellez Almacan,
in September of last year, which was a slanderous libel, without
signature; and I have another which was written this year, at the port,
to the auditor Don Antonio Maldonado, in the name of a friar. The
handwriting of it must be Doctor Morga's, although it is disguised,
[for so it was considered] by the auditor Almacan, who is writing to
your Majesty about this, as also is the fiscal of this Audiencia. I
beg your Majesty to commission whomsoever your Majesty deems best,
to investigate this matter, for it is not just that this evil act be
passed by in silence. I assure your Majesty that I have seriously
tried, and am still trying, not to be offended by their insults in
this land; and that in the Audiencia, not only have I kept, and still
maintain, great harmony, but I am also trying to harmonize the auditors
and the fiscal; for now they are not in accord, and many [of them]
have disputes and all [come to me,] and I reconcile them. In order
that your Majesty may know the manner in which I have served you, and
my method of procedure in this government, and in order that it may
be seen that [_MS. worn_] whatever may have been reported, or shall
be reported, to your Majesty in another way, I have wished to make,
before this same Doctor Morga, the report that I am sending to your
Majesty, from the most honorable people of this land, in order that
you may understand better my zeal for your Majesty's royal service,
and the good of this realm. May our Lord preserve the Catholic person
of your Majesty, as is befitting. Manila, July 14, 99.

_Don Francisco Tello_

[_Endorsed:_ "Governor Don Francisco Tello, July 14. Let this be
kept until that which is mentioned here arrives, and then let it
be presented."]




Sire:

I wrote your Majesty by the ships sailing from here to Nueva
Espana this year, about the news I had from Malaca concerning the
English ships which had come to Sunda, and had made a settlement and
fortification there; and that I was awaiting a more detailed account
of the enemy's designs from the commandant of Malaca, and everything
else relating to the subject. [9] Advices have now come from the
commandant of Maluco that two English ships had arrived there, and had
formed an alliance with Terrenate, as your Majesty will be informed
in greater detail by the copies of his letters which I enclose, and
also those of the king of Tidore and the people of that stronghold,
requesting in strong terms that I send them aid. [10]

I then called a council of war to consider the disposition of the
affairs of these islands, and what was to be done therefor--since
affairs are in the condition which I have described to your Majesty
in other letters. As there are but few and badly-armed troops, and so
few supplies with which we could send help, it was unanimously agreed
to give no aid whatever to Maluco, but to undertake the no small task
of preserving this land. Notwithstanding, I am thinking of sending
reenforcements of supplies, powder, ammunition, and other military
supplies such as can be given, also a dozen musketeers. As that land
belongs to your Majesty, it is but just that your Majesty's servants
and vassals should make all possible efforts to aid it. I assure
your Majesty that if you are not pleased to provide this realm with a
goodly number of well-armed troops and with money from Nueva Espana,
according to the demands made by him who shall be governor--who, since
this fort is placed in his keeping, can well be entrusted with twenty
thousand pesos more, in control of the officials of your Majesty's
royal exchequer--we may find ourselves hard pressed. I fulfil my
duty by giving account thereof to your Majesty, and by defending
this land as occasion may arise therefor. In whatever I find to do,
here or elsewhere, I shall strive to serve your Majesty well; but
if on account of my little strength, I should be somewhat remiss,
I beg your Majesty to understand that I could do no more.

At the news of the English, it was urgently necessary to aid Cebu. But
as we did not have it to send, and the presidio of La Caldera,
[11] with its eighty Spanish soldiers (who go more than a legua by
water), [12] was in danger; and since the English and Terrenatans are
confederated, they may attack the fort, and if the water is cut off
from them the Spaniards are lost--I have resolved, with the approval
of the council of war, immediately to withdraw those troops with
their artillery; and that they, after burning their fort, shall go to
Cebu. When it shall appear to me that a favorable opportunity occurs,
they can return to La Caldera, from which, according to orders, it
is necessary that punishment be inflicted on the king of Jolo for
the crimes, and the murders of Spaniards committed in this land.

I am writing to the viceroy of Nueva Espana the information I have
received of the hostile ships; I am asking for reenforcements, [13]
and that the ships which return next year must sail very cautiously,
as perchance the enemy might be awaiting them at the mouth of the
channel, or outside of it. Moreover, he should send the duties
and freight-charges that are paid at Acapulco from the Chinese
merchandise. Your Majesty has ordered that this money be returned to
us, but it has never been done. If it were sent to this royal treasury,
this kingdom would not suffer its present necessity and danger.

For some time past I have exercised great care and diligence in the
founding of artillery, [14] and it is being more carefully done. Four
out of five medium-sized pieces, which were being founded, have
resulted well, and I am very well pleased. The said founding is being
continued by native Indians, and I have a quantity of metals for said
work in the royal warehouses of your Majesty. May God our Lord preserve
the royal Catholic person of your Majesty. Manila, August 7, 1599.

_Don Francisco Tello_





Letters from Felipe III to Tello



The King: To Don Francisco Tello, my governor and captain-general of
the Filipinas Islands, and president of my royal Audiencia therein
established. Your letter of June 23 of last year, 98, has been
received. I understand by it that quiet and peace has been restored
in Mindanao, and that you were examining the papers brought by the
master-of-camp, to see whether any of the subdued people were to be
punished or not. Keep me informed of what you shall do in that respect.

You speak also of other insurrections among the Canbales Indians in
Panpanga, who were already pacified; and of your intention of taking to
that city [Manila] an Indian who has been the chief of those people,
in order to remove him to a location where his presence would be less
dangerous. This is well; do what is needed and keep me informed of
the proceedings.

We have considered what you say of your caution and forethought
concerning the fears which Japan is wont to cause; also your behavior,
friendship, and correspondence with certain chiefs of that country,
whom you have entertained. It is well to continue these efforts,
and to give us notice of what takes place.

What you say about retiring two companies is commendable; nevertheless,
if you think best in the future to increase one of them, do so, and
make the necessary provisions. Keep me informed of the measures that
you shall take.

I am writing to the viceroy of Nueva Espana, that I have assisted you
with what is necessary, and shall ask him to see that the people whom
he sends to those islands be useful and carry weapons. He shall take
care to punish the captains for their excesses. You shall do the same
in what concerns you.

In regard to the needs of the soldiers, which you attribute to their
not having, and the impossibility of providing them with, encomiendas
for a long time; and as it concerns the temporary employments which
you give them instead of the servants, and even these employments
are not sufficient for all--you shall observe the instructions, laws,
and ordinances which you possess. You shall see that the distribution
of what is available be made among worthy men who have served in
that land.

As to the remedy which you propose in the marriage of elderly women,
and encomenderas of the land, you shall introduce no innovation. But
you shall enable marriages freely to take their proper course. At
Denia, August 16, 1599.

_I The King_

By order of the king our sovereign:

_Juan de Ybarra_



The King: To my governor and captain-general of the Philippinas
Islands, and the president and auditors of my royal Audiencia
thereof. I have understood that the Chinese Indians who trade in that
country bring thither each year eight hundred thousand pesos' worth
of merchandise, and often more than a million; and that in the ten
days which they spend in that country they make more than a hundred
per cent, and that in the last year, ninety-eight, it was said that
they secured two hundred per cent. Since in their own country they
pay increased duties, and since so great profit comes to them from
the merchandise which they bring to those islands, while they pay me
no more than three per cent in duties, which is the amount formerly
imposed by Governor Don Gonzalo Ronquillo, it would be just that
they should pay the said duties proportionately to the profits;
and accordingly these might be increased by at least another three
per cent. As I wish to be informed more minutely concerning what is
expedient in this matter, and whether an increase of the said duties
would or could result in any inconvenience whatsoever, and for what
reason; and, in case that there is no objection, to what extent the
duty can be increased--I command you to send a report thereof, with
your opinion. Done at Denia, on the sixteenth of August, of the year
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine.

_I The King_

Countersigned by _Juan de Ybarra_.

Signed by the Council.

I [the King:] to the archbishop of Manila.

[_Endorsed:_ "To the governor and Audiencia of the Philippinas; let
them give information concerning the report that the duties can be
raised on the merchandise from China."]





Documents of 1600



    The pacification of Mindanao. [Unsigned and undated; 1600?]
    Oliver van Noordt's attack on Luzon. Francisco Tello, and
    others; October-December.



_Source_: These documents are obtained from MSS. in the Archivo
general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: The first document is translated by Robert W. Haight;
in the second, the commission to Morga is translated by James
A. Robertson; the instructions to him and to Alcega, by Jose M. and
Clara M. Asensio; the account of the battle, by Arthur B. Myrick,
of Harvard University, and James A. Robertson.




The Pacification of Mindanao


_Concerning the pacification of the island of Mindanao; in the
year 1600_

In the relation of the last year you will have learned how occurred
the death, in the pacification of the island of Mindanao, of Estevan
Rodriguez de Figueroa, who offered to carry out this pacification
under the conditions which he stipulated with Gomez Perez Dasmarinas,
formerly governor of these islands--copies of which were sent to
his Majesty, and to master-of-camp Juan de Lajara, formerly of
the said expedition, who succeeded to his place when the camp was
abandoned, and came to Manila. Don Francisco Tello, governor and
captain-general of the said Philipinas Islands, who at that time
had taken possession of the government was considering how to aid
and stimulate the said pacification at the expense of the heirs
of Estevan Rodriguez, and with the agreement of the captains and
persons who were long resident and experienced in war in the said
islands. Don Juan Ronquillo was appointed commander of the galleys,
to prosecute the said pacification; and in the meantime, in order to
be present and continue the expedition, Captain Torivio de Miranda
was sent forward to encourage and animate the troops, under orders
to keep them in his charge; and in case the post should be abandoned,
and a retreat made to Manila, he should detain the troops and return
to Mindanao. The said Captain Toribio de Miranda having arrived at
the island of La Caldera, which lies forty leagues from the river of
Mindanao, there found the whole camp, which was returning from the said
islands. Conformably to the orders which he had, he turned back and
fortified the site where they had first been, which was on the river,
four leagues from the forts of the enemy. Juan Ronquillo, having been
despatched to Mindanao, had taken the camp in his charge, and begun
to achieve some success. He achieved a victory in the battle which
he fought with the Terrenatans, who had entered with eight hundred
men to give aid to the people of Mindanao. Before these successes,
he had written a letter in disparagement of that country (a copy of
which was sent to his Majesty)--on account of which, in a council
of war which had been held, the general Don Juan Ronquillo had been
ordered to make a last effort against the Mindanaos, doing them all
possible damage. He was then to come to the island of La Caldera, and
there build a fort, to be garrisoned with a hundred Spanish soldiers,
with artillery, arms, and munitions; and leave them there as a check
upon Terrenate and Mindanao, in charge of a good soldier, one of the
captains of the camp, and with the rest return to Manila. Although
Don Juan Ronquillo received this order, after having won considerable
victories, he again wrote that he would not abandon that place, even if
such were the order, because it would not be expedient to retire from
the camp and comply with what had been ordered, when he was leaving
the island of Mindanao already pacified--the chiefs, with whom he
had used gentle means, that they might all be more contented, having
again rendered submission to his Majesty; and likewise as the king
of Jolo again rendered obedience and submission. Confiding in this,
Captain Cristoval Villagra, whom Don Juan Ronquillo had appointed
commander of the garrison of La Caldera, had sent thirty soldiers to
the island of Jolo for supplies. They found at this time in Jolo a
Mindanao chief--an uncle of the king of Mindanao, and a brother-in-law
of the king of Jolo--who had been driven out of Mindanao because he was
rebellious. He treacherously killed thirteen Spanish soldiers. When
news of this was brought, Juan Pacho was sent to take the troops of
La Caldera in charge; and, when it should seem best to him, to try to
inflict punishment on the king of Jolo. Having gone out to inflict the
said punishment with six hundred Spaniards, the enemy unfortunately
killed the said Juan Pacho and twenty-nine Spaniards, the rest of them
retiring without any success. This news having come to the governor,
he sent in place of Juan Pacho Captain Toribio de Miranda, a person
in whom he had entire confidence, with an order not to attempt any
punishment until he had force enough for it. After this Captain Toribio
de Miranda arrived at La Caldera on the twenty-sixth of August in
ninety-nine. When the garrison was given into his charge he put the
defensive works in order; and with the arms which he brought, and
those which he found in the fort, he armed all the troops, amounting
to a hundred and fourteen soldiers. As directed by an order of the
governor, he sent a chief of the Pintados to Mindanao with letters to
the chiefs of the island, in which he informed them that they would be
protected, favored, and upheld in justice, as vassals of his Majesty,
and that with this object a garrison had been placed in La Caldera;
and that to aid in maintaining it, and in covering the expenses
which they had caused in the war by their disobedience, the largest
possible quantity of tributes would be collected for his Majesty, and
that he would send for them shortly--which had not been done earlier
because the Mindanaos had been so spent and afflicted. Having arrived
on the second of September at the river of Mindanao, and delivered
his despatch, this chief was well received, and found the people
in the settled state in which General Don Juan Ronquillo had left
them. Adiamora, the main chief of Mindanao, in the name of them all,
sent him back on the fifteenth of the said month, offering to give
to his Majesty all the tribute which they could collect.

At this time--news from the chief captain of Malaca having reached
the governor, to the effect that in the Sunda, [15] a hundred and
fifty leagues from that port, there had been seen a number of English
ships, whose designs were not known; and, a little later, word from
the commander of the fort of Maluco that there were at Terrenate,
within the port, two English ships with four hundred men and fifty
pieces of artillery--a council of war was held as to what was best to
do. The said council decided to withdraw the garrison from La Caldera
to Zibu, so that the enemy should not take that place; and, if they
should attempt to do damage to that province, they would find it in a
state of defense. Accordingly an order was sent to Captain Toribio de
Miranda to withdraw with the troops, arms, artillery, and munitions,
dismantling the fort; he was also told that he could return shortly
to the island with more troops and arms, in order to assist in its
defense. On the ninth of September Captain Toribio de Miranda arrived
at Zibu, with all the troops, artillery, arms, and munitions; and at
the same time General Don Juan Tello arrived at Zibu with a hundred
men, who came as reenforcement from the city of Manila. Having spent
six months there and commenced to build a fort of stone, the governor,
as they had no more news of the English referred to, sent an order to
the said Don Juan to come to the city of Manila--which he did with the
hundred men, leaving the province of Zibu in a prosperous condition,
with the troops which are usually kept there, and those of the garrison
of La Caldera, which in all amount to two hundred and fifty Spaniards.

After all this, in June of 1600 the governor received news, by way
of Malaca, that the ships which had passed to the South Sea belonged
to Dutch merchants, who had come to load with spices in the Maluco
Islands. Having transacted their business, they had returned to their
own country by way of Yndia, without doing any damage to the islands
of the west; it therefore seems that we are safe, notwithstanding
the news received of those enemies.





Oliver van Noordt's Attack on Luzon



_Commission to Antonio de Morga_

In the city of Manila, on the thirty-first of October of the year
one thousand six hundred, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands having assembled,
the president announced to the said auditors that news had been
received that, on the sixteenth of the current month and year, two
foreign ships had anchored in the bay of Albay, outside the mouth
of the channel of these islands; whereupon he sent by land Captains
Pedro de Arceo, Cobarrubias, and Christoval de Axqueta with seventy
soldiers--arquebusiers and musketeers--to the place where said ships
were stationed, in order to make the defense and resistance that
occasion and opportunity might offer. He also ordered several ships
to be equipped and prepared at the port of Cavite, so that they could
attack the said vessels. At this juncture of affairs, it was now
reported that, on the twenty-fourth of the current month and year,
the said ships had weighed anchor, left the said bay of Albay, entered
the channel of Capul, and anchored at the island of Capul, where
they still were. The enemy's intention, according to the president,
is to advance upon this city. Accordingly, whatever may happen,
both in order to resist him, and to prevent among these islands the
possible effects to them and the vessels about to come from Castilla,
it is very advisable and necessary to go, with all haste, in pursuit
of said enemy, and to assure the safety of the vessels and the port
of Cavite. As has been gathered from recent discussions held in the
presence of the said president and auditors, with certain captains and
men of experience, it is necessary to equip the deep-draught vessels
quickly, and what light vessels can be prepared, so that they may
attack the enemy. Now in order that the aforesaid preparations may
be effected and executed with all diligence and precision by all, it
is advisable for the said president and auditors--the latter acting
jointly with the said president--to attend personally to this matter,
on account of its importance; for thus will the despatch be effected
more quickly, and with the necessary equipment. The president requested
that, attentive to the aforesaid, they decide and determine the
course advisable to pursue in this matter. After having considered
the above proposition, the said president and auditors resolved
that Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor of this Audiencia, should go
immediately to the port of Cavite and take charge of the despatch
and preparation of the vessels about to go to attack the said enemy,
and to place the said port in a state of defense. For this purpose
he shall request the necessary means, which shall be given him as
may be provided and ordained. The licentiate Tellez Almazan, also
an auditor of this Audiencia, shall remain in this city to attend to
what is necessary for its defense, and for the provision of the said
port of Cavite. The president declares that the commandant at either
place shall also assist and aid in such work as may be necessary, and
as occasion may demand, so that by this means all possible diligence,
together with the requisite haste, may be observed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_

Before me:   _Pedro Hurtado de Esquivel_

In the city of Manila, on the thirteenth of January in the year
one thousand six hundred and one, I, Pedro Hurtado de Esquivel,
clerk of court for the king our sovereign, in his royal Audiencia and
Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands, at the request and order of
Doctor Antonio de Morga, of the council of the king our sovereign,
and his auditor in this said royal Audiencia, had this copy drawn
from its original, which is in the book of the government of his
royal Audiencia. It is a true and faithful copy, and agrees with the
original thereof, witnesses to its copying, correction, and comparison,
being Pedro Munoz de Herrera, Joan de Arana, and Miguel de Talledo,
citizens of Manila.

In testimony thereof, I affix my seal, in witness of the truth.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquivel_, clerk of court.

[_Endorsed_: "Testimony of the resolution of the Audiencia of the
Filipinas in respect to the entrance of the Dutch corsair among
the islands."]

_Instructions given by the governor to Doctor Antonio de Morga_

The course of action to be pursued by Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor
of the royal Audiencia of these Filipinas Islands, and captain-general
of the fleet about to go in pursuit of the English [_sic_] enemy,
is as follows.

First: Inasmuch as news has been received that the English enemy,
against whom this expedition is directed, is stationed in the harbor of
Marayuma, and inasmuch as he might take flight without awaiting attack,
should he, by any chance, hear of our fleet, it is ordered that our
fleet, with the least possible delay, shall start in pursuit of the
enemy, in order to engage and fight him, until, with our Lord's help,
he is killed or sunk.

_Item_: The engagement with the enemy must be conducted with
all diligence and care, whether in firing or in boarding his
ships--whichever may be possible, in accordance with the best and
readiest opportunity permitted by the weather. Should the enemy take
flight on sighting our fleet, he must be pursued, until the object
sought is accomplished.

_Item_: Should the enemy have left this coast when the fleet is
despatched against him, and should information be received that he
has gone to any other of these islands, then the fleet shall seek and
pursue him, until he is captured or sunk. Should the enemy have left
these islands, he shall be pursued as far as possible, in accordance
with his [Morga's] judgment, in order that the end desired may be
attained.

_Item_: Inasmuch as the master-of-camp and the captains present at a
council of war, held on the second of this current month and year,
declared that, in their opinion, if no exact information as to the
course and route taken by the enemy should be received, said fleet
should follow the coast of Ilocos toward the strait of Zincapura, where
it is thought the enemy must pass, in order to make his voyage. Yet,
notwithstanding the said council of war, the said general, in the event
of receiving no information as to the enemy's course, shall pursue what
course he considers most advisable, as he is the one in direct charge
of the matter, and as weather and occasion allow, endeavoring to attain
the end desired--namely, the pursuit and destruction of the enemy.

_Item_: Should the fleet encounter any enemies whatsoever, pirates
or others, who may be among the islands, or who shall have left
them after committing depredations among them--whether English or
Japanese, Terrenatans or Mindanaos, or from any other nation--they
must be attacked and punished, in order that some good result may be
attained in this case also, should opportunity arise.

_Item_: After the capture of the enemy, as it is hoped, God our Lord
willing, the fleet will return with as many of the enemy as are still
living, and the captured ships.

_Item_: The booty found in said ships shall be divided among those
who gain the victory, as is customary on similar occasions.

_Item_: The greatest care must be taken that the crews of the fleet
are peaceable and well disciplined, in regard to which the regulations
followed on similar occasions shall be applied.

_Item_: Good management must be exercised in regard to the supplies
and ammunition carried; and they must be consumed sparingly, especially
if the fleet leaves these islands.

_Item_: If perchance the fleet shall have engaged the enemy, or
pursued him outside these islands, it must return to the islands as
soon as possible after the desired end has been attained. Should
the weather not permit the return voyage until the coming of the
monsoon, then he [Morga] shall endeavor to preserve, provide, and
equip the fleet with all needful things, at his Majesty's expense,
in order that his voyage may be made with the greatest promptness
and security possible. Given in the city of Manila, on the tenth of
December, one thousand six hundred. [16]

_Don Francisco Tello_

By order of the governor and captain-general,

_Gaspar de Azevo_



_Instructions given by Doctor Antonio de Morga to Captain Joan
de Alcega_

The order to be pursued by Captain Joan de Alcega, admiral of this
fleet of the king our sovereign, in the course of this voyage and
expedition, is as follows.

[1.] First: Inasmuch as the end for which this fleet has been prepared
is for the search and pursuit of the English [_sic_] ships, which
have come but lately among these islands, and, as we are informed,
are near this place; and as in conformity with the instructions of the
governor and captain-general of these islands, the said enemy must
be pursued and followed with all care and diligence wherever found,
and must be engaged, and captured or sunk: therefore it is necessary
that the said almiranta [17] proceed very cautiously, and be ready
with sailors, soldiers, and artillery, in order, on their part,
to accomplish the said purpose, when opportunity offers.

[2.] Further, the said almiranta shall follow the flagship to leeward,
unless it be rendered necessary for progress, or because of the
enemy, to beat to windward. It shall have a care that the other
smaller vessels of the fleet do not fall behind or deviate from the
course--this to be without prejudice to their navigation and voyage,
and their accompanying the flagship, which is the most important thing.

[3.] _Item_: Should opportunity be offered to engage the enemy,
the almiranta shall endeavor to engage him at the same moment as
the flagship or alone, in case that flagship is to leeward, or so
situated that it cannot do the same so quickly; for the flagship will
endeavor to come to its aid in whatever happens, with all haste and
speed possible.

4. _Item_: Upon overtaking the two ships of the enemy, efforts shall
be made to grapple and board their flagship, where their force is
carried. This same effort shall be made by the flagship of this fleet;
but in case the flagship of the enemy cannot be overtaken, and their
almiranta is in such a condition that something may be done with it,
it shall be attempted.

5. _Item_: Should our fleet attack the enemy and grapple, both
ships--the almiranta and the flagship--shall endeavor to grapple on the
same side. But if that cannot be done, care shall be taken that our
artillery and arquebuses are not turned on our own ships and men. In
this the greatest possible care and precaution shall be observed.

6. _Item_: Upon grappling the enemy, efforts shall be made to make
him fast to our ship and to lower his sails, so that he may not
become separated from us. Before boarding with troops, the nettings
and deck of the enemy shall be rendered safe by clearing and raking
them, in order that there may be as little risk as possible to our men.

7. In the course of this voyage in pursuit of the enemy, not a musket
or arquebus shall be fired, nor a powder-box touched, until after
his discovery. Neither shall any artillery be fired, for an effort
must be made to find the enemy at anchor, and to see that he have no
knowledge of the fleet that is pursuing him.

8. Should the almiranta be in any urgent need that requires aid,
a shot shall be fired in the direction of the flagship, as a signal
for help. The same will be done by the flagship in case it encounters
a like necessity.

9. _Item_: Should the flagship display a flag in the shrouds, it will
be a signal-call for a council of war, or other matters of importance,
for which the admiral shall come to the flagship in whatever boat
may be most convenient.

10. _Item_: One of the two caracoas that accompany the fleet shall
keep as close to the almiranta as possible, in order to act as tender
to it and supply its necessities.

11. _Item_: The greatest possible care and caution shall be taken
in the use of the ammunition and supplies, in order that this voyage
may be prolonged.

12. _Item_: All these vessels must endeavor to keep together. But if
one of the vessels should become separated from the others, by storm
or by any other necessity, no direction for the exact route to be
followed is given, as the design or course of the enemy is unknown. It
is observed only that all the vessels are under obligation to seek for
and pursue the enemy until they shall drive him, if nothing more shall
be possible, from these islands, and leave the islands safe and free
from the said enemy. But the best thing for the ship to do that becomes
separated, as said above, will be to find out the course taken by the
enemy, and to pursue that same course until it shall rejoin the fleet.

13. _Item_: Inasmuch as the governor and captain-general of these
islands has given Captain Joan Tello y Aguirre, who is aboard the
said almiranta, command as captain of infantry of what men I may
assign him, I do hereby assign to him the infantry troops aboard said
ship for the time that said expedition shall endure and last. The
said admiral shall deliver these men to said Captain Joan Tello y
Aguirre, in order that, as their captain, he may have charge of them,
and punish and discipline them.

All the above plan must be kept and observed now and henceforth
throughout the course of this voyage. I give these instructions
to the said admiral and other persons whom they may concern, in
conformity with the command that I hold from the said governor and
captain-general of these islands. In testimony thereof, I affixed my
signature aboard the flagship, off the island of Mariveles, Wednesday,
December thirteen, one thousand six hundred. [18]

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_





_Account of the battle between Morga and Van Noordt_


The license and daring of these heretical enemies of our holy
religion and faith are so well known to all, that no one can relate
satisfactorily the misfortunes that they have brought upon us,
the destructions and deaths that they have caused among us, and the
rich booty that they have carried away--which God in His righteous
judgment permitted. As they behold themselves so favored by fortune,
their greed is increasing continually, and they are continuing to
prosecute their designs, as was the case when Francisco Draque [19]
passed the Strait of Magellan and coasted along Chile and Piru, where
he seized the vessel "San Joan" of Anzona, with a large consignment
of silver, in the year 1579. Again in the year 1587, they passed the
straits under the English general Don Tomas Canbler. [20] Within sight
of the Californias they seized and sacked the vessel "Sanctana," which
was sailing from these islands to Nueva Espana with a large cargo of
silk and gold. Having easily made this seizure, they returned home,
displaying innumerable banners, streamers, and pennons; and it is
even affirmed that their sails were of damask. Their countrymen,
upon seeing them return so rich and prosperous in so short a time,
were so enthusiastic as to launch a similar undertaking. Among those
who resolved to make a voyage to these parts was Oliver Daudtnord [21]
a native of Nostradama [Amsterdam], one of the islands of Olanda and
Xelanda [Holland and Zeeland]. Being persuaded and informed by the
boatswain who sailed on the vessel that seized the ship "Sanctana"--to
whom he gave title as captain and chief pilot--and being attracted
to privateering, he asked permission of Mauricio, count of Nasao,
and prince of Orange, [22] in whose dominions the above islands are
located, to equip four ships. He received permission, whereupon he
collected as many men and as much of supplies and artillery as he
deemed necessary. He placed forty of the total of two hundred and
sixty men aboard two of the ships, which sailed from the port of
Nostradama--while the other two sailed from the port of Rrotadama
[Rotterdam]--on the eleventh or twelfth of August, in the year
1598. They laid their course toward the straits of Magellanes; and
while skirting the coast of Brasil, the Portuguese there hoisted a
flag of peace. This being seen by the English and Irish, twelve of
them went ashore in the shallop, where the Portuguese, who numbered
perhaps ten or twelve, received them with pleasant countenances, and
invited them to dine. But while at dinner the Portuguese murdered all
the Irishmen, among them the chief pilot, upon whom the others relied
because of his familiarity with the said course and voyage. Thereupon
the enemy, furious at the manner in which they had been treated,
landed forty or fifty arquebusiers in order to avenge the injury that
they had received. The Portuguese, in anticipation of this, intrenched
themselves very strongly, so that the enemy was unable to enter their
fort, but was, on the contrary, forced to retire to his boats with a
loss of six men. They set sail and laid their course for the strait
[of Magellan], where they arrived a year and seven months from the
time when they sailed from their own country. When they arrived
there they encountered many storms and head-winds, and sickness
to such an extent that they were obliged to transfer the men still
remaining on one ship to the other three. Then they sunk this vessel,
and with the three vessels pursued their course, followed continually
by storms which never left them. They sighted a vessel, which upon
investigation turned out to be English. By it they were informed
that another squadron of four vessels had sailed from Yngalaterra
[England], and that this vessel, being unable to carry so much sail
as the others, had been left to its fate, and knew naught more of
the others. The Dutch ships continued their course and sailed ahead,
so that within a few days they lost sight of this vessel. They passed
through the strait, where they lost four or five months. After this it
happened that the general fell out with his admiral, whom he charged
with negligence of his orders. The admiral was tried, the charges
sustained, and traitorous misdeeds proved against him; therefore
he was abandoned on a desert island near the coast of Chile. [23]
Then the general appointed as admiral one of the most valiant and
experienced soldiers of his band. He reached the coast of Chile,
where he made a few captures, although of no especial importance. The
first was a fragata, [24] which was seized near the island of Sancta
Maria Domingo de Rramos in the year 1600. They were informed by this
vessel that two ships had gone to Arica for the king's silver; but
they were warned that there were war-vessels at Callao. This fragata,
they say, was carrying three consignments of gold; but our men, upon
seeing that they were lost, threw it overboard. The enemy seized the
pilot, who was a Portuguese, and took the fragata along with them,
together with two negroes who were aboard of her. The latter told
them that the pilot had had all the gold thrown overboard, whereupon
they ordered the pilot to be cast into the sea alive. They captured
at Santiago on the same coast another vessel laden with tallow and
Cordovan leather [morocco]. Considering that it was worth little to
them, they burned it, and its crew escaped by swimming, except a few
Spaniards and natives who perished in the water. The enemy seeing
that they were acquiring small profit in that neighborhood, decided
to go up along the coast of Nueva Espana, and wait at the entrance of
the Californias for the annual vessels from these islands--the very
purpose and object for which they had resolved upon their navigation,
as is evident from the aforesaid. However they abandoned that purpose,
upon being told by the negroes whom they had brought with them that
Don Luis de Velazco, viceroy of Piru, had left Lima in person for
the port of Callao to superintend the preparation of a large fleet,
as he had been informed that pirates had passed and were along the
coast. The enemy, fearful of this, and recalling the fact that,
five years previously, Arricharse de Aquines, [25] an Englishman,
was defeated and captured by our men, after the greater part of his
force was killed, decided to abandon their voyage to the Californias,
and to head for these islands, with the intention of awaiting at the
Ladrones the shipments of silver from Nueva Espana to Manila. With
the said intent, they put to sea, but after sailing for several days,
they encountered a storm, which brought them all nearly to the verge
of destruction. One very dark and stormy night they lost sight of
the almiranta, and never saw it again. Seeing himself without this
vessel, the general chose as almiranta the fly-boat which he had
remaining. This was a vessel of perhaps fifty toneladas burden, called
"La Concordia," under command of a captain called Esias Delende. Then
they resumed their course, with the same intention of capturing our
silver, but, if unable to do more, to proceed to Maluco to barter for
cloves, for which purpose they carried mirrors, knives, basins, and
other small wares. They reached the Ladrones Islands--our Lord thus
permitting--four or five days after our vessels had passed. They
were detained there for several days, where, upon seeing their
plans frustrated, they burned the fragata that they had brought
from Piru. Thereupon they set sail and made the principal channel
of these islands, eighty or ninety leguas from this city of Manila,
where they stopped--either for iron, or, as our people here said,
because of a need of provisions; or, as I believe, and as they
themselves asserted, purposely. In short, instead of going by way of
Capul, the right and necessary path for the voyage they were making,
they entered a small bay called Albay, on the Camarines coast, where
they anchored as if they were in their own harbors, and with as little
fear and mistrust, as was clearly seen later on. They were hospitably
received in this district, for our people supplied them with abundance
of rice, with which to satisfy their need. They paid well for it,
in order to relieve their necessity--they could not, had they wished,
pay for more--for the purpose of assuring the natives that they had
not come to harm them. They told the natives that they were vassals
of the king Don Phelipe, our sovereign, in whose service and by whose
permission they were coming. As is proved by those selfsame papers,
the general showed the natives some counterfeit decrees, with which
they ought to be satisfied. A messenger was sent to Manila to give
information of the vessels that had arrived there. The news reached
here on the nineteenth of October, when Captain Xiron reported that he
was in the Camarines, and that he had boarded the general's ship, which
was coming well-supplied with munitions, arms, and artillery. He gave
information also concerning the number of men who, in his opinion,
were carried by the two vessels--about ninety men, of whom some
were sick; and of his dealings with them, and that they claimed to
be vassals of the king our sovereign. As soon as news of the enemy
reached this city, Don Francisco Tello, governor of these islands,
sent soldiers as scouts along the Camarines coast, with orders to
hide all the provisions, as he was unaware of the generous supply
that the enemy had. It is quite true, as the English themselves said,
that they could have had as much as they wanted, by paying for it.

Captain Pedro de Arseo and Captain Christobal de Arseo Etaminchaca,
both of the infantry, were also ordered to go with a command of men
along the coast to form ambushes, should the enemy land. But this
was all to no purpose, for the enemy, in little more than a month,
came out of the bay and sailed away on one course or another--which
seemed quite impossible to the people here, because they were confident
that the enemy could not get out of the bay in which they lay. But it
finally turned out quite to the contrary; for, as I say, they departed
and laid their course to Capul, until they cast anchor in a harbor,
where they are said to have cleaned the ships and sent men ashore to
burn a small native village. One of the English was left behind there
among the Indians, who seized and brought him to this city. They took
his deposition, in which he told some of the things related above.

Toward the last of November, one of the negroes, named Salvador,
who had escaped by swimming one night near Capul, arrived here. He
reported that the enemy were directing their course toward Maluco,
and that meanwhile they were trying to discover if there were any
plunder among these islands. He said that the capture of the enemy
would be greatly facilitated by attacking them with a fleet; and
his advice was not bad. All this time the enemy were coming nearer,
until they anchored in the port of El Frayle, near Mariveles, where
they lay very much at ease and without any fear, watching for the
vessels coming to this city. They captured a fragata, which they
sank. They took a quantity of flour from a Japanese vessel that was
on its way here. In order to quiet the Japanese, they gave them a
sword, and a few trinkets of no particular value. They captured a
Chinese champan, by which they were informed that the Chinese vessels
would arrive within a few months, laden with silks and merchandise of
great value. This news pleased the enemy so highly that they did not
propose to leave until they should seize some of the Chinese. From
this place they wrote a letter to Don Francisco Tello, in which they
declared that the Indians there had stolen a number of fowls from
them, that his Lordship should order the Indians to make them good,
and that they were coming to pay their respects to him. It may be
seen by this how little they feared the governor.

While these things were taking place, the governor had three ships
fitted out--one from the city of Cebu, to act as flagship; another,
a galizabra, still in the shipyard--which was launched a few days
before the departure--called "San Bartolome," to act as almiranta; and
a Portuguese patache [26] which had come from Malaca--with artillery,
men, and munitions sufficient to overbalance the greater strength of
the enemy. Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor of this royal Audiencia,
was appointed captain-general of this fleet, an appointment which
highly displeased the old captains, because in their opinion they
should have been considered. They thought it unjust that the auditors
should take part in the affair, especially because it left only
one auditor in the Audiencia. In the end, however, neither these
nor other reasons sufficed to prevent his appointment. The general
appointed as admiral Captain Joan de Alzega, a very courageous soldier,
of considerable reputation and credit, a Biscayan by birth. Many noble
and wealthy people assisted in serving his Majesty in this expedition,
in all about three hundred men, counting the paid soldiers, the seamen,
and others. They embarked very gallantly, with the resolution and
intention of attempting not only that undertaking, but another of
greater weight and difficulty.

The general was impatient for the fleet to depart, and accordingly set
sail on Tuesday, the twelfth of December. The flagship and almiranta
left, without waiting for the Portuguese vessel, or allotting it
sufficient crew or munitions, taking advantage of a tide which was
discovered at the time of their departure, which was favorable to
them. Accordingly they began their voyage. As they left the bay,
beyond the river of Canas, three leguas from the harbor, the shallop
which was carried on the stern of the almiranta went to the bottom,
and drowned two seamen who were in it. They continued their voyage,
and that night cast anchor at Mariveles, where they lay the rest of
the night. In the morning they were informed by the alferez Albarran,
who was stationed on that island as sentinel, that the enemy were
anchored at Azebu, five or six leagues from there. Upon receiving
this news, on that same day (St. Lucy's) our men began to spread the
_pavesades_, [27] and ballasted the flagship a trifle more. They were
all in the highest of spirits, and so eager were they to come to close
quarters with the enemy, that every hour's delay seemed a hundred
years to them. At midnight, or a little later, on St. Lucy's day,
the flagship weighed anchor without notifying its almiranta. The
latter, seeing the flagship make sail, followed. Without waiting
for the small Portuguese vessel, they followed the course of the
enemy, and at dawn the next day, which was the fourteenth of the
said month, they discovered them. They investigated and ascertained
beyond all doubt that it was the enemy. Their only fear was lest the
latter might escape from them. Our men thought that if but once the
enemy were grappled, they could overcome ten vessels. However, in a
little while they were made to see the difference between fighting
in imagination and actually using their hands in real earnest. In
short, as above stated, our flagship was leading the advance; and
when the enemy saw it, he ordered his almiranta to weigh anchor and
reconnoiter. The order was obeyed, and although the almiranta put out
to sea but a little distance, it recognized them as armed vessels,
which was reported to the general. The latter ordered the almiranta to
keep a sharp lookout and to run close-hauled; and, if it was apparent
that the two vessels were approaching to attack them, to return to
his assistance. But his intent was to see if he could not in any way
separate their force, because he said that, ship for ship, his force
was the abler. Since our flagship was drawing nearer and outstripping
the almiranta, it was overtaking the enemy, who put to sea with his
flagship and waited close-hauled. He fired a shot, which carried
away part of the tops and the main halyard on our flagship. Ours
returned the fire, but struck the water. When they almost touched
our ship, the enemy fired another shot, which destroyed a pump and
killed two or three Indians. Thereupon our men crowded on all sail,
and attacked with the greatest determination that was ever seen--for,
as they say, they were going with all sails set. Our ship grappled with
its opponent, so that our men could board easily. With the vessels in
this condition, shots were fired on both sides. About twelve of our
men leaped aboard the enemy's ship. The enemy retreated to the bow,
where they intrenched themselves, and made loopholes, through which
they fired their muskets--although, being fearful lest our almiranta
should come up to grapple with them, they did but little damage,
before they were compelled to strike their own colors and hoist
ours in their place. At this moment our almiranta came up with the
intention of boarding on the other side. Thereupon our men who were
aboard the enemy's ship cried out: "Victory! victory! for the king
of Espana! Pass on ahead! Do not fire and kill us, for the ship has
surrendered already." However, the admiral, Joan de Alezega, caused two
pieces to be fired and a discharge of his musketry and arquebuses upon
the enemy. It is understood that with one piece of this broadside,
he did the enemy considerable injury, as was proved. As soon as
the admiral understood that our men were advising him to pass on,
and that the enemy's almiranta was fleeing under a press of canvas,
he bore away in pursuit of it.

The enemy's flagship, seeing that our almiranta had departed, began
to serve their artillery more rapidly, and their musketry from the
bow, so that they inflicted considerable loss upon those of our men
who boarded their ship with only shields on their arms, and their
swords. In this way they would have defeated the enemy if they
had attacked with fifty men in a body. Instead of taking such good
counsel, they boarded in parties of threes, while the enemy continued
to wound and kill them. Even this lack of system and concord did not
stop here, but it is understood that the enemy pierced our flagship
with a ball at the water-line. Our men, flushed with the exultation
of the victory they had won at first, and confused by much shouting,
did not hasten to repair the damage; for they were people who did
not like to be ordered, and their general could do nothing with them,
as they were all captains and men of distinction. On account of this,
and as the ship was so occupied by the sailors' berths, they could not,
or did not, notice the shot which our ship received. When they did
perceive it by the rising of the water to the second deck, they all
became frightened; and, instead of boarding the enemy's ship, with
the thought that if they were losing a ship, they were gaining one,
they began to devise means of escape. Accordingly some leaped into
the enemy's small boat without orders from the general, whereby a few
escaped, while others had recourse to our own small boat. Thus eight or
ten of them contrived to escape, without waiting for anything else. A
little before this, they addressed the general, Antonio de Morga,
saying: "Escape, your Grace, for the ship is sinking." He answered
that it was not suitable to his reputation to leave his ship and not
die with all the others, from which answer it was understood that,
in case the ship went down, he was confident of his own strength and
dexterity. The rest of our men--it may be seen what sort of men they
were--seeing that the vessel was settling little by little, and that
the enemy did not cease to serve their guns, huddled together in fright
as they saw their ship filling with water--a state of affairs which
would make others undertake not only the exploit of boarding the ship
and mastering it, but even more difficult enterprises. In short, by the
just judgments of God, which our sinful countrymen so well deserved,
He disturbed their minds and deserted them, so that they would make no
effort, excepting a few--of whom I shall make particular mention below,
because they deserve it. There was one who, in order that he might
take them with him, ordered a gold chain and other jewels brought
to him. Seeing things in this condition and the danger so evident,
a father of the Society, by name Father Santiago, took a crucifix
in his hands, and commenced to call out to the Christian Spaniards:
"Where is that courage of yours? See, this is the cause of God! Die,
die like good soldiers of Jesus Christ! If you do not care to be food
for fishes, consider that the lesser of the two evils which threaten
us is to board that ship of the enemy, for if we are losing one ship,
we are gaining another." After this exhortation, several men hastened
to board their enemy's ship. Those who did not do it were prevented
by two reasons: first, because they saw a fire breaking out on the
enemy's ship, caused by some charges of powder which they set off
purposely to terrify our men, and make them believe that they were
about to blow up the ship; the second, because our pilot told them
that, although the ship was so full of water up to the second deck,
all hands could be saved even if the ship were lost, as the distance
from there to the island of Fortuna was little more than one-half
legua, and, if they would cast loose from the enemy and crowd on sail,
their purpose would be just as well effected. The idea of escaping with
their lives seemed very attractive to all, and accordingly this plan
was immediately put into execution. They began to cut the cables and
to cast loose from the enemy. In a few moments our ship started off
in such a way that they saw the dead bodies of drowned men floating
about between decks. The general, upon seeing this, began to strip
off his clothing, at the persuasion of a private servant of his named
Josepe Denaveda, who gave him a mattress of [_MS. worn_] on which the
two naked men threw themselves into the sea. Many others did likewise,
though only a few reached shore. Our ship gave a lurch and foundered,
carrying down with it all those whom fear of their inability to swim
prevented from taking to the water--some of whom were armed--so that
the majority of the men were carried down with the ship. Many who were
very good swimmers were dragged to the bottom by the force of the
suction. All our men who were still on the surface tried by all the
means in their power to save their lives. It was the unhappy fate of
some of them to reach the enemy's ship itself where those heretics
hastened to receive them with pikes, and speared them with great
cruelty. Among those they wounded Captain Gomez de Molina with a lance;
however he continued to swim thus wounded, until he reached the shore,
where he died from loss of blood, at the water's edge. In this way
many died, and those who escaped took shelter on the island of Fortuna,
eighteen leguas from the city, until some vessels might pass by.

At this moment the small Portuguese ship, seeing the outcome, laid
its course to Malaca, because it had arrived only at that moment. Our
ship had grappled with the enemy for six hours, from eight in the
morning until two in the afternoon, when the former foundered.

Admiral Joan de Alcaga, who was chasing the enemy's almiranta, overtook
it, and after he had fired two or three volleys of his artillery,
musketry, and arquebuses, he grappled it on its stern-quarter on the
starboard side. Our men immediately boarded the enemy, the said admiral
being among the first. The enemy defended themselves well, serving
their artillery and thrice setting a fire purposely with some powder
cartridges, but our men hastened to put out the fire with buckets
of water. The enemy seeing the strength of their assailants and how
unfortunately the action was turning out, because the best of them
were killed, honorably surrendered. Admiral Joan de Alcaga agreed,
and so they were captured with nineteen men alive. On our side only
one man was killed by a gun-shot, one Joan Baptista de Mondragon,
a nephew of the precentor in the cathedral at Manila. Another from
the Canarias was drowned while trying to jump from one ship to the
other. Some were seriously wounded; the captain and master of our
almiranta, Joan Lopez de Serra, was shot through the thigh, and a
certain Calderon was shot through one side of his shoulder and part
of his arm. There were others wounded, but none seriously. Some booty
was found on the vessel, two pipes of oil and two of wine, a number
of basins, candlesticks, and brass mortars, iron in plates and bars,
and some other small wares of little value. They captured twelve pieces
of artillery--eight heavy and excellent pieces of cast iron, and four
small ones. Among other things captured, was found a small iron coffer
which was kept in the after-cabin, and in which the admiral carried the
papers and commissions which the prince of Orange had given him when
he appointed him captain of that ship. One was in his own tongue and
the other in ours, which is the one copied at the end of this relation.

One or two charts were found, which they brought for Piru; these the
holy Inquisition has in its possession. Then Admiral Joan de Alcega
ordered a few sailors to be transferred to the ship surrendered by
the enemy, and set them to making repairs in order to take it into
Manila; for its main mast and rigging were lost, and our men in
boarding left nothing standing by which they could navigate. They
took it to an island near by, called Luban, While there, our men
sighted a dismantled ship which seemed to be coming toward them,
which they took to be the enemy's flagship, which was already ours,
and that it was being sent, like their own, to be repaired. Their
expectation was not unfounded, for they had seen our men in it and
heard them shouting, "Victory!" so that it seemed to them that nothing
else could be possible. But in actual truth it was the enemy, who was
coming, upon seeing his almiranta, to see if he could assist it. But
when the enemy saw the two ships close together, and heard no noise
of guns, he tacked about, and hitherto nothing has been known of his
whereabouts. It is believed that his flagship was badly injured and
battered, since it did not wait, although victorious by having sent
our flagship to the bottom. However, we may give credit to some who
said that when they were in the water, they saw the crew of the enemy
casting lances at our men who were swimming, whom they could overtake.

Our almiranta, after its recent success, set sail to return to Manila,
where they thought that our flagship was calmly lying at anchor. They
arrived at Mariveles and there they heard of the misfortune our
people had suffered. The admiral sent a messenger to the governor of
this city to procure his orders, and to tell him that he was waiting
there. He was ordered to follow instantly and pursue the enemy as far
as Malaca, or wherever else he might hear that he was. Immediately
he received another order to cruise among those islands--when, if he
should not find the enemy, he was to return. This he did after sending
the survivors of the enemy to this city. The admiral himself came
later to the city, and the governor ordered him to be arrested, but
afterward set him at liberty. I do not know what justification there
was for either act. After all this, the governor, with perfect justice,
notwithstanding the word that Admiral Joan de Alcega had pledged to
them, ordered all the prisoners to be garroted. [28] This sentence
was fulfilled and executed upon thirteen of them because the rest
were boys. The latter, who are not young children, are divided among
the monasteries, with I know not what end in view. Twelve [of those
executed] died good Catholics and converts, and with many tears, so
that the religious were obliged to administer the most holy sacrament
of the eucharist to them. The Confraternity of La Sancta Misericordia
buried them with great charity. The only one who refused conversion
was the English admiral [Lambert Biezman], the most stubborn fellow
[29] and the most obstinate heretic I have ever seen in my life.

According to the reports received, a total of one hundred and
thirty-seven men were killed or drowned.

_Copy of the commission which was found in the iron box_

(This is a faithful and exact copy of a letter and patent, written
lengthwise on white parchment in large letters, and illuminated with
letters of gold. The first line is covered with a pendent seal of
red wax, the size of a consecrated wafer. This document appears to
have been issued by Mauricio de Nashau, who styles himself "Prince
of Orange," as commission for the captain or second in command of a
certain armed fleet, and is countersigned by J. Melander; its tenor
is as follows. [30])

Mauricio, Prince of Orange; Count of Nasau, Catzenelleboghen, and
Bietz; Marquis of Veer and Flissinge; governor, captain-general,
and admiral of the United Provinces of Flandes, etc.: To all who see
or hear these presents, our affectionate greeting, etc. Whereas, in
order to contract friendship with certain foreign nations and kingdoms,
and for many other considerations, we have seen fit to send a goodly
number of vessels, in good order and well equipped, to the coasts
of Asia, Africa, and America, and the islands of Eastern Yndia, to
make treaties and carry on trade with the subjects and inhabitants
thereof; and because we have been informed that the Spanish and
the Portuguese are hostile to the subjects of these provinces, and
obstruct their navigation and commerce in those parts, contrary
to all natural right of all cities and nations; we have found it
necessary to entrust, to certain valiant and experienced captains,
the task of executing this our intention. Being well-informed of the
fidelity and experience of Esaias de Lende, we have appointed him
captain of the ship named "La Concordia," of about fifty toneladas
register, with very detailed and explicit orders to go to the said
islands, to resist and make war on, and to harm and injure as far
as possible, all the said Spanish and Portuguese, and any others
who attempt to obstruct them in their duties, and in the performance
of everything which shall be further commanded by their admiral and
captain-general, Olivier van Noordt. That he may execute this, his
commission and charge, with greater facility and readiness, we have
ordered that he shall raise as many men as he shall deem necessary,
and as shall be entrusted to him by the said admiral. We strictly
order these men to obey and respect the said captain, and to obey all
his orders to them in the name of the said admiral. In everything
else he shall do all that a good and faithful captain is bound and
obliged to do--always excepting that neither he nor any of his men
shall dare to do any harm or injury to the subjects of his imperial
Majesty, or those of the kings of Francia, Anglatierra, Escocia,
Denemarqua, Suedia, and Polonia, or of the princes of the Empire,
[31] or of any other rulers who are friends of these provinces, or
inclined to the true Christian religion. Therefore we request and
require all the said kings and princes, and all other states, and
all persons whom the said Esaias de Lende shall encounter; and we
also give express orders to all admirals, vice-admirals, colonels,
captains, and other military men on sea or land, and others who are
under the government of these provinces and owe them obedience--to
recognize him as captain of the said ship, and to allow him, with
the said ship and crew, not only to go and trade wherever he shall
please, but also to assist him, and extend him all favor, aid,
and succor, from which we shall receive great and especial favor
and satisfaction. We will render favors to them on like occasions,
and our people will perform for them the services for which they are
under obligation. Given at La Haya [The Hague], on the twelfth of
May in the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight.

_Maurici de Nashau_

By order of his Excellency:

_J. Melander_

[This is followed by a certificate (dated February 6, 1601) of the
accuracy of the copy, with the statement that the original had been
delivered to the royal notary for copying by Doctor Antonio de Morga.]





Documents of 1601



    Report to the governor, on the battle with the Dutch. Antonio
    de Morga, January 5.
    Annual letters from the Philippine Islands. Francisco Vaez,
    S.J.; June 10.
    Letter to Felipe III. Diego Garcia, S.J.; July 8.
    Letter from the fiscal to Felipe III. Hieronimo de Salazar
    y Salcedo; July 16.
    Complaint of the cabildo of Manila against Morga. Gonzalo
    Ronquillo de Vallesteros, and others; July 20.
    Letter to Felipe III. Antonio de Morga; July 30.
    Grant to Jesuit school in Cebu. Council of Indias; December 11.




_Sources_: All these documents save one are obtained from MSS. in the
Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla; the second is taken from John Hay's
compilation _De rebus Iaponicis, Indicis, et Pervanis_ (Antverpiae,
M. DC. v.), pp. 950-968, from the copy in the Library of Congress.

_Translations_: The first and fourth of these documents are translated
by Norman F. Hall, of Harvard University; the second, by Henry
B. Lathrop, of the University of Wisconsin; the third, fifth, and
sixth, by Robert W. Haight; the seventh, by James A. Robertson.




Morga's Report to the Governor on the Battle with the Dutch


_Copy of a petition of Dr. Antonio de Morga to the governor, in which
he gives an account of all that happened in the expedition against
the Dutch corsair, presented as soon as he returned from it._

This is a copy well and faithfully made from a petition which it
seems was presented by Dr. Antonio de Morga, auditor of the royal
Audiencia of these islands, to Don Francisco Tello, knight of the
Order of Santiago, who is governor and captain-general of these
islands. This is in connection with a suit brought by order of the
said governor against Joan de Alcega, admiral of the royal fleet
which went against the Dutch enemy which was sailing among these
islands. The said auditor was commander-in-chief of this fleet,
and the admiral was the said Joan de Alcega, who deserted the royal
flagship in time of battle. It runs as follows:

I, Dr. Antonio de Morga, auditor of the royal Audiencia and
Chancilleria of these Philipinas Islands, say that in the month of
October just passed, in the year one thousand six hundred, there
came to these Islands for the purpose of robbery one Oliver de Nor,
corsair and a heretic, and a native of the states of Flandes, with
two men-of-war well provided with men, artillery, and munitions. One
of the two ships was large and strong, and was the flagship; the
other, smaller and of less importance and strength, was the admiral's
ship. With these he had entered the South Sea through the Strait of
Magallanes, and skirted the coast of Chile; and then came and anchored
outside the entrance to these islands, in the bay of Alvay. After
making inquiries about affairs in these islands, and finding that
there was no fleet, and no arrangement by which one that could molest
him could be created, he passed by Capul and proceeded on his way
until he reached the mouth of the bay of this city of Manila. There
he made some captures and committed some robberies on vessels which
entered, and he was hoping to commit greater ones on the ships which
are expected this year, both from China and from Nueva Espana, with
the money belonging to these islands. On this account your Lordship,
together with the royal Audiencia, by a decree in due form dated the
last day of the aforesaid month of October, commanded me to go to
the port of Cavite and to place it and keep it in a state of defense;
and likewise to finish some vessels which had been begun there in the
dockyard, and to prepare and put in order those which could be used
quickly for a fleet to go out and resist and punish the enemy. By
working personally day and night, without having anything given to
me for it, I put all this into operation with the greatest diligence
and care, in thirty-two days. When I came to this city to give your
Lordship an account of the good condition of the fleet--in order that
it might be immediately arranged who was to go out in it, and the
soldiers and seamen who were to embark--considering the fact that
the corsair still remained near this bay, your Lordship, influenced
by urgent causes and reasons, ordered and commanded me in writing,
in the name of our lord the king, to set out with the volunteers of
this city, who were placed at my disposal for this expedition. It was
understood that I was to conduct this expedition, and, with another
body composed of hired soldiers from this district, was to go out as
quickly as possible in search of the enemy, and was to fight with him
until I overcame him or sent him to the bottom. There were many other
conditions which are contained more fully in the letter of instructions
which your Lordship gave me, signed and sealed, to which I refer. In
fulfilment of this, and only for the service of God and of our lord
the king (which service your Lordship commended to me so strongly),
leaving my house and quiet life, leaving my wife and nine children,
I obeyed your Lordship's command. At my own cost, without having
anything supplied from the royal treasury either to myself or to the
volunteers who were with me, and who formed the larger part of all
the body, I embarked on the fleet on the twelfth day of the month of
December of the aforesaid year, taking as flagship the vessel "San
Diego," which is of about two hundred tons burden; and in its convoy
the ship "San Bartolome" as admiral's ship, of the same burden,
in command of the captain Joan de Alcega, admiral of the fleet,
and other small vessels for the service of the fleet.

That same day I set sail from the port of Cavite in search of the
enemy; and on the following Thursday, the fourteenth of December,
I came in sight of him. Both ships of his fleet were anchored near
the mouth of the bay at the point of Balagtigui, with his boats at
the stern. The flagship of the enemy, from behind, was very easily
seen to be a strong vessel, but the admiral's ship was not. When
he discovered the two ships of the royal fleet and saw that we were
keeping together, in order jointly to board and attack his flagship,
he weighed anchor; and, after sending the said admiral's ship out
to sea under all sail, in order to divide us, thinking that one of
our ships would go after it, he with his flagship luffed toward our
vessels, in order to get to windward of us, which he was not able
to accomplish. On the contrary, when I discovered the number and
excellence of his artillery, with which he began to cannonade me, I
saw that success must consist in coming hand to hand with him as soon
as possible, with both of our vessels, according to the arrangement
which I had made on the day before, the thirteenth of December, when
I had given orders and instructions to that effect in writing to the
said admiral. So with my flagship I boarded the corsair's flagship,
and grappled with it side to side, on the port quarter of the enemy,
in the expectation that my admiral would do the same on the other
side, as he was perfectly able to do. At the first volley from the
artillery and arquebuses I swept the deck of the enemy, unrigged
his main and mizzen masts, sent his yards and shrouds into the sea,
burned his sails, and won and took into my power the flag at the
topmast, the standard and flag at the stern, and the others which the
ship bore. Then I sent on board of him a band of men with arms and a
banner of infantry, who captured the poop and the cabin and took the
shallop or long-boat which it had at the stern. All the enemy retired
below the harpings and coverings at the bow. Seeing from there that my
admiral was already coming upon them, and that they could not defend
themselves, they sent to ask protection for their lives, and to say
that they would surrender; and I granted their request, in order to end
the battle with the least possible loss and with the greatest safety.

At this time the admiral's ship of my fleet ought to have boarded the
enemy as I had done, according to his duty, and to the order which he
had from me; and, without orders from me, ought not to have passed by,
and still less to have gone in pursuit of, the opposing admiral's
ship which was going out to sea. These orders, for many reasons,
I could not be expected to give him, especially at that time, until
the flagship had completely surrendered and a guard had been placed
over it and over the people on it, which would be impossible with my
ship alone. Nevertheless our admiral aforesaid, for some reasons of
his own which he had, passed by, and with all sail started to pursue
and overtake the admiral's ship of the corsair. When the enemy on the
flagship saw this, and that they were alone, and that, on account of
the superiority of his ship and artillery, he might hope to defend
himself, he turned a deaf ear to the terms which I sent him; and he
not only did not surrender, but he put himself on the defensive, and
fought with me with all the fury of his artillery and of his musketry,
from both sides of the ship, and with fire contrivances, with which
he was well supplied. The battle lasted six hours, with both ships
lashed side to side, but in all this time my admiral aforesaid did not
leave his course, or return to succor or help me. On the contrary he
began, in our sight, to fight with the admiral's ship of the enemy,
which he had overtaken, and he easily captured it because it was
a very small ship, with about twenty-two men, including boys and
the sick; and after it had surrendered he remained there, instead
of returning to help me in time of battle. The enemy killed ten or
twelve Spaniards of my men, and some Indians of the service, and on
his side most of his men died; so that, being still so hard pressed,
he himself set fire to his ship of his own accord, at the stern,
where our men were on the poop with the banner. The fire so increased
there that we feared that both ships were going to be consumed.

Furthermore, my flagship, which was not a strong one, having been made
especially for the merchant trade, sprang a leak at the bow with the
force of the artillery which had been fired in this long combat; and it
made water so fast that nothing could be done, because we had no pumps,
as they had been knocked to pieces by one of the enemy's shot. On this
account, by the advice and counsel of the chief pilot and of the seamen
who understood the situation, I was asked to loosen myself from the
enemy and to go to save my ship (or at least the artillery and men
on it) at the island of Fortun, which was to leeward of us a legua
and a half away, and which they said we could reach quickly. When
I saw the opinion of the aforesaid men and the danger which my ship
was in, both from the fire on the enemy and from the risk of sinking,
I followed the advice; and, having withdrawn the men and the banner
that I had on the poop-castle of the corsair's ship, which was left,
as I have said, so broken and disabled, I started for the aforesaid
island of Fortun to make repairs; but the water which the ship was
taking in increased so that all at once the ship sank.

When the enemy saw himself alone, with the few men that he had, he
hastily began to put out the fire on his ship; and with the foresail,
which he had had up all the time, he took flight toward the island
of Luban, where he has not appeared since that day, nor in any other
of the adjacent islands. From this and from the fact that he was so
broken and so stripped of men and without any long-boat, it may be
inferred that he went to the bottom. Some indications of this have
been seen since in the shape of yards and sails, and bodies of the
enemy's men, so that we may presume that it is so.

When the flagship of the fleet on which I was went to the bottom,
there was no shallop or boat to saye the men, because the boats had
been taken by some sailors and soldiers, who to escape the danger, had
gone with them to the aforesaid island of Fortun. Consequently when the
ship sank I was left in the water, and saved myself at the end of four
hours by swimming with great exertion to the island of Fortun, which
was a legua and a half away, against many waves and a high wind. The
same thing was done by two hundred other persons, including Spaniards
and slaves, but the rest drowned and perished, with what was left in
the ship. Then I made haste to take all the people from that island,
because it was without inhabitants and without water, and I started
them on the way to this city. After that I went along the coast to
get information about the enemy which had fled, and in search of the
admiral's ship and of the captured vessel; but I could not find them,
nor could I in the islands of that district, although I searched among
them in light vessels, for they had departed thence. At last, having
heard that they were near Mariveles, I came to claim them, but did
not enter them because your Lordship wrote to me, at just that time,
to come to this city on other business in the service of his Majesty.

Thus that expedition ended. It is true that the desired end was
accomplished--namely, to destroy the aforesaid corsair so that he
should not be able to do the damage which he was doing in this sea,
and to conquer him, which was done. Nevertheless it could have been
accomplished fully without the loss which there was, if my orders
had been followed in the aforesaid fleet, and if there had not been
other transgressions and irregularities--which I should have proceeded
against and executed justice upon if I had had opportunity to return
to the aforesaid fleet, as I tried to do. Since on my part this is
all ended, it remains for your Lordship, as captain-general of this
realm, to take action in this cause--not only to execute whatever
may be just in the matter, but also in order to give an account to
our lord the king of what has happened. I have had this in mind in
giving to your Lordship so faithful and exact an account of the case,
and of the aforesaid irregularities, of which the ones that need
particular attention are the following.

First. When the fleet was on the point of setting out from the port
of Cavite, although it was already scantily equipped with seamen
and artillerymen (which was a matter of the greatest importance),
the majority of those who had been provided and supplied absented
themselves and fled from the aforesaid fleet at the time of setting
out, so that they could not be reached; and the fleet had to go
without them, which was the cause of a great deal of suffering and
loss. It can be determined who were guilty of this through the lists
of allowances and apportionment which are in the possession of the
factor of the royal treasury, and through the register which the
accountant afterwards made of both fleets at Mariveles.

_Item_: Although your Lordship, at my request, had some seamen sought
out in this city, and had them sent to me with the sergeant Pedro Lopez
to Mariveles (where the fleet was anchored) on Wednesday, December
thirteenth, and although the aforesaid men arrived on Wednesday,
they refused to go on the expedition because they were men of wealth
and property; and they did not go to the fleet that night, but went
to the settlement on the island. There they remained until the fleet
had gone in pursuit of the enemy in the early morning, when they left
the village and returned to this city.

Third. The Sangley nation of this city offered themselves, with three
ships, according to their custom, to go in the service and convoy of
the aforesaid fleet. They were armed and set out after it from Cavite
for that purpose, but when they reached the station at Mariveles,
where the fleet was anchored, they left it; and it was necessary to
send to them and order that on the following day they should join the
fleet and follow it without moving off, under pain of their lives. Not
only did they not comply with this, but on the following day, when
they saw the battle, they remained more than three leguas behind,
looking at it; and although they could have been of great assistance,
when they saw my flagship founder, they returned toward the bay,
ringing bells and beating drums, as is their custom.

Fourth. The aforesaid captain Joan de Alcega, admiral of the fleet, did
not obey the orders and instructions which on the day before the battle
I gave to him in writing, signed with my name, according to which
both ships, flagship and admiral's ship, were to board and fight with
the enemy's flagship, because it was a strong vessel. Nevertheless,
though he had seen me board, he passed by without having an order
from me to do so, and still less having any order to follow and to
fight with the opposing admiral's ship, and thus abandon me. If he
had done as he was under obligation to do, the flagship would have
been made to surrender completely without the loss of one of our
men; and we could have captured for his Majesty a beautiful ship
and twenty-six pieces of artillery, and many other things of price
and value for all, and my flagship would not have been lost, and the
people of worth who died in it would not have perished. After that,
it would have been a sure and easy thing to capture the admiral's
ship, which was a small boat, of no strength. Your Lordship should
send promptly to the admiral to write the instructions which I gave
him originally in Mariveles on the thirteenth of December by the hand
of the captain Joan Tello y Aguirre, who came for them--signed with
my name, without any erasures or changes whatever--because through
them the above matter will be verified, without any fraud or deceit.

Fifth. After my flagship had foundered, the enemy in his, as broken
as it was, took to flight with only the foresail up, and passed
within sight of the admiral's ship of my convoy, and although the
admiral was aware of my loss, and that that was the enemy's ship,
and made sail after her, he did not try to follow her; and so he let
her go, although he could easily have overtaken her, as she bore only
the foresail, and could have captured her, as she was so broken and
without men. Most of us who were on the island of Fortun saw this
from there; and the captive Flamenco admiral will say the same thing,
as well as those who came in our admiral's ship and remained in it.

_Item_: Although our admiral's ship ought to have come in search of its
flagship, which it saw sinking in the sea from its companion ship--or
at least in aid of its men who had escaped to the island of Fortun,
which was near, in order to rescue us from that island, uninhabited
and without water, where we were in evident risk of our lives--yet
he did not do it. On the contrary, he went away with all speed, and
returned to the mainland to the station of Mareyuma; consequently
we could not find him, and he could not receive orders from me, his
commander, concerning what he was to do in such matters as following
the aforesaid enemy (in which a great opportunity was lost), as well
as in other things in the service of his Majesty which ought to have
been done.

Seventh and last. Although the aforesaid admiral ought not to have
allowed out of his convoy the vessel which he had captured and taken
from the enemy, so that it might not be lost again on account of
his having put very few men on it, he left it; and, under pretense
that he was sending it to be repaired, he ordered it to the island of
Luban with other intentions--where on the same day, near night-time,
there appeared the flagship of the enemy, which, if it had seen this
ship, could have seized and taken it easily, because it was without
defense. Then, without having been repaired, it left Luban and returned
to the aforesaid admiral's ship at Mareyuma.

Of all this your Lordship is sufficiently informed through the reports
which have been sent to your Lordship about the aforesaid event, and
through the investigations made by the alcalde-mayor of the province
of Balayan, in whose territory and under whose jurisdiction the event
took place. Your Lordship will also be informed by the searchings
and investigations which your Lordship ought to make concerning the
aforesaid case and every particular of it, personally and very soon,
before the guilty ones pervert them so that the truth may not be
understood. They have been preparing for this, holding investigations
before themselves in the admiral's ship, about their own affairs
and business; but opportunity ought not to be given for these,
nor any attention paid to them, for they are void and fraudulent,
and malicious.

I ask and pray your Lordship to do and perform in this matter, since
it is of such quality and importance, whatever may be proper in the
service of God and of his Majesty, so that those may be punished who
are guilty in a matter of such harm and loss, and that our lord the
king and the gentlemen of his Council of the Indias may be informed
faithfully of all that has happened and of what has been done--since,
as far as I am concerned in this matter, as there no longer remains
to me any authority or jurisdiction of commander in the fleet, I have
done my duty. For this I have, etc., and ask it for testimony.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_

In Manila, on the fifth of the month of January in the year one
thousand six hundred and one, before the governor and captain-general
of these islands, Don Francisco Tello, appeared the doctor Antonio
de Morga, and presented this petition; and when his Lordship had
seen it, he ordered it to be joined with the investigation which
the alcalde-mayor of Balayan made, in order that the other proper
verifications may be made according to what is provided, and that
whatever is just may be done.

_Tello_

Before me:

_Gaspar de Azebo_

This copy was made, as has been said, from the aforesaid original
petition, which is in the aforesaid suit of petition and mandate by the
aforesaid auditor, and is exact and correct. In the city of Manila,
on the twentieth of the month of November in the year one thousand
six hundred and two; the witnesses being: Joan P[ablo?] Monfredo,
and Gregorio del Castillo, and Josephe de Naveda Alvarado.

In testimony of truth, I have affixed my seal.

_Joan Paez de Sotomayor_, royal notary.

We, the notaries who sign here, certify and give our word that Joan
Paez de Sotomayor, by whom this testimony is signed and sealed, is
a royal notary, as he signs himself, and commissioner of the royal
Audiencia of these islands; and, as such, complete faith and credit
has been given and is given to all acts and writings which have passed
and do pass before him, in court and out of it. And, to certify to
this, we give these presents in Manila on the twentieth of November
in the year one thousand six hundred and two. I have affixed my seal,
in witness of truth.

_Francisco de Valencia_, notary-public.

I have affixed my seal, in testimony of truth.

_Jhoan Francisco Aparicio_, notary-public.





Annual Letters from the Philippine Islands


_From Father Francisco Vaez, [32] June 10, 1601, to Reverend Father
Claudio Aquaviva, general of the Society of Jesus._


Amid all the calamities and miseries which it has pleased the Lord to
inflict on these islands, the chief has been the loss of some ships
which were wrecked, including among others the flagship and the ship
of the second in command. They set sail from this coast during the
last year, 1600, for Nueva Espana, being laden with a large amount of
treasure and merchandise; and by them the records of this province
and the letters from Japan for your Paternity were sent. But, after
sailing for eight months, these ships encountered a violent contrary
wind, and, having on board a great number of sailors, were gradually
driven back by sickness, hunger, and the fury of the waves, which
swept the men from the very decks of the ships to be drowned in the
waters. The vessels struck on rocks and were wrecked, a few men only
being rescued, like the servants of Job, from the immediate danger,
to announce the destruction--which, being increased by one misfortune
and mishap in war after another, heaped sorrow upon us. On one of these
ships, called the "San Geronimo," was Father Pedro Lopez de Parra, a
professed religious of our Society--who, as we trust, after this long
voyage (or rather that longer one of thirty-seven years in religion),
has entered the gate of eternal life, laden with a rich treasure
of good works. He taught philosophy and theology in Nueva Espana,
having been one of the first members of the Society formerly sent
thither; he trained our ministers with fruitful results. Although we
have heard nothing certain with regard to the details of his death,
yet, as he took great delight in the duty of hearing confessions and
helping souls, it is likely that with great devotion he aided all in
that extremity of danger. [33]

In another disaster we have lost another priest and a brother, if loss
be the proper name to give to the death of those who have been slain
for the gain of souls, and while aiding their brethren in a just war
against heretic pirates. These were Hollanders and Zeelanders who
were driven to the Philippine Islands in the year 1600, and came to
get booty on the sea called the Northern Ocean, or "Mar del Norte"
(for they had already made spoil of a Portuguese ship), and, after
passing the Strait of Magellan, had, in that southerly ocean called
"Mar del Sur," done likewise with a small vessel from Peru. Their
leading vessels, the flagship and the almiranta, took a station six
leagues from Manila, where the Spanish, Japanese, and Chinese ships
had to unload their cargoes, and to which all the smacks and other
small boats that left the city had to hold their course. Against
these ships of the enemy there were sent out from Manila two ships
provided with three hundred of the best soldiers of these islands,
together with many bombards and other equipments of war. In the chief
ships were Father Diego de Santiago and Brother Bartolomeo Calvo,
at the request of the general, Antonio de Morga, auditor of the
royal Audiencia, and of other officers of rank, who were accustomed
to confess to the said father.

Now when the father had exerted himself to receive the confessions
of the soldiery, and had exhorted them to fight bravely, on the
fourteenth of December they came in sight of the enemy; and the
flagship spread its sails and bore down so swiftly on the other
flagship that the passage from one to the other was easy. In the
conflict our men tore away the enemy's flags and carried them back to
their own ship, shouting, "Victory!" with joyful voices. Just then
our ship, having taken in a great quantity of water from all sides,
was by the permission of God suddenly swallowed in the waves with
all the sailors, except a few who by the help of a skiff captured
from the Dutch, or by swimming, made their way to land. The general
was one who threw himself into the water with two flags of the enemy's.

Then the almiranta, having encountered the enemy's almiranta,
captured it, and carried it away to Manila, where punishment was
inflicted on all the sailors. Among the number of those on our side
who were slain or drowned, a hundred and fifty-nine in all, Father
Diego was drowned. He had heard, as it appeared, the confessions of
all; and as he was making the effort to throw himself clear into the
sea, he was called back by the voice of a captain desiring to make
his confession. While he was hearing the confession he was drowned,
with the brother and the rest. The father was in the twenty-ninth year
of his age, and had lived fifteen years in the Society. The brother,
his companion, was of the same age, and had lived in the Society seven
years; he had entered it in these regions. He was a man endowed with
every virtue, being especially noteworthy for his obedience, to which
he was always greatly inclined.

Of the brethren there has also died Martin Sanchez, a native of these
islands, who was for a decade a member of the Society, and who left a
glorious example in life and death. There remain in this vice-province
thirty priests and twenty-nine brethren (of whom two are scholastics
and four novices)--those nine being included whom your Paternity has
sent hither with Father Gregorio Lopez, in whom this vice-province
assuredly receives a great assistance. As it is of later birth, more
scantily supplied with workers, and further from Rome, it is likewise
poorer; and, as the younger daughter, ought to be the dearer and more
precious to your Paternity.




College of Manila


There live in this college (the leading one [34] in this vice-province)
seventeen of Ours--seven priests and ten brethren. All of them, by the
favor of divine Providence, have by their example and labor brought in
a rich harvest from the spiritual tilling of this city. This has been
added to on account of the war and the earthquake, the loss of the
ships, and other calamities; and we have learned by experience that
piety grows more rapidly in adverse than in prosperous fortune. The
earthquake has made us hesitate to go on with the completion of the
college buildings, for we are compelled first to repair what has
already fallen or is on the verge of ruin. Last year we wrote that
on the twenty-first of June the main part of the nave of the church
had fallen; but in this year of 1601, on the sixteenth of January,
the other part corresponding to it was overthrown, and the rest so
shaken that it had to be leveled with the ground. We regard it as
a great blessing that these buildings fell without injuring anyone,
although the first of the earthquakes came while the people were in
the church at mass, the other when it was least expected. The people
of Manila have accordingly been warned by Ours of the daily peril
of life on earth, and have begun to lift up their hearts to heaven,
and to pray for its care and protection. By a happy lot it has been
obtained for them by the patronage and advocacy of St. Polycarp,
[35] bishop and martyr, the disciple of St. John the Evangelist;
and in his honor they have begun to celebrate an annual feast with
a solemn procession.

The beginning of another pious work has been made this year with
marked results. This is the practice of scourging, not as hitherto
on three days in Lent, but every Friday throughout the year, in our
church. There is a great concourse of people at that time to hear the
fiftieth psalm, _Miserere_, by the melancholy harmony of which they
are most moved to devotion and to doing penance. Not infrequently
the royal auditors and the governor himself have been present, as
well as other leading men.

Those in prison also have been aided by the reception of sacramental
confessions and by pious exhortations; and--a thing that has edified
the people not a little--the necessary food was for some days carried
all the way to the prisons on our shoulders. From children, too,
the food of Christian doctrine has not been withheld on Sundays;
and with the children arranged in the form of a procession we went
out during Lent to the military barracks, where after delivering
sermons we reaped fruit not to be ashamed of.

The congregation of scholastics begun this year has made the best
of progress. Every month, according to the rules, they make their
confession to the priest, and partake of the divine food. On feast-days
they spend the afternoons in listening to spiritual reading and in
commemorating the examples of the saints. The solemn feasts of the
Blessed Virgin they celebrate with the greatest fervor and joy. On one
of these they go with their cloaks cast off, each with a silver ewer
and basin in his hands, and carry food to the prisons, marching in the
finest order and system; and with great readiness and humility they
serve the unhappy men. They are believed to have taken their manner
of procedure, in all respects, from the congregation at Rome. The
privileges of the Sodality, also, have so much attracted laymen that it
has been necessary to divide them into two orders. As for the adult men
and householders who look forward to spending Sundays and feast-days
to advantage in the Sodality, the father-visitor has made a beginning,
by delivering to them familiar exhortations, and narratives of pious
examples taken from the Lives of the Saints; and we have every reason
to hope that the undertaking will succeed to the greater glory of
God, with the most noble of advantages to the city. Even now there
are some who, having heard one or another sermon, have entered upon
more holy and profitable ways of living than they followed before.

A beginning was also made this year in selecting some saint's name
by lot (a custom introduced in some towns); and there has been a
great concourse of people. One man was plunged into the sea along
with many others in the naval battle with the Dutch already spoken
of; but because he invoked the name of his patron, St. Nicanor, who
had fallen to his lot that month, he was rescued from that danger in
which the others were swallowed up; and by swimming a whole league
at last got to shore, to his own great wonder.

The number of those confessing and communicating this year has
surpassed that of any previous year, for upon their old devotion has
been heaped up new, kindled by the torches of calamity. The quarrels
of many have also been brought to an end. In Lent, moreover, their
zeal for all piety flamed forth in the confession of many evils, and
in doing penance for them with daily scourgings, and other exercises
of devotion.

The chastity of a certain woman was assailed by some of the wicked,
with entreaties and the bestowal of gifts; but by the weapons of more
frequent communion and confession she repulsed the attacks of the
enemy. Yet even then the enemy was not made entirely to desist. One
day, after the holy communion, which she had devoutly taken in our
church, she was walking in a lonely place; and there he came up to
her, and with his dagger at her bosom, he threatened her with death
unless she consented to wickedness. But she answered with firmness
that she preferred death to offending God. Then with blows and words
of insult she vanquished the beastly desires of her adversary, barely
escaping with her honor.

Another, giving up all thought of God and of his own salvation, had
spent many years in dreadful sin, and especially in a disgraceful
lust, which was so deeply rooted and fixed in his innermost heart
that he regarded our priest, who strove to lead him away from this
vile manner of life, as only less than a fool. So completely had he
plunged himself into the filth of these pollutions of his soul that,
like a sow in a wallow, he seemed to take pleasure in nothing else. Yet
at last this obstinate man yielded to argument and persuasion, and
not only gave up visiting his harlot, but tore all lust from his
heart by the roots as completely as if he had had no knowledge of
it; for by a general confession of the lapses of his past life he so
corrected his morals that all those who knew him before were amazed
at the sudden change in his life.

When the Dutch pirates of whom we have spoken were condemned to death
in Manila by the judges, the governor thought it well to entrust
them to several religious, as they might perhaps abjure their errors
and be reconciled to Holy Church. It pleased the divine goodness to
restore all, to the number of thirteen, except the admiral, who as an
obstinate heretic was hanged and cast into the sea. The others with so
great sorrow for their crimes subjected themselves to the obedience of
the holy Roman church that it seemed good to the religious fathers to
admit them to the holy communion. Of five commended to our Society I
can affirm that they greatly edified all, for they made a confession
of the sins of all their life and approached the holy communion with
many tears, having previously made public profession of the Roman
Catholic faith and abjured their heresies, being prepared to live
and die in the said faith. Two days later, with rosaries around their
necks they were led forth to the place of execution in great joy of
mind that they could atone for their sins by death.

Our Order has been no less occupied with the Indians in these
regions than with others--partly because there is a greater number
of them gathered in this town of Manila than anywhere else, partly
because they feel a greater good-will toward the members of the
Society than toward any others. They never lack some one of Ours
to aid their confessions; and they would need old priests the year
round, if there were so many who understood the language, to hear
the confessions of all. They greatly affect the holy communion, and
report wonderful fruit from it. Every week, on Saturday, very many
hasten to perform their discipline with the others; and more would
come if the city gates which separate the Indians from the Spaniards
were not closed at nightfall. Indeed many do not fear to creep through
the little hole in the gates in order not to neglect that salutary
penance. They hasten, too, on the Sabbath to hear the sacrament of
the mass of the Blessed Virgin, and in Lent to hear sermons, and that
in such numbers that, although our church is of considerable size,
they fill it completely. And when it was overthrown by the earthquake,
they all hastened together, down to the very children, to give their
help in carrying stones away. It was a delightful sight to see them
swarming like ants upon the rubbish and the wall--men and women,
young and old, powdered with dust and lime, carrying baskets on their
shoulders and vying with each other in carrying off the ruins so as
to clear the space.

The girls' sodality, recently introduced among the natives, has
marvelously roused all the others. Sometimes they have fed the poor
with such liberality that much was left for the prisoners and other
needy persons. After the meal was over, they poured water for the hands
of the poor persons, and kissed them; and then the poor persons fell
on their knees and prayed God for their benefactors. At another place
these same Indian members of sodalities went to the Indian hospital and
there gave their aid to the sick by making their beds and digging up
the ground for them--a thing worthy of special admiration in this race,
for they abhor visiting hospitals. The sodality members, although poor,
offer the usual alms to the church and to those who are in need. They
are given to hearing sermons and to fasting, being content for whole
weeks with bread and water. They are glad to go to our churches for
confession and spiritual instruction, and obtain great spiritual
benefit and edification.

A certain Christian woman who was for a long time held in slavery to
the infidels in the islands of Mindanao and Borneo, which are given
to the faith of Mahomet, could not be torn from the true belief,
or be persuaded to the worship of idols, although she visited many
of their places.

An Indian man, who along with some others had made his confession
that he might receive the holy communion, declares that he had kept
silent as to the circumstances of some sins; and that in a vision he
saw a beautiful child offering to him the holy eucharist. But when
he answered that he was a great sinner, the child replied: "Thou
are indeed not worthy of the communion, for in thy confession thou
hast hidden such and such a circumstance." Therefore when he awoke
he hurried to our church, revealed the vision to one of the fathers,
and desired to repeat his confession.

Another had so accustomed himself to the scourging of his body that
one day when he was required to march with a troop of soldiers,
he withdrew from it in the night, in order that he might not omit
this holy exercise. When the officer of the infantry, going his
rounds at night, secretly perceived this, he thought the man was
meditating some mischief, and silently followed him. At last he saw
him enter the cemetery of a church, and after pouring forth prayers
to God, beat his back severely. When the scourging was finished, the
officer approached; and when he recognized this Indian, he was even
more edified. And when he asked him where he was from, he answered
that he came from the city of Manila, and said that he was in the
habit of confessing to Ours. The captain, marveling that a tyro in
the Christian religion should take such care of his soul's health,
gave him some money and told him to go back home, that he might not
be perverted by the habits of the soldiery.

A priest with a brother as his companion was sent off as on a
mission to some Seilan villages, which, being without parish priests,
needed instruction. When they reached there the plague was raging;
and the father and brother freely assisted them, not only by the
administration of the sacraments of confession and the communion,
but by that of food, which was prepared in our church.

On another mission performed by the rector of the college and another
priest, there was a mighty fruit of their labors reaped in hearing
confessions, in reconciling enemies, and in recalling the perverse to a
better life. Twenty adults were initiated by the sacrament of baptism,
having been imbued with the Christian faith by a certain blind man. He,
though deprived of the use of his eyes, yet took such care of his
catechumens that if a single one out of any number, however great,
was missing, he regularly informed the father. We think the more
of this from the fact that he who formerly was numbered among the
catalons--that is, petty priests of idols--now since his conversion
has become a teacher of Christian doctrine.




Residence of Antipolo [36]


In this residence are ordinarily maintained three priests, to care for
the harvest of three thousand Christians. More than five hundred have
been baptized this year. We have tested the great devotion of this
people, and their rare sense of piety in frequenting the sacraments,
in offering prayers, and in undergoing discipline and performing
other good and edifying works; and, finally, there has been wrought
in them all a great change in conduct.

The father-visitor has laid the foundation of a hospital, which
is of great importance. On the day when the roof was finished the
father-visitor led them in serving the poor who were gathered there,
by pouring water on their hands, and then kissing their hands on his
bended knees, which example was followed by all the chief men there
present. And thus the custom has been established that four members
of the confraternity established for this purpose bring them their
food every day. The same thing is done by the women for the sick of
their sex.

A beginning has been made of a school for boys, in which they may be
educated from their earliest years in all virtue and good morals,
according to the laws of Christ, so far as these are open to their
capacity. This is a thing not merely necessary for their receiving
the true doctrine, but also easy and delightful. They are all fed
with rice sent by their parents, and by other contributions. Their
occupations are learning to read and to form their letters, and to
do such other things as are appropriate to childish years.

The custom has everywhere been introduced of singing throughout
the year, in honor of the Virgin Mother of God, the anthem _Salve
Regina_; and on Saturdays in Lent of performing the discipline in
church. So when some Indians were bathing in the river, as is the
custom in hot countries, and heard the bell give the call for _Salve_
and the discipline, they put on their clothes and set out. Only one
remained, and laughing at his companions said in their language:
"_Acoi ouian_!"--that is, "Bring back something for me," which is
their expression of ridicule. When the others had gone away, he who
was alone was attacked and killed by a crocodile--a fierce animal of
these regions, which is very fond of human flesh--and that before
they could render him any assistance, spiritual or temporal. This
event was indeed the occasion of no little wonder, for this beast
is very voracious, and swallows men whole, or piece by piece, or at
least tears off hand or foot; but this man he left whole and untorn,
which the Indians attribute to the virtue of the _Salve_ that they
sang and the discipline that they performed.




Residence of Zebu


This residence is in the province called Pintados, in which the
greater part of Ours have lived and are working for the salvation
of the Indians, although ordinarily not more than three priests and
four brothers labor there. The situation is extremely convenient,
because all the other residences carry on their work from it as a
center. The ministry of the Society is exercised with great profit to
the city. A boys' school has been opened, and the Latin language is
taught. Last year the most reverend bishop, the officials, and other
leading men, in letters sent to his Catholic Majesty, made a full
statement of the great spiritual harvest with which Ours in these
regions exercise their ministry, among both Spaniards and Indians;
and they also earnestly entreated that he would be pleased to render
that residence permanent by some annual provision, in order that they
might be able to continue to enjoy the labors of our fathers.

The excellent bishop walked on foot, although a man sixty years old,
throughout the whole of his diocese; [37] and, turning aside into
our houses, he there dwelt with us in such humility and familiarity
that he seemed to be one of our members. After he had finished the
visitation of the diocese, he was accustomed to say that he had
greatly admired the modesty and piety of the women in it; for in
gossip and conversation their reputation had long been very much to
the contrary. He added that he had seen nothing like it in all Nueva
Espana. Turning to our fathers, he declared that they ought to be
contented with their lot, because they had undertaken the duty of
disseminating the word of God in those regions; for in his opinion
they were spending their lives in a part of the world which was the
best of all, and the best beloved by God, and that from which they
would be able to obtain the most ample fruit for their labor.

In our churches we began this year the practice of the discipline,
with a great number of penitents and great devotion from the people. We
also delivered sermons, with the Christian catechism, to the garrison,
with extraordinary results.

A certain father added that a sick Indian had lost the faculty
of speech before he had confessed, so that he could not receive an
exhortation to a pious death. Accordingly, he urged him to attempt at
least to pronounce the name of Jesus. The sick man obeyed, and uttered
it obscurely so that he could scarcely be heard. The father continued
to urge him to speak more distinctly. Finally with a moderate effort he
uttered it with the greatest distinctness, made a complete confession,
and on the following day left his bed well.

Father Miguel Gomez [38] was sent to a tribe at a considerable
distance. At first he gave all his attention to learning the names
of those who had not yet been washed in the holy waters of baptism;
and there were brought to him sixty, besides some others who are known
as Visaians. And to all these, after he had sufficiently demonstrated
the vanity of idols and the truth of the Christian belief, he imparted
baptism, with so great a degree of consolation to them all, although
they were old men, that they all marveled. But before dawn, behold
some others, men and women of very great age, who had hidden by the
gate of our house that they might be initiated by means of the same
sacrament. Accordingly sixty, along with six children, were initiated;
and in this number was included the chief of the place, a man already
more than sixty years old.




Residence of Bohol


This residence is subject to the preceding one, that of Zebu. The
harvest reaped in it your Paternity will learn from the letter of
Father Valerio Ledesma [39] herewith enclosed. He says: "In accordance
with the direction of your Reverence I visited the island of Bohol and
gave my first attention to collecting the people, who were scattered
everywhere, into one place. To many I suggested means of peace, and
proposed efficacious remedies; and at last I succeeded in getting a
thousand men, the greater part of whom had been trained in the use of
arms, to leave their mountains, from which it had been impossible to
draw them before, and to assemble at one spot. We also attempted to
attract a number of barbarian inhabitants of the mountains, who had
never looked upon any mortals before they saw our fathers, making use
of all of the offices of humanity and of the allurements suitable
to their nature, and we succeeded. We assigned them a settlement
near the river, where they have now built a church, to which they
flock on Sundays. We have baptized one hundred and twenty of their
children, or even more. The adults have not only laid aside all
of their fierceness, but pray for baptism with the greatest ardor,
singing chants, and night and day recite the Christian faith.

"On the day sacred to St. Anne, to whom the church was dedicated,
the conversion of a certain old chief, on whom they all look as a
father, made a beginning for the conversion of the rest. He on bended
knees begged me with the most humble prayers that I would bathe him
in the sacred fount. His example greatly confirmed in their purpose
those who were ready for baptism, and excited others to desire it;
so that one after another, to the number of more than one hundred,
came as suppliants for baptism. In Visaia I baptized eighty-nine
adults at one time, and a few days later ninety-four--partly children,
partly adults; and on another day all the rest of the natives. Leaving
here I crossed a mountain; and the Lord obtained as spiritual gain
twenty-nine children, with faces like those of angels; and with the
cleansing water we sprinkled them in the name of the Holy Trinity,
along with three adults whom I had taken with me that they might
hear the sacrifice of the mass, and might by word and example be more
accurately instructed in the Christian faith. After we had gone some
distance thence, we came to a hamlet in which the natives had built
a convenient church in preparation for our arrival, extending over a
space of ten cubits. Here we began to spread our net, or rather the
net of Christ, and caught in it all the fish that were there; for
all the leading men and women, with old and young, great and small,
cast themselves at the feet of Christ Jesus, recognizing Him as the
true God and ardently pleading to be joined to Him in faith through
the mystery of baptism. And here I began to recognize the favor which
God had shown me, in calling me forth from Espana in these days;
for this single instance was enough reason to call me forth. On the
very first occasion when we baptized, we plunged a hundred persons
in the sacred fount; on the second, all the rest without exception.

"When I was once explaining to a fierce and barbarous fellow the great
glory of paradise and the dire pains of hell, he answered, just as
if he had been possessed by a demon, that he had rather go to hell
than to paradise; and, as he was one of the chiefs in that region,
he carried a great many with him to the same decision of a perverse
mind. But I did not hesitate to attack the foolish fellow again and
again, and I insisted upon the horror and the eternity of the torments
with great vehemence of language; but he answered that he certainly
ought to go, after this life, there, where his parents and the rest
of his ancestors had departed, rather than anywhere else. Then I
responded that he had better just try the force of fire; but he, with
hands as hard as his heart, did not hesitate to snatch up some burning
coals from the hearth. However, a few days later, his mind divinely
changed, he ran out into the fields and meadows, and, calling all his
tribesmen together, he urged them to accept the Christian sacraments,
with such zeal that he had no equal among the Visaians."

In another letter sent to the father-visitor from the same place,
the same Father Valerio writes that another father had written to
him that in the islands Lobo and Dita he had sprinkled four hundred
persons, chiefly infants, with the most holy waters. Thus within the
interval of three months more than a thousand had been initiated by
the same sacraments, and numberless others are left burning with the
same desire. Therefore the members of our Order declare that the time
is come for the salvation of that island, and eagerly wait for workers.

But your Paternity will learn of a more glorious fruit from these
missions in Bohol from the letters of Father Gabriel Sanchez and Father
Cristofero Ximenez, [40] who have been assigned to that mission. [41]
In letters written in the month of October, Father Gabriel writes as
follows: "Our Lord has singularly blessed our attempts and labors. For
after the flocks of the heathen were gathered in one place they were
converted to God with such earnestness, so completely without pretense,
that I can say nothing else than that God their Maker and Redeemer
has desired by some peculiar favor in their calling to add them to
His flock--inasmuch as within two months two thousand mortals have
yielded themselves to the laws and customs of Christ, by accepting
baptism. And it is my opinion that, if some fathers are ready,
the whole of them will accept the yoke of Christ. It is beyond the
power of language to tell with what spiritual joy I am affected when
I see men who are almost savages of the forests hastening down from
the mountains to supplicate the benefits of baptism. Nay, the very
children, like to angels, taught by I know not whom, now repeat the
Christian faith. Indeed, a few days ago one came to me not ignorant
of his catechism, whom I had not seen for ten years, and with great
earnestness begged me not to refuse to baptize him. The catalons,
or priests of the idols, also come, and show by so many proofs that
they desire baptism with all their hearts, that it is necessary
to satisfy their desires. Truly, my Father, I abound in delight,
I rejoice, I exult; nor is there anything in this world set before
me than to serve our Lord God with all my heart, and to desire that
all should be turned to the worship of His Divine Majesty. On Sunday,
in church and elsewhere, there were counted seven hundred persons. If
your Reverence were to see at sunset a hundred mountain boys and girls
who have been newly added to Christ marching in procession along the
bank of the river, praising God in harmony and chanting all together
the Christian faith, he could not help dissolving in tears of joy. A
few days ago in Dita five hundred were purified with holy baptism. Thus
in the whole region of Bohol we may now easily count three thousand
Christians. At the beginning there were only eight hundred; now,
by the accession of a new blessing of God, twice thirteen hundred
have been added in baptism."

With regard to another brief mission undertaken by a priest, the
same Father writes as follows: "God adorns and enriches this Tobigon
[42] people with so many heavenly gifts that I do not dare depart
hence, and break the thread of our most happy progress. The church
is filled with people morning and evening; no one is anxious about
food, although they may not have it, or may have to bring it from a
distance. All their care is to be Christians, and to be initiated in
baptism. In these fifteen days in which we have instructed them in
the rudiments of the Christian faith, there have been baptized more
than two hundred and fifty adults. There remain forty catechumens,
for the rest will be baptized after our return.

"An old man, a chief who is held in high honor, and who has hitherto
been obstinate, has at last told me that he is ready to bow his
head to baptism. He is all white-haired and decrepit, so that he
can scarcely combine word with word. Since he is unable to come to
church, I am compelled to go to his house. I will baptize him, with
another man of advanced age, as early as possible. It seems to me no
small evidence that they have been predestinated, that both of them
have waited so long, and that they now begin to glow with so great
a desire for baptism."

With regard to another mission, Father Gabriel Sanchez writes that the
archdeacon of Zebu, who holds a benefice in Tana, went to the island
of Bohol, twelve leagues distant, to ask our superior for a father
skilled in the language, to preach the gospel to his tribe. Father
Gabriel was sent, and in one month heard four hundred confessions,
and offered to many the sacred body of the Lord. He also baptized
eighty small children and some larger ones. The custom was there
introduced of having boys march in procession in the public streets,
and chant the Christian belief. The same thing has been done in the
church, so greatly to the delight of the people that even the chiefs
of the tribe think it small honor to them if they are not sometimes
examined in the same belief.

The Indian wife of a local governor was bedridden, and one night began
to suffer so intensely that she was entirely deprived of the power of
speech. A father of the Society was called, who found her entirely
speechless. And since she had not confessed her sins, although she
tried to do so, the father began to recite the holy gospel, and to
sprinkle her with holy water; and when this was done she collected
her strength and, after pronouncing the name of Jesus, said, "Have
mercy upon me!" Then, in the presence of many, she desired to confess;
and after less than a quarter of an hour she arose from her bed, so
well and whole that the father would not listen to her, but directed
her to come to church on the following day to make her confession,
which she did. The same thing happened to the same father in the case
of two other sick persons, whom by the recitation of the gospel and by
the sprinkling of holy water he restored to sense and health, so that
they were able to confess their sins. Further, on two different days
having gone to two children near to death, and deprived of the power
of speech, with the same antidote of the gospel and of holy water,
he restored both to their former health, so that one of them went so
far as to jump suddenly out of his bed and return to his boyish sports.

The same priest also went, for the sake of hearing confession, to a
man who lived a league and a half from the town, whose body was so
weakened and torn by sickness that he could not bear to be touched
or to be turned from one side to the other. When his confession had
been heard and the gospel had been recited, the father went away on
Saturday of that week. On the following Sunday, when the father asked
how the sick man was, he was told that he had been restored to health,
and had gone out to an island in order to get by hunting what was
necessary for his food. One night, while the daughters of one of the
chiefs were chanting the heads of the Christian law, they looked up
from a sort of portico and saw a crucifix in the sky, with a kind of
crown on the head, rough but beautiful, and with the whole body and
breast plainly visible. It shone like the sun, and went up to heaven
until it reached the sphere of the moon; as soon as it had reached
that it vanished. The sight of this vision caused the spectators as
much joy as its disappearance did sorrow. The father commanded that
the whole thing be recounted in church, in the presence of many, by
those very persons who had seen it; although, as that tribe is very
simple and modest, they showed great fear and shame in telling the
story. Afterwards it was learned that the same crucifix had appeared
in another place two leagues away. This vision ought to be recognized
as of greater value because it befell persons of exceeding virtue,
who are persevering in their pristine habits of holy living.




Residence of Samar


Since the inhabitants of this island are scattered along an extended
coast-line of the sea, it was necessary to send six of the fathers for
the greater part of last year to cultivate it, with the results which
might be expected from such missions. We learned from the letters
of Ours that the people of this island who live along the coast
have begun to offer their names in order to receive the Christian
religion, and that all the chiefs have already been purified by
holy baptism. The duty of visiting fourteen places rests upon this
residence. In this year three thousand six hundred and eighty persons,
for the most part adults, have been joined to the spouse of Christ
through the holy waters of baptism. In one tiny island, which had
not been visited for two years, two of Ours who had been sent thither
on mission were received by the whole tribe with such delight that,
all the way from the beach of the sea to the church of the place, they
adorned all the roads with green branches; and then they were led to
the church by a procession of boys and girls singing the Christian
teaching with joyous voices. And when Ours asked to have placed on
the lists the names of those who desired to receive baptism, they
answered that there was no need of a list, that they all wished to
become Christians. The old men--who are generally more perverse than
the rest, and are unwilling to learn the Christian teaching--brought
forward no other ground for the baptism which they so much desired
than that their old age promised them no long life. Thus all by the
divine grace were made children of God, and inheritors of eternal life.

The news that these had thus been added to Christ soon moved other
islands also to desire our fathers. On one of these islands, within
fifteen days one hundred and sixty adults and five children forsook
the dark wilderness of infidelity for the light of the gospel. Among
them was one old woman one hundred and thirty years of age--blind,
deaf, incapable of motion; for, wherever she was carried, there she
remained like an unmoving stone. Afterward in other places there were
baptized five hundred adults and two infants. When they returned on
a second mission, after an interval of three months, eight hundred
and thirty-seven were baptized, and from the most of these their
concubines were taken away. Besides this, in other places many were
plunged into the same waters, the total number reaching three thousand
six hundred and eighty.



Residence of Dulac


The most ample fruit has resulted from the Christian teaching among
the people of Dulac, [43] given by the seven men of our Society. The
foundations of a boys' school have been laid. In it thirty are imbued
with good morals and solid virtues, and give their aid to Ours in
explaining the catechism to the more ignorant people and those of the
lower order, and that with happy results; for whenever Ours go where
these pupils have exerted their diligence, they find all the people
well prepared to receive baptism.

To the old Christians and some of the more intelligent adults familiar
sermons are delivered on the life of Christ and those of the saints,
and on the manner of profitably receiving communion, and notable
results are evident. On account of these pious exercises and the
uprightness of life shown by these converts, the Christian religion is
ordinarily held in such high esteem that few remain who do not desire
to be initiated into it by baptism. In Advent and at the feast of the
Nativity we baptized more than seven hundred persons. We have baptized
in all, from last year to the present date, two thousand and twenty,
or more.

To this residence are annexed, besides other charges, the care of two
great and populous districts, which give surest proof of their virtue
by clean morals and by obedience. We are informed by letters that,
at the feast of the Nativity, in one of them eight hundred infidels
pledged themselves to the Christian faith; and that the believers
do not yield to Espana in frequenting the sacraments of confession
and communion.

There was found in one little village an old man leading the life
practically of a hermit; and when our father asked him about his
manner of life, he answered so wisely that the father was greatly
surprised. Among other things he said that though his bodily life
was passed on earth, yet his soul lived in heaven. He had no dreams
at night except about the other life, and he was accustomed to see
the blessed surrounded with great splendor, and one among them who
excelled them all. And when the father gave him a picture of the Last
Judgment to look at, in which was expressed the glory of paradise,
he asked him if his dreams agreed with this picture of the blessed
life. The wonderful old man answered: "Should I see nothing but this,
my father? Much more! much more!" The father was amazed to find such
a treasure of spiritual riches laid up in this man; for he afterward
said that his meditation and the occupation of his mind would be of
nothing else than of Jesus and Mary, until he had exchanged this life
for the eternal one.

Two of Ours, happening to enter a wretched rustic hut, found a man
more than eighty years old lying upon some reeds. He was deprived
of all his senses and his whole body was so worn out that the skin
scarcely adhered to his bones--a living image of death. Our fathers
pitied the man, and prayed to God for him that He would not deny
His compassion to this most pitiable of men. Soon after, the dying
man revived, and with great joy received baptism. As soon as he had
received it he was again deprived of his senses, and, gently calling
on the names of Jesus and Mary, he rendered up his soul to God.

Information was brought that there was a man lying grievously ill in
the most distant part of the district. Although we were not a little
deterred from the journey by the darkness of night and the great
number of serpents, as well as by the necessity of crossing a river
full of crocodiles; yet we did not regard all these things as of so
much consequence as the value of a single soul redeemed by the blood
of Jesus Christ. One of the fathers, therefore, went thither, and with
a medicine healed the sick man in the name of Jesus. On the father's
return, something more extraordinary happened to him. He came upon
a sick woman, who, although she did not seem to be dangerously ill,
yet departed to the better life as soon as she had received baptism. As
two of Ours were making their way over a sandy soil at noon, under the
dreadful heat of the burning sun, being without any food or drink, they
laid this their affliction before the Lord God; and behold! suddenly,
at this most unusual time, there was a man sitting on the ground,
who showed himself most kind and courteous. He ungrudgingly offered
to the hungry and thirsty men fresh fruit from his basket. When they
accepted it readily, he not only took great pleasure in that, but
also urged them, with a certain strange earnestness, to feed upon
it as if it were their own. Strengthened with this little meal they
went on, which they could hardly have done otherwise, and offered
great thanks to God that He had come to their assistance in their
extremity. Afterward, when they had considered all the circumstances
of the fact, and of the place in which the man was found with the
fruit, and had reflected that no Indian was in the habit of going on
a journey alone in the heat of the day, and again that, although they
were unknown to him, he had shared the fruit with them so kindly and
generously, they came directly to the conclusion that he was an angel
of God. At least it was a proof of the singular providence of God;
and it is well worthy of belief, that God in this manner had been
willing to show His bounty to them, inasmuch as the said two fathers
had exercised their ministry with great spiritual fruit in that place
from which they had set out on that day.




Residence of Alangala


In this residence four priests and three brethren give their energy to
cultivating the vineyard of the Lord. They go afoot through the rivers,
the pools, and the marshes, the water often reaching to their navels,
and the sun burning above them. But since their labor is wrought
through the love of God, He, in His unmeasured kindness, never
deprives them of His solace in the utmost perils. They write that,
from the end of last year up to the present time, more than fourteen
hundred have received the sacred washing of regeneration. They give
diligent attention to the divine offices, which are celebrated in
this residence with greater magnificence than elsewhere, on account
of the convenience of three Indian chapels, which far surpass the
Spanish. They follow the practice of singing _Salve Regina_, in honor
of our Lady the Virgin; and, throughout Lent, of singing the psalm
_Miserere_ to accompany the discipline.

Several missions have been established in various places, with
manifold increase of baptisms and other spiritual fruits. I will give
an account of some. While a father was living in one little district,
an Indian, crippled in both hands and feet, made his way straight to
the father by boat, and that alone, to the astonishment of all--God
and his guardian angel doubtless impelling the boat. He begged the
father for baptism, and declared that the author of his request had
been a certain Spaniard who had told him that all those who did not
accept the Christian law would be carried off to hell.

The greatest results have been obtained from the schools, for the
pupils have each of them become teachers in the paternal homes of
all the domestics; and by the good example of their lives they incite
others to accept the true doctrine. A boy, a cantor in church, being
solicited by a Spaniard to perpetrate a foul deed, answered: "Sir,
I know well by what remedy you should drive away that temptation
of yours. Let us recite together a rosary in honor of the blessed
Virgin Mary, and instantly all these wicked thoughts will vanish in
smoke." Thus by the newly converted Christian he was instructed who
ought rightly to have been the teacher and master of others.

In the island Leita there were counted last year above five hundred
and twenty-nine thousand souls; and they have the instruction of our
priests only, who are six in number. By their hands the most holy
waters of baptism have, in the course of a year, in this and other
islands, been sprinkled upon at least ten thousand nine hundred
heads. And this, in brief, is the harvest of this vice-province.

       *       *       *       *       *

It only remains that your Paternity should cast your eyes upon this
new and tiny plant, separated from Rome by so great an interval of
distance and situated in the most remote parts of the world, as it
has also obtained the last place in the government of the Society;
and that you should show to it all kindness and favor by sending to it
some laborers with these words from the eighteenth chapter of Isaiah:
_Ite, angeli veloces, ad gentem conuulsam et dilaceratam, ad populum
terribilem, post quem non est alius._ [44] Thus they may bring unto
these places of darkness some light by their preaching of the gospel,
and all may bend the knee before the true God, the maker of the world,
and adore and revere Him.

These treasures the India of the Philippines offers to your Paternity,
and it is confident that by the divine grace and your blessing it
will offer greater ones. Finally, may our Lord protect and preserve
the health of your Paternity for many years, to the advantage of the
whole church and the increase of the Society. Your Paternity's son
and servant in Christ,

_Francisco Vaez_




Letter from Diego Garcia to Felipe III


Sire:

In the year ninety-nine I came to these islands, by order of my
general, to console and visit in his name the fathers and brothers
of our Society who reside in them. We were much pleased to see how
much has been done for the service of our Lord and your Majesty,
and the good of the Indians.

The Society of Jesus has in its charge a good part of the islands
called the Pintados, where the holy gospel had never been preached. In
the period of four years, eleven or twelve thousand have been converted
and baptized. Matters are now in such course that in a short time,
with the divine grace, there will be more than forty thousand
baptized. As the priests who are occupied in this conversion are
not more than thirteen, [45] the results, if there were many more,
would also have been incomparably greater. For the honor of God, I
beseech your Majesty to be pleased to command that workers be sent,
as it is a great shame that, when the season for the harvest is upon
us, it should be lost through lack of reapers.


_[In the margin of the preceding paragraph_:

Already provided for."]

The Indians of these Pintados Islands have by nature good dispositions
and abilities. I have learned by experience with some few, who were
brought up in our houses, from the time when they were children,
that if there were several seminaries where the education of the youth
might be carefully attended to, taking them out of the power of their
heathen parents, while still children (for the latter would give them
up willingly), inside of a few years there would be a very prosperous
Christian community in the sight of God and men. In my opinion there
is no more effective means to establish the faith firmly among these
barbarians than this.

Your Majesty would do a great service to our Lord by ordering that a
seminary for these people should be established. I believe that the
money which has been collected from the fourths, where there is no
instruction, might well be employed in this work. In all conscience,
it ought to be spent for the spiritual good of those Indians, as
your Majesty directed by your royal decree. And none will do so well
as this, which is the seed for all the rest. I have learned that,
in the royal buildings at Manila, fourteen or fifteen thousand pesos
are spent which are obtained from these fourths. From these and some
other funds which lie in the treasury and are every day accumulating,
several of the said seminaries might be well established.

[_In the margin of the preceding paragraph:_ "Have the papers brought
which relate to this."]

It is a great disadvantage for conversions to our holy faith, and
for the civilization of these same Indians, for them to be dispersed
like wild beasts among the mountains. It would be a great relief for
the burden on the royal conscience of your Majesty, if your ministers
should execute the order given by your Majesty to reduce this people
to settlements. As they now are, the labor of the ministers is
immense, and the results are small; and they are unable to establish
Christianity and civilization as they should. [46]

[_In the margin of the previous paragraph:_ "Write to Don Pedro
de Acuna that with the help of these fathers, with all possible
gentleness, and at the least cost, he shall see to it that the Indians
be thus reduced; and if there be any great difficulty or disadvantage
therein, let him advise us of it."]

The Indians have many grievances against the corregidors and
encomenderos. With fewer or none of these judges there would be more
justice; and if the encomenderos or collectors of tributes were not
present in villages, the Indians would be better guarded.

[_In the margin of this paragraph_: "Let Don Pedro de Acuna send
information."]

The students in this country receive no reward for their studies,
and accordingly tire of them and leave them at the most important
time. It would be well if your Majesty would give permission for us
to graduate them from our courses of study, which are the first that
were established in this country. In this way the sons of the country
will be encouraged; and the cost of bringing masters from Espana,
and maintaining them with a perpetual salary, will be saved to the
royal treasury. In great part there will also be saved the expense of
bringing ministers from Europe, since they will be trained in this
country--where they are used to the climate, and know the language
of the natives. Although at present we cannot found so organized
a university, at least they can be graduated in arts and theology,
which are the sciences lectured upon in our Society.

[_In the margin of this paragraph_: "Provided for in the duplicate
of this."]

There are many persons in these islands who have toiled in the service
of your Majesty, and your Majesty would direct his favor well if
he extended it, among others, to Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor
of this royal Audiencia, who is a man of good parts and fitted for
any matter pertaining to the service of your Majesty. Likewise the
licentiate Don Antonio de Ribera, auditor of this royal Audiencia,
has done a great deal in saving a galleon in which was carried the
entire wealth and support of this country. Captain Hernando de Avila,
treasurer of the royal exchequer of your Majesty, is filling that
office as a faithful servant. Captain Christoval Ascueta Menchaca
has served many years and is worthy of reward.

[_In the margin_: "On the memorandum of the exchequer."]

Throughout our entire order, especial care is taken in all matters
respecting your Majesty, and we shall still continue this, beseeching
our Lord to protect your Majesty many years for us, as He may see
is fitting for the welfare of His church and of the kingdoms of your
Majesty. Manila, July 8, 1601.

_Diego Garcia_, visitor of the Society of Jesus.





Letter from the Fiscal to Felipe III


Sire:

I, the licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo, fiscal for your
Majesty in the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of the Philipinas
Islands, say that, as it has been heard in the islands that your
Majesty has done them the favor of appointing Don Pedro de Acuna as
governor and captain-general, and president of the royal Audiencia,
this has greatly pleased and satisfied them, on account of the good
reputation which he has of being an excellent soldier, and not at all
self-seeking. Therefore his arrival is desired, because it is very
necessary for all and [_illegible in MS._] for the matters of war,
in which many mistakes have been made up to the present time--which I
will not mention, however, since the remedy is so soon expected with
the arrival of Don Pedro de Acuna. If this had occurred a year ago,
it is certain that a great misfortune would have been avoided which
these islands suffered, and which was as follows.

On the sixteenth of October of the year 1600 just past, there entered
the little bay of Aluay, which is in these islands, near the entrance
to them, two vessels, which, from some people who went on board of
them, were found to belong to strangers. After having robbed some
vessels they came toward the port of Cavite, which is two leguas from
this city, and is the place where vessels anchor. It was decided that
some ships should be fitted out in the aforesaid port--namely, a ship
built in the island of Cebu, called the "Sant Diego," which belonged
to some private persons; a galicabra called the "Sant Bartolome," which
belongs to your Majesty; a galley of twenty benches, also belonging to
your Majesty; and a pataje belonging to some Portuguese from Malaca,
who were in the port. [47]

It seemed to Don Francisco Tello, governor and captain-general of
these islands and president of the royal Audiencia, and to the doctor
Antonio de Morga and the licentiate Cristoval Tellez de Almacan,
auditors therein, that it would be well, in order that the ships
might be got ready in the best way and as quickly as possible, for
the aforesaid Dr. Antonio de Morga to go to Cavite for that purpose,
and so he went there early in November. Later, desiring to go as
commander-in-chief of the expedition, he asked for that office from
the president, who proposed it to the licentiate Cristoval Tellez de
Almacan, desiring him to secure it through a session of the Audiencia,
but the latter opposed it. I afterward spoke to him of the lack there
was of auditors, and of some other matters, and suggested to him to
write about this and let each one give his opinion. Yet, although
the said president agreed to do so, he did not, but secretly gave
the title of commander-in-chief of the fleet to the said Dr. Antonio
de Morga, although your Majesty had here Don Juan Ronquillo, who was
receiving a salary as commander-in-chief of the galleys, and who was
a veteran soldier, together with many others who have well approved
themselves on the occasions for service which have arisen. The doctor,
fearing that the president might change his mind, made haste to leave
the port; and, although he could have had the galeota fitted out,
he did not do so. It was understood that the reason given was that
Don Juan Ronquillo said that it should not go out because he was
commander-in-chief of the galleys for your Majesty, and that the
right to go in the galeota could not be taken from him. Likewise,
although he could have taken the pataje from Malaca, for which he had
received some supplies and artillery at your Majesty's expense, he did
not wait for it; and some say that friends of the doctor said that he
ought not to take the pataje, because the Portuguese on it said that
he should not, although the victory would have been to their account.

So on the twelfth of December he set out from Cavite for the port of
Mariveles, which is seven leguas distant, and there [_MS. illegible_]
the flagship which was the ship "Sant Diego;" and on the following day,
the thirteenth, at eleven or twelve o'clock of a very black night,
he left the port of Mariveles, without informing his admiral's ship,
which was the galicabra, and in which sailed as admiral the captain
Juan de Alcega. However, after the flagship had been gone more than an
hour, the other ship saw it by accident, and went after it. At daybreak
our flagship recognized that of the enemy, which, together with its
admiral's ship, was between the islands of Anacebu and Fortun. On
account of the roughness of the weather, they were unable to unite;
so the enemy's flagship kept up into the wind to wait for ours,
which gained the windward of it and closed with it under full sail,
while the admiral's ship of the enemy took to flight.

Meanwhile the two flagships were fighting. For each man of the enemy
our ship had four Spaniards--not to mention the Indians and negroes,
who helped very much--and a great deal of artillery, powder, and
munitions and instruments of war; and they destroyed the enemy to
such an extent that as many of our men as wished to do so entered it
and took the banners and standards and other things belonging to the
enemy, without having anyone appear on it, for they had retired to the
bow. At this point our admiral's ship arrived, and with its artillery
and arquebuses did some damage to the Dutch flagship; and our men on
it, especially Alonso de Mansilla, the sargento-mayor's adjutant,
called aloud, telling the others not to do them any damage, but to
pass on to the admiral's ship of the enemy, because their flagship
had already surrendered to your Majesty; whereupon our admiral's ship
went in pursuit of the Dutch admiral's ship, which was more than two
leguas away. The two flagships remained thus over three hours more,
besides the two during which they had already been together. The enemy
did not fight, and on our ship there was no one to order or govern,
or command anyone to pass to the other ship. Then it was said that
our ship was going to the bottom, and so loudly that the enemy heard
it and took courage again. In our ship there was no one to command
what was to be done, so that it did go to the bottom. There escaped on
mattresses and on shields, and by swimming, Dr. Antonio de Morga and
[_illegible in MS._] other persons; but more than as many Spaniards
again were lost, and more than a hundred Indians and negroes. The best
artillery that there was in these islands, which had been taken from
the fortresses for this purpose, was also utterly lost, besides all
that the vessel carried, which was a great deal. That same day the
admiral, Juan de Alcega, captured the Dutch admiral's ship, and sent
its men to this city.

Then it was that they were found to be Dutch. They called themselves
vassals of Mauricio, Prince of Orange and Count of Nasau; and they
bore a patent, a copy of which is subjoined. The president thought
it well to send after the enemy's flagship, and for this purpose
he ordered that our admiral's ship should go, with Admiral Juan
de Alcega as commander; and that the Dutch vessel should go as
admiral's ship, with Captain Juan Tello de Aguirre as admiral, who
had had the position over the infantry in our admiral's ship. They
went where they were ordered, but did not find a trace of the Dutch
flagship. The commander of this was Oliver van Noordt, and in command
of the admiral's ship was Lanverto Viesman. They were heretics who,
with other ships, had set out from the port of Nostradamus [_i.e._,
Amsterdam] in Olanda, on the twelfth of September in the year 98;
and had come by the Canaria Islands and by Brasil, through the Strait
of Magallanes and along the coast of Chile, to these islands.

As I thought from the beginning, as soon as I knew of the loss of
our flagship, that they would try to conceal it from your Majesty,
I made an investigation about it, a copy of which is subjoined. [48]
From this it can be seen who was to blame; and whatever is written to
your Majesty contrary to this, or to what is contained in the report on
the investigation, is not to be relied upon. The president has made an
investigation in this matter, trying to shield himself and the guilty
ones; and it has been carried on in such a way that it is known that
no witness has dared to tell the truth. On this account I presented a
petition to the president, asking that he refrain from trying the case,
because the witnesses did not speak freely for fear of the power of the
guilty, and because I intended to ask your Majesty to appoint a judge
who could try the case, since the president could not do so. I also
asked that a copy might be given to me of all that had been written
about this matter, in order that I might give it to your Majesty and
ask for what might be proper. This was denied me by the president,
and I appealed to the royal Audiencia, but for lack of auditors,
of whom there was only the licentiate Tellez de Almazan, no action
was taken. If a judge were to be appointed, there would be none who
would dare to declare against the will of the guilty. Although the
licentiate Don Antonio de Rivera Maldonado has come since, it has
been impossible for me to take up this matter, because I have been
ill now for more than forty days. So I beg your Majesty to order
that this report be examined, and that whatever is proper may be
done. Our Lord keep the Catholic and royal person of your Majesty,
with a greater increase of realms and power. From Manila, which is
in the Philipinas Islands, on the sixteenth of July of the year 1601.

_Hieronimo de Salazar y Salcedo_





Complaint of the Cabildo of Manila Against Morga


Sire:

The most faithful city of Manila in the Philipinas Islands humbly
informs your Majesty that for some years past this city and realm
have suffered, and are at present suffering, so many hardships and
misfortunes, both in wars and in the loss of wealth and prestige, that
it has been very close to entire ruin. This has arisen and arises
not from unavoidable accidents which ordinarily happen in states
and communities, but from those which the persons in charge of the
government and who reside there could avoid, but do not prepare for;
and they are notoriously due to the fault and misgovernment of the
persons to whom your Majesty has entrusted the administration of these
islands--partly on account of their scant energy and vigilance, but
most of all through what has resulted from their not being willing
to fulfil the orders, instructions, and royal decrees which your
Majesty had previously issued for the attainment of your objects
and for particular ends; these they have directly violated. Since
such conditions require a remedy, and as this must depend upon the
royal will of your Majesty, who are not informed of the actual truth
concerning events which have occurred here, these states must remain
without relief on your Majesty's part, and with the said danger of our
ruin. Owing to the general obligation which rests upon us as vassals
of your Majesty, and that which in conscience especially obliges us
as regidors of this city, which is the capital of all these islands,
the following account has been written.

In the first place, a matter whence many other losses have resulted
is this. Your Majesty having ordered the conquest of the kingdom of
Mindanao to be entrusted to Captain Estevan Rodriguez de Figueroa,
conformably to the edict or ordinance which treats of the conquest of
newly-discovered countries and settlements in the Yndias, and this
order having been despatched to the said Captain Estevan Rodriguez
de Figueroa, Governor Don Louis Das Marinas arrived here in the year
96. When the former reached Mindanao with his expedition, he (and he
alone) was killed by the natives of that island on the unfortunate
day of St. Mark of the same year. When Don Francisco Tello arrived
in the following June of the said year and took this government, he
immediately undertook to send a person to conduct the said conquest
of Mindanao. As all the troops were there which had been taken by
the said Captain Estevan Rodriguez, and as Don Joan Ronquillo (your
Majesty's commander of the galleys and of naval affairs in these
islands) had gone there with another detachment of troops, and had
remained in the said islands until March of the year 98--where, during
all this time, he won many victories over the enemy, and latterly one
against the king of Terrenate (who was sending his fleet to aid the
said island), wherein he routed and captured the vessels and killed
their commander, who was an uncle of the said king of Terrenate--at
this the natives of the said island of Mindanao, who until that
time had defended themselves, began negotiations for surrender,
and for rendering submission to your Majesty; a part of them did
so, and paid tribute to your Majesty. The said Don Francisco Tello,
with the approval of Doctor Antonio de Morga, without considering
the state in which this matter lay, or reflecting upon the injuries
which might result from issuing such orders as they did (as may be
seen later by what will be written further on), sent the said Don
Joan Rronquillo an order to dismantle the fortifications of the said
island, without leaving any fortified station, and to tear down the
forts which your Majesty held there. Although he saw the great loss
which would result from this, yet, as there was a clause in the said
order directing him to do this without any reply, under penalty of
being held contumacious and liable to punishment, he left the said
island and came to this city with the fleet and troops which he had
there, in the month of April of the year 98. The said Don Francisco
Tello and the said Doctor Morga, seeing the great error which they had
committed, attempted to exonerate themselves before the said Don Joan
Rronquillo should arrive in this city. They arrested him, charging him
with having taken away the protection of the said island of Mindanao,
without their having sent him any strict order which would oblige him
to do it. In order to give color to this--as they were aware that, in
the voyage which the said Don Joan Rronquillo made while returning,
his ship was partly wrecked, and they supposed that the said order
which they had sent him had been lost, they intrigued with the
government notary, and had him produce in the prosecution against
the said Don Joan the order which had been given to dismantle the
fortresses of Mindanao, omitting therefrom those words which made
it obligatory for him to do so--namely, that he should do so under
penalty of being contumacious and liable to punishment. In this way
they were released from responsibility for their act, and the said
Don Joan Ronquillo was inculpated without excuse, since in so serious
an affair he, being on the spot, should not have done so for a simple
command. The case having been continued, and he having presented the
original order which they thought had been lost, and having given other
explanations, he was even by them acquitted of that charge. All this
appears sufficiently by the record of the case, which remains in these
islands. Your Majesty having been made aware of the abandonment of
the said islands during the last year, there arrived here your royal
decree directing the investigation and punishment of whomsoever was
responsible. As they were to blame in the affair, as can be seen by
this relation, they remained silent, and have taken no action. From
the abandonment of what was already gained, through the said order,
it has followed that the Indians who are natives of the said islands of
Ufanos, which the Spaniards had left, considering that this was due to
fear, assembled, with others from other neighboring kingdoms, to come
to work havoc in the lands of your Majesty. Accordingly, in the past
year of 1600 they came with a fleet of many vessels to the Pintados
provinces, which are subject to your Majesty; and in the region known
as Bantayan they burned the village and the church, killed many, and
took captive more than eight hundred persons. Thence they came to the
river of Panay, an encomienda assigned to the royal crown, and killed
a great many more, taking six hundred more prisoners from the said
encomiendas. They burned the church and the image of our Lady which
was in it, which a few days before that had for a considerable time
miraculously sweated out many drops of water, as if in premonition of
the impending event. They drank out of the chalice in their feasts,
scoffing at the consecration of it, after the fashion of Mahometan
people, whereby the natives and Spaniards of those regions were
greatly afflicted and terrorized, as may be imagined.

As has already been said, the reason for the coming of these
Indians to inflict the said damage was the command to take away your
Majesty's camp from the said land of Mindanao. But the cause for
their having wrought those injuries after they arrived was, as was
said at the beginning, that the order and decree of your Majesty
was not obeyed. For your Majesty had in this camp four captains
of infantry with the four hundred soldiers which your Majesty had
commanded to be left there as a garrison, and the said captains were
satisfactory persons; and it was ordered that there should be no more
than the said four captains there, as any more would be superfluous,
since there were so few soldiers. Doctor Antonio de Morga, auditor of
this royal Audiencia, has reached such arrogance and restlessness of
mind, caused by his having wrought so many injuries to this afflicted
commonwealth through the power and authority which he has, both
in general and in particular, to many citizens thereof; but, with
his customary facility for speaking ill to some one's prejudice, he
escapes, without anyone daring to speak of the matter. In the little
time which he had spent in this country, he found himself rich and
powerful through his trading and commerce. Accordingly he commenced to
procure taking away the employments and offices from soldiers and men
of war whom your Majesty has here, and appropriated them to himself
and his relations. Thus, contrary to the said limitation of number,
and in violation of what your Majesty commands by your ordinances
and decrees--namely, that offices of profit shall not be given to the
auditors, or to their kindred, servants, or dependents--Governor Don
Francisco Tello appointed, as alcalde-mayor of the island of Mindoro,
a certain Pedro Cotelo de Morales, a first cousin of the wife of the
said Doctor Morga, who came with the latter to these islands; and
passed by, in giving it, many of the conquerors and poor settlers. But
the said Doctor Morga would not accept this, saying that he would
have no appointment for him unless it was a paid captaincy. The man
was a mere youth, and in all his life had never fired an arquebus,
and was not skilled or experienced in war. On the contrary, he had
led a very evil life, which cannot be fittingly described to your
Majesty, and so is left unsaid. Accordingly, to give some color to
what he desired to do, and in order that he might not appear to
be exceeding the said number of four captains, the said governor
appointed this man captain of infantry, so that he could go out of
this city to the said Pintados provinces, where they were in fear
that the said enemies were going. He was assigned the regular salary
for a captain, and in like manner the other officers of his company
were established with pay; and they likewise were men of the same way
of life and the same amount of experience in war as the said Pedro
Cotelo. He went with the troops to the city of Santisimo Nombre de
Jhesus, which is in the said provinces of the Pintados, thus leaving
in this city of Manila the four regular captains of infantry, who had
some knowledge of the affair, in idleness and without any troops;
for among all four of the companies there did not remain a hundred
soldiers fit for service. As he was in the said city at the time when
the said enemies came, and received word that they were in the said
village of Bantayan, the alcalde-mayor and commander of the troops
of war, who was in the said city, despatched the said Pedro Cotelo
de Morales with ships and troops against them. Although the journey
from the place where he was to that where the enemies were situated
was two days long, he took four to it. If he had arrived at the time
when he might have done so, he would have found the enemy drawn up
on the land, and would have burned their fleet and taken away their
prizes. When he arrived, sailing on from that place, he again heard
the noise of the engines of war which they had with them, near some
islands; and some of the soldiers, even, climbing up the masts of
the ships, saw those of the enemy. But he would not go against them
either, alleging various excuses--as your Majesty may have seen more
at length by the information which accompanies this.

Besides this, the said Pedro Cotelo Morales, having arrived with
his fleet at the town of Arevalo, a settlement of Spaniards, the
commander and alcalde-mayor there resident gave him more ships and
troops, and ordered him in a council of war (in which Pedro Cotelo
himself took part) to go and seek the enemy; and, if he did not find
him in an island near there, to come back immediately to the said
town of Arevalo on account of the fear lest the enemy should escape
thither. The said Pedro Cotelo, taking no heed of the said order,
as one who held the post of alcalde should, and in order to flee the
battle, did not observe this command, and went into another region
without coming back to the said town. In the meantime the enemy came
there and landed, and the town was almost ruined. They killed the
alcalde-mayor and commander of the troops, and then withdrew. If the
said Pedro Cotelo had come back as had been ordered by the said council
of war, he would have found them fighting there with their ships
in the bays and rivers, in such wise that not a man or a ship could
escape. In this way the enemy left with the two prizes mentioned. And
this year we have even now information that they are coming back with
increased forces; and in the preparation which has been already made
or is now under way, more than fifty thousand pesos have been spent
from the exchequer of your Majesty and furnished by private persons,
to say nothing of the losses which the pirates will inflict when
they return. The said Doctor Morga has been to blame for all this;
because, contrary to the orders of your Majesty, he succeeded in
having his relative placed in an office which he did not deserve, and
for which he was not competent. Concerning this last affair, a copy
of the proceedings of the council of war was sent to your Majesty,
in which was the above-mentioned order to the said Cotelo. In order
that it may be more thoroughly proved, they sent to the said town of
Arevalo to have the matter investigated; but the magistrate there,
for fear of the said Doctor Morga, would take no action.

The said Doctor Morga, continuing his bold acts, was not content with
having been responsible for the losses to property. Two Dutch ships
having arrived in the past year of six hundred, in these islands,
and having come in the month of November to the mouth of the bay of
this city, while they were beating about in the bay, ships were put
in readiness to go out against them. The said Don Joan Ronquillo,
commander of the naval forces of your Majesty, having gone to the
port of Cavite for this purpose, the said Doctor Morga commenced his
machinations, and claimed that he should go as commander of the said
expedition. To give this some foundation and color, when the said Don
Joan Ronquillo had come to this city to seek various supplies for the
said expedition, he was arrested; and on the next day following the
said Doctor Morga went to the port of Cavite, saying that he had best
be present in person to encourage the despatching of the fleet. In
fact, through scheming and plotting, and by the authority of his
office, he succeeded in taking the said expedition away from the said
Don Joan Rronquillo, and having it given to himself. He wrote letters,
the originals of which are extant, to the governor of these islands,
asking him that, even if Don Joan Rronquillo should petition for
judgment against him, he in no wise respond or have to do with him
until the despatch of the vessels should be completed, so that the
latter might not appeal to the Audiencia and obtain a decree which
would hinder the said Doctor Morga in the expedition. When three ships
were armed and fitted with artillery to go out against the enemy's
fleet, he went with the two vessels, which were the flagship and
almiranta, to the island of Mariveles, eight leagues from the point of
Cavite and five leagues from where the enemy were--without awaiting
the other third ship which lay at Cavite, and belonged to several
Portuguese, which arrived at the said island of Marbeles the same night
when Doctor Morga sailed away. Having sighted the enemy on Thursday
morning, without waiting for Captain Joan de Alcega, who was in the
other ship, as admiral, or taking advice as to what should be done,
he was confident of the victory on account of the report which had
been made concerning the few troops which the enemy carried, and the
large number that he himself had on board with him. Consequently the
flukes of the anchors were put upon the side of the ship; and having
come up with and grappled the enemy at the sixth hour, the latter,
seeing the force which the flagship had, gave up, and put himself
with all his men under cover, without firing a single arquebus for
more than an hour by the clock. Some of the soldiers and sailors from
our ship, having entered theirs without orders (for the said Doctor
was not able to give the order), and having found the deck of the
enemy's ship without men and all the troops withdrawn--the banners
being captured, and cast over to our ships--when the enemy saw how
little care was given to the taking possession, since the troops were
coming aboard without orders or any plan, they began to recover their
courage somewhat, and commenced to defend themselves. When they had
killed one or two of ours, as the latter had no one to command or
direct them--because the said Doctor, as soon as they came in to
close quarters with the enemy, had thrown himself down behind the
capstan of the ship with a number of mattresses--the troops became so
demoralized that no one was able to accomplish anything. Although some
of them went up to the said Doctor and told him to board the ship,
or to send troops on board of it with an order, he would not do so,
as he was so overcome by fright and lacking in courage. Likewise,
when they came to tell him that the ship was taking in much water
through the gun-ports, because, when the fleeing troops left the
side where they were grappled, and passed to the other side without
fighting, the said ship careened and the water entered--although
he was told of this several times, that he might remedy it, it was
the same in this matter as the rest. Accordingly so much water was
entering the ship that it was in danger. A father of the Society of
Jesus, bearing a crucifix in his hand, told him that since the ship
was in danger he should go over with the men to that of the enemy;
since as they were so near together, and there was no resistance,
it would be like passing from one dwelling to another. He would
not do it, but on the contrary threw the mattresses with which he
had fortified the capstan into the water, in order to go to a small
islet which lay near and escape, as he did. The enemy rushed upon
all the troops, who threw themselves into the water, and the killed
and drowned amounted to more than one hundred and twenty Spaniards
of the most distinguished and important people of these islands,
without counting more than a hundred negroes and natives beside.

Such was the manner of the surrender of the said ship of the enemy
as soon as it was grappled. When the said captain, Joan de Alcega,
arrived with his almiranta on the other beam of the enemy, giving him
a volley of artillery and musketry, and when he finally undertook to
board the enemy's ship, the Spaniards who were on the inside under
its deck (among them being the adjutant of the sargento-mayor), told
them not to fire, or they would kill the Spaniards; and to go ahead
and follow the enemy's almiranta, which had taken to flight, as the
flagship was already in your Majesty's hands, and there was nothing to
do there. Accordingly the said admiral went after the other ship, and,
coming up with it three or four leagues away, caused its surrender and
brought the enemies who remained alive to this city, where justice was
meted to them. The ship, with very good artillery, lies in this port.

Besides the said loss, there was much artillery which the said Doctor
Morga was taking in the said ship, and supplies of war, as he had
taken what lay in the forts of this city, leaving them destitute of
supplies, and the royal storehouses almost without powder; for he
took six hundred barrels of it on the said flagship. Owing to the
lack of men--so great that hardly anyone appeared on the streets--and
that of the said artillery and arms of various kinds, this city was
in such danger of ruin as never before, if some of the many enemies
who surround it had attacked it with even a small force. Likewise the
opportunity for the capture of the said flagship of the enemy was lost,
in which was stored all which they had captured since leaving Olanda,
and twenty pieces of artillery which they brought, many stores, and
eight hundred muskets--all of which they were carrying, according
to the declaration of the enemies who were in our power. For this
country, where there is such a want of that kind of articles, and
so many occasions continually arising in which they are necessary,
it would have been of great importance and value; but the enemy is
taking them away to buy with them cloves and pepper, and other drugs
from these regions, as they are at present doing. For we have certain
news that they went to the Maluco Islands, where they are anchored,
and will leave the enemy there--who are most warlike, and who are most
continually making war upon us--strengthened with arms like ours,
whereby they will become skilful in their use; and from that will
follow many difficulties, as may be imagined.

Likewise there results another very great injury to these regions,
because, the said ship of the enemy having escaped, they carry with
them an excellent knowledge of these regions and of the sailing-routes;
for day by day they record in writing their bearings, and the courses
by which they have navigated. There is a society which has been formed
in Olanda and other states, for the destruction of these regions,
according to the account which all the enemies who were captured alive
agreed in. Five great galleons for this purpose were being built here,
so that if any of those ships should come from there the Spaniards
might sally out with more force.

We are sending your Majesty a copy of an information in this matter
which was secured by your Majesty's fiscal with great secrecy, before
the licentiate Almacan, auditor of this royal Audiencia. There
is likewise a testimonial concerning the arms, military stores,
artillery, and troops taken by the said Doctor Morga, in his flagship
against that of the enemy; of the troops, not more than fifty-six
people in all came back. There is another to the effect that on the
morning of the day when the enemy were discovered the commander sent
to the admiral fourteen of the twenty-seven that he had. There are
some documents, drawn up at the petition of the said Doctor Morga,
concerning the artillery and other articles which he caused to be given
to the third ship that he was to take with him. On account of his not
waiting for this two hours, and not being willing to assign it men,
the misfortune came about by which, as he confesses in his petition,
two hundred persons escaped; whereas it is known that the dead of the
Spaniards alone amounted to more than a hundred and twenty, so that,
according to this, he took five or six men with him for every enemy.

He has drawn up a number of informations which, considering the dignity
and power of his office, may obscure this truth and give some color to
his case, as he is confident that it has done--and as he has likewise
done in other matters, as he has used such bold and excessive measures
ever since his arrival in this country. In this manner he has reached
such a point that he petitioned for justice because he, as commander,
had to divide the prize which he took in the enemy's captured ship,
and maintained that a great part of it belonged to him. Afterward,
by another petition he says that, as a vassal and servant of your
Majesty, he relinquishes the part which falls to him and gives it
to your Majesty, so that a share of what was taken may be given to
him. A copy of these petitions is being sent, which makes this evident.

There is also sent a copy of the commission as commander which the
said Doctor Morga bore, and an edict which he drew up and enacted, by
which the governor ordered him to go as commander. We do not undertake
to explain to your Majesty any of the matter therein contained,
since in these papers may be plainly seen what audacity he shows in
trying to make it understood that he is a warrior, and that at other
times, by your Majesty's order, he has had similar matters in charge;
and from those very papers may be learned his conduct in many other
matters in this country, against many people, without his taking into
consideration in the least what was owing to them.

The majority of the people through all this city have been hurt and
injured, from the time when he came to this country, by the procedures
of the said Doctor Morga, both in his actions and words against
them, and in letters which he has written treacherously regarding
the circumstances of various people, signing false names to them,
and disguising his handwriting. Afterward he showed copies of these
to other persons, in order to give the impression that he was not
the author of them. At present, since this affair, the ill-feeling
has grown with all these people, and become much greater, because
most of the soldiers whom he took (serving at their own expense)
went under threat and against their will; and as the relatives of our
citizens died on this occasion, and their death was notoriously due
to the fault and mismanagement of the said Doctor, it could not fail
to arouse resentment against him. In the same way the said Doctor has
been opposed to them, so that all the men who went in the almiranta are
desirous of maintaining that they conquered, and not he; consequently
what with the ill-feeling of the said Doctor against some of them, and
of others against him, there are very few people in these islands who
are not concerned. Accordingly he is odious and suspected in his office
by all men; and no lawsuit is brought up in which he is not accused,
as is now happening in several cases. The general ill-feeling here
is no less owing to the fact that, whereas there are so many soldiers
here who have come to these regions with no declared object except to
serve your Majesty, and have done so since their arrival here, with
good success, the said Doctor Morga should bring this about under
the claim and pretext that there were no persons in these islands
to whom such a matter could be entrusted; and that by this means the
Spaniards had lost a victory so obviously theirs that it would without
doubt have been gained if it had been entrusted to the least famous
soldier here. We humbly beseech your Majesty in consideration of all
these matters pertaining to the said Doctor, that a remedy may be
applied to them, as is usually done by your Majesty, owing to your
holy zeal and righteous justice. May our Lord protect your Majesty
as we, your Majesty's vassals, desire. Manila, July 20, 1601.


_Don Gonzalo Ronquillo de Vallesteros_
_Francisco de las Missas_
_Francisco Mercado Dandrade_
_Hernando da_ [_illegible in MS._]
_Bernardino de Avila_
_Diego Melendez Florez_


By command of the city of Manila:

_Luys de Contreras_, clerk of the cabildo.





Letter from Morga to Felipe III


Sire:

During the month of March of the past year, 1600, there passed
through the Strait of Magallanes into the South Sea a squadron of
armed ships from Holland, belonging to Count Mauricio, having as
commander Oliver de el Nort, and as admiral Lamberto Biezman, with
a patent and instructions in Flemish and Castilian to make war with
fire and sword upon the Castilians and Portuguese whom they might
meet in these parts. After they had made a few captures of little
importance on the coast of Piru, the commander's ship and admiral's
ship, together with their long-boats, came to these islands, where they
came out of the channel on the sixteenth of November of the said year.

Governor Don Francisco Tello found himself unprovided with any kind of
fleet to resist them by sea; for he had no galleys and no other kind
of ship with which to carry on offensive warfare, because a galizabra
which had been commenced the year before in the shipyard of Cavite had
been abandoned, and its build changed to that of a merchant ship. As
he feared that the enemy would come down to the said port, and burn
the few ships which were on the voyage from Nueva Espana, in order
to secure himself from the seaside at all points he commanded Don
Juan Ronquillo de Castillo (who was drawing his salary as commander
of galleys when there were none) immediately to go to the said port,
and put it in a state of defense, and build a fleet with which to go
out against the pirate. He went to the port, which is two leagues
from this city, and on the third day returned to the city without
having undertaken to do anything, or shown any disposition to do
so. He interposed difficulties, and asked for so many things which
he said were necessary, and which were not at hand, that he made the
thing out impossible; and not only was the governor disgusted with him
for it, but Don Juan allowed himself to say things which obliged the
governor to arrest him, as he did. The pirate continued his voyage in
the direction of the bay of this city, and the president and governor,
seeing himself hard pressed, communicated with the Audiencia and sought
its aid. The latter, desiring to make the greatest effort possible,
decided that I should go to Cavite and put the port in a state of
defense and likewise secure a fleet. I opposed no difficulties or
excuses to this, nor did I seek any rewards or aids for the expense,
nor any impossible things. On the contrary, that same day I went to
the port and fortified it so adequately that it was in a good state
of defense--so that, although the enemy came into the mouth of the
bay, they dared not enter or carry out their designs, on account
of the knowledge that they had of my preparation. At the same time
I finished the galizabra and launched it; and I fitted out another
vessel, belonging to private persons, which lay there. I armed both of
them and set sail in thirty days with a number of volunteer troops,
men of quality, who were resolved to accompany me on the service of
your Majesty on such an occasion (all at their own cost), as the enemy
was well established at the mouth of the bay, waiting for the ships
of the Chinese and the vessels from Nueva Espana with the silver,
in order to capture them. When the governor saw the state in which
I had put things, and at so little cost to your Majesty's exchequer,
and that the troops with which the expedition must be made would not
do so, or even go in the fleet if I did not go as its leader, and
realized the great importance of promptness, he ordered me in the name
of your Majesty to make the expedition immediately. He told me that in
no other wise on this occasion could I serve your Majesty. I obeyed,
and made ready to go where I was ordered, without seeking any pay of
profit. I spent more than four thousand pesos of my scanty property
to procure the necessaries for the expedition, some reenforcements, an
outfit of arms, and other things. I risked my person, honor, property,
and the support of ten children whom God has given me, and a good wife,
solely for the service of God and your Majesty; for it is certain that
no other interest or profit could take me from my house, where I was
in quiet and safety, since I never sought or asked for this thing.

This resolution was distasteful to the said Don Juan Ronquillo de el
Castillo and his retainers--chief of whom are the factor, Francisco
de las Missas [49] and the licentiate Tellez Almacan, auditor of this
Audiencia. These men quite openly proposed to the governor to give
Don Juan the expedition, as he was the commander of the galleys;
and other things to this purpose, which satisfied the governor but
little. It seemed best to him not to change the design if I should
desire it, or at least should not be burdened by it.

I sailed with the two armed ships in quest of the pirate, from the port
of Cabite, on the twelfth of December. On Thursday, the fourteenth
of the same month, I came to close quarters with him, and the battle
resulted as your Majesty will learn more at length by the relation
which accompanies this.

I took as admiral, by the appointment of the governor, a certain
captain Juan de Alcega, a citizen of this city, and a partisan of
the said Don Juan Ronquillo; he is for this reason a great friend of
the said licentiate Tellez Almacan, the auditor, and likewise because
at the time when he came to this city the latter was hospitable and
kind to him, and has always continued so. He is a man skilful in war
with the Indians, as it is practiced here; but is of an irritable
temperament, and desirous of having his own way on occasion, without
obeying his superiors, of which there has been proof enough. When
I had fully recognized the enemy and knew that he was carrying
all his force on the flagship, I ordered the admiral in writing on
the day before the battle, what particularly must be done--namely,
that with both our ships we must engage the said flagship of the
pirates. Accordingly as soon as I discovered the enemy the next day,
I kept the almiranta near me, and grappled with the enemy and moored
to him. When the admiral arrived and should have done the same,
he shoved the tiller aside and, without my order, contrary to the
command which I had given him, went after the almiranta of the pirate,
which was sailing away; thus he left me unprotected and alone, for
which reason my commander's ship fared as recounted in the relation.

For this disobedience, and others of which he was guilty and of great
importance, immediately upon our entrance into the city the governor
arrested the said captain Juan de Alcega, and is proceeding against
him. Through the favor of the said auditor and his party, and various
measures which they have taken--especially with the licentiate Salazar,
fiscal of this Audiencia, who is openly of the said party--they
have shielded him in this case in such manner as might be expected
of a person who is so near losing his office, and to whom it is so
important not to make more enemies for his residencia. Accordingly
thus far there has been nothing done in the case, and I have no hope
that anything will be accomplished by the present proceedings.

This Captain Joan de Alcega was freighter of the ship "Santo Thomas"
[50] in the year 99, which left here for Nueva Espana in company with
two other vessels from this city. In the loading of this ship, so
great was the dishonesty and deceit on his part that it is understood
that your Majesty's exchequer was defrauded of more than a hundred
thousand pesos. The governor, in order to wash his hands of this
wrongdoing, began suit against them and condemned them to heavy
fines and penalties, as he must have informed your Majesty. The case
came on appeal to this Audiencia. On account of the said friendship
and partiality, the fiscal hushed up this case, as he has others,
without discussion upon it, and with no reparation to your Majesty
or to this commonwealth.

In this manner Juan de Alcega not only remained unpunished but, aided
by the said persons with several letters, informations and documents,
which they had secretly made and composed, they are attempting to
underrate my good service and seek for him the reward. I have not
wished to set down in a boastful way anything more than the naked
truth, which your Majesty now has before your eyes. I most humbly
beseech your Majesty to be pleased to look upon my good intentions
and labors with the clemency and benevolence which they deserve,
extending to me the favor which is due, in such wise that they shall
not remain without the recompense which the servants of your Majesty
receive on similar occasions. And the chief of these should be to
order me withdrawn from this exile, to a place where I can spend the
rest of my life in greater peace in the service of your Majesty, and
start my children upon the same path. God protect the royal Catholic
person of your Majesty for many long years. Manila, June 30, 1601.

_Don Antonio de Morga_





Grant to Jesuit School in Cebu


Sire:

Hernando de Espinosa, procurator of the Society of Jesus in the
Yndias, in the name of the residence [51] of this order in the
city of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus of the Philipinas Islands, has
represented that, because of the great need of persons to administer
the sacraments to Spaniards, Indians, and Sangleys residing in and
about that city, and to preach to them the holy gospel, the provincial
of the said Society, with the permission of the governor, founded the
said residence six years ago. It is productive of much good, for,
besides the preaching to the Spaniards, natives, and Sangleys, and
hearing their confessions, the other sacraments are administered to
them; and there is a school where reading and writing are taught and
Latin studied, which is of great gain and benefit to the community. The
religious who are there are in great poverty; for they have no income,
nor do they receive any alms from the people. The said procurator
entreats from you a very moderate consideration, on account of their
poverty. This being evident to the said governor, he ordered that
to them be given annually, for such period as should seem fitting to
him, two hundred pesos and two hundred fanegas of rice, as an alms,
from the treasury of the fourths from the encomiendas that are without
instruction. With this it is, however, impossible to support the said
residence. It has need of repairs on its house, and, on account of
its narrow quarters, of erecting new buildings; and because it has
no alms, in lands or chaplaincies, [52] for the mass or any other
of the purposes referred to, it is in great want, as is evident by
the investigations made in the royal Audiencia of the said islands,
which were examined in the Council. He entreats that your Majesty, in
consideration of the aforesaid, will order that the said two hundred
pesos and two hundred fanegas of rice--which were granted to it,
as stated, by the said governor from the treasury of the fourths--be
set aside for it from the royal treasury, as the other fund is not
a permanent one. He further asks that you will bestow upon it from
the royal treasury one thousand pesos of income for its support,
and three thousand, to be paid once, for repairs and buildings for
the said residence; since your Majesty is wont to favor the other
parts of the Yndias for this purpose, as there is no other recourse
for aid. After examining this matter in the Council, our opinion is
that, if your Majesty be so pleased, one thousand pesos of eight reals
each, might be given once to that residence from the royal treasury of
the Philipinas, as an aid in building its houses; and that, besides,
information concerning it should be obtained from the governor and
the archbishop. Valladolid, December 11, 1601.

[_Endorsed:_ "Council of the Indias; December 11, 1601. In regard
to the aid and alms that should be bestowed upon the residence
of the Society in the city of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus, of the
Philippinas." "So let it be."]






Documents of 1602



    Instructions to Pedro de Acuna. Felipe III; February 16.
    Two royal decrees. Felipe III; February 16.
    Pintados menaced by Mindanao pirates. Juan Juarez Gallinato,
    and others; May 29-June 4.
    Letters to Felipe III. L. P. Dasmarinas, and others; June
    8-July 10.



_Source_: All these documents are obtained from MSS. in the Archivo
general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: The first document is translated by Alfonso de Salvio,
of Harvard University; the second, and part of the fourth, by Robert
W. Haight; the third, and part of the fourth, by Norman F. Hall, of
Harvard University; the first letter in the fourth, by Jose M. and
Clara M. Asensio.






Instructions to Pedro de Acuna


The King: To Don Pedro de Acuna, whom I have appointed my governor
and captain-general of the Philipinas Islands, and president of my
Audiencia therein. My royal Council of the Indias having examined
some letters from the said islands, I have resolved upon the following.

Since the Philipinas Islands are so far away and distant, surrounded
by so many great kingdoms of infidels, the entry and intercourse which
the Chinese and Japanese enjoy in Manila, and their friendly relation
with the natives, give us reason to fear that the former, allying
themselves with the natives, may attempt some disturbance, as they
are inclined to do. Considering the fact that the greatest security
and strength of the land lies in the Spanish settlement, and I have
heard that not only does it not increase but is not even maintained in
its previous condition--because, although the viceroys of Nueva Espana
are ordered to send reenforcements of men every year to the islands,
many people die from the bad climatic conditions of the land, others
are scattered in military expeditions, others must be permitted to
return (either because they have left families in their own country,
or because they cause injury to the commonwealth), and others go
there with no idea of remaining and have refused to become citizens:
considering all this, and seeing that it is a matter requiring much
attention, I charge and command you, in case this despatch shall
reach you in Nueva Espana, to consult the viceroy concerning all that
may pertain to the improvement of these conditions; or, in case you
receive it in the Philipinas, to do the same by writing, and to make
the arrangements and give the orders which you think best for the
settlement of the said islands, striving to draw the expenses from my
exchequer with the necessary moderation. I shall now write again to
the said viceroy, telling him to take care to provide the islands with
useful people, and permanent settlers; and, in order that such persons
may settle there, and remain in the islands, he shall favor them,
and see that the orders concerning the trade between the said islands
and Nueva Espana be carried out with exactness and rigor in order to
attain the end and purpose for which we allow this commerce--namely,
the preservation and prosperity of the islands, and the welfare of
their citizens and inhabitants. You yourself must attend to this with
much care, striving for the settlement of the said islands, and their
safety and tranquillity, and for the instruction and conversion of
the Indian natives.

Governor Don Francisco Tello wrote to me last year, ninety-nine,
about the precautions that he had taken in the punishment of some
Japanese pirates who had repaired to that coast and after whom he had
sent vessels by different routes; and about the inquiries that he had
likewise made among the crews of some merchant ships which had put
into Manila at that time, suspecting that they and the pirates were
all of the same sort. Since it is necessary to take notice and be
careful of this, I charge and command you to be always very vigilant
in foreseeing the troubles which may require your attention and which
may arise in the said islands, even if it be under pretext of trade
by foreigners. You will give a hospitable reception to friends,
and maintain amicable relations with them, keeping the ports and
frontiers of the said islands in the necessary security, and taking
special care that the expenses to be met by my royal exchequer in
the precautions to be taken, the manning of vessels for searching out
and punishing pirates, and the rest, be no more than are absolutely
necessary--since you see the many things which need attention; and,
above all, the limited resources of these islands.

When you informed me that in order to punish the pirates who resort to
the coast of the Philipinas Islands, it would be well to arm and man
some galleys, I granted you by my letter bearing the date of April 8
of this year, that if you saw that the galleys could be of service and
usefulness you might cause them to be built and manned. But through a
letter of July 12 in the said year, 1599, the said Don Francisco Tello
informs me that since the galleys are not suited for those seas--as
they had learned by experience, on account of the swift current
and their inability to enter a bay while pursuing the enemy--and
on account of the difficulties which the religious oppose to his
collecting rowers, and as those whom they get possess little skill,
he had decided to build four galizabras; these were already being
built, and when well armed and equipped would, with three galliots,
constitute a sufficient force for the clearing and pacification
of those seas. It is therefore desirable that you carefully note
all these matters, and after you have examined and considered them
thoroughly, you will see whether or not it will be advisable to keep
the said galizabras and galliots in case they are built and manned. You
will give the necessary care to the security of that coast and land,
keeping me informed of what is being done and of the coast which the
said galizabras or vessels appointed for that purpose will guard.

The said Don Francisco Tello says in the same letter that the province
of Mindanao was already pacified; but that some of the native chiefs
had given no pledge, and matters had not been thoroughly set in order,
and therefore it was necessary to keep there a garrison of two hundred
soldiers. He adds that, as the country is poor and has few sources of
wealth, he thought that the Indians would be unable to pay tribute;
but it was necessary to assure the safety and accessibility of that
post, because that was the landing-place where the Terrenatan landed
on his plundering expeditions against the Pintados, as he did in the
year 95. The said governor, as he had so few men and so little military
strength, decided to place a hundred soldiers in La Caldera, which is
near [the river of] Mindanao, in order to assure safety for that place
and to hold in check him of Terrenate. You will thoroughly inform
yourself of the state of affairs, and make the necessary provision
for them, taking special care to hold what is already pacified and to
have the gospel preached everywhere. As for the tribute to be imposed
upon the Indians you will do what may seem necessary, consulting the
prelates and observing my orders; you will see that those who have
been pacified and are subjected to me be safe, and receive no injury or
molestation from enemies. You will inform me of all that is being done.

The fiscal of the Audiencia of the said islands has written me
that since the Indians do not pay the eight reals tribute in kind,
as they were wont to do, but it has been left to their choice
instead, many difficulties have been and are being experienced,
detrimental to the newly-pacified Indians, to my exchequer, and to
the commonwealth; because, when they gave the produce of the land
in payment of the tribute, they cultivated and gathered it, and,
besides paying the tribute, there was left to them a large quantity
of produce, which they kept for their trade and crafts. The result
was that the community was well provided with abundance of supplies,
at little cost, and with cloth of various fabrics, with which they
clothed themselves. The encomenderos shipped these articles to Nueva
Espana, and the returns therefrom remained in the islands instead
of being taken away by the Chinese, as is done now; for the stuffs
are being bought from the Chinese, and the Indians of the islands no
longer manufacture them. Much gold was also taken to Nueva Espana,
from which the tenth was paid to me to the yearly amount of six or
eight thousand pesos, not to mention the larger amount which was paid
for the tributes of the encomiendas which are assigned to my crown;
but since the tribute is not paid in kind, hardly any gold is mined
now. Another trouble that results from this is, that the Indians,
who are naturally prone to idleness, easily earn enough with which to
pay the tribute and buy stuffs from the Chinese with which to clothe
themselves, and so do not manufacture these. In order to remove these
difficulties, it would be expedient to impose upon the said Indians
the occupations and work for which they and the provinces where they
live are fit and suitable, with the raising of cattle; they should
also be forced to extract gold from the mines and rivers, for, if
this were done, much gold could be obtained from the mines, rivers,
and placers. Thus the Chinese trade would cease in a large degree, and
the returns from the gold and cloths which might be carried to Nueva
Espana would remain in the land; and that, with the gain which would
thus result to the Indians, would make them well inclined to such work,
and cause them to do it willingly. The main point to be settled in
order that the Indians may be influenced to undertake it is, to make
them pay the tribute in kind. And since much attention and thoughtful
consideration should be given to what is here pointed out, not only
for the welfare of the Indians but for that of the commonwealth--since
if the land itself could provide and supply produce and merchandise,
that would be more advantageous than to procure them from outside;
and the gold and silver which is now taken away to foreign and pagan
kingdoms would remain in the land itself--I charge and command you
that, as soon as you reach the said islands, you call together my royal
Audiencia there; the honored prelates who shall be in Manila, and the
superiors of the religious orders--informing of this matter, by letter,
those who cannot easily go thither--and confer and deliberate with them
on all that is expedient and necessary to be done. In this conference
you shall keep in mind the welfare and preservation of the Indians and
of the country, and see that the said natives be neither molested nor
wronged--striving for this object, that there may be crops and other
products of the country; and that, for this purpose, the Indians shall
pay the tribute in kind. You will observe the necessary system in
taxing them, and will execute whatever decision is reached about the
matter; moreover you will inform me of what is being done, and will
always be careful to see that the Indians work in some occupation or
other and be not idle, since idleness is the chief cause of their ruin.

My governor of those islands was ordered to abolish many false musters
and extra expenses which were granted out of my treasury; but I have
heard that, although he reduced or abolished some of the said musters,
other stipends and extra expenses have since been given which had not
been usually paid--namely, to captains, alferezes, and other military
officers whom the said governor appointed over the people of the
towns. I have also heard that many alcaldes-mayor and other officials
have been added and their salary increased, so that where there was
only one alcalde-mayor, there are now three, each having a deputy, and
all drawing salaries from my treasury. I have learned that the said
officials could be reduced in the following way: In the province of
La Laguna, one alcalde-mayor, with a salary of three hundred pesos;
in the district of Mauban, [53] on the opposite coast [of Luzon],
one corregidor, with a salary of two hundred pesos; in the province
of Camarines, another alcalde-mayor, with a salary of three hundred
pesos, abolishing the office recently established; in the province
of Cagallan, one alcalde-mayor; in Pangasinan, one alcalde-mayor;
in the province of Ylocos, one alcalde-mayor with the same salary,
who could administer the jurisdiction of the district of Bulacan,
thus dispensing with the alcalde-mayor lately appointed for that
place; we can also dispense with the alcalde-mayor of the town of
Ytondo and of the coast of the city of Manila, all being districts
and suburbs of that city, leaving them under the jurisdiction of the
alcaldes-in-ordinary of the city of Manila, as in former times, so
that one alcalde might administer justice in the suburbs during six
months of the year, and the other serve in the city. It would also
be expedient to dispense with the alcalde-mayor lately appointed for
the islands of Leite, Zamar, and Babao, which may remain in charge
of the alcalde-mayor of Zubu, as they were before; for the natives
are troubled by both of these, and it is not desirable to have there
more than the alcalde-mayor of Zubu. Moreover, one corregidor with a
salary of two hundred pesos would suffice for the river of Butuan; in
the island of Calamianes, one corregidor is enough, drawing the same
salary; in the district of Oton one alcalde-mayor, with a salary of
three hundred pesos; in Panay, one corregidor, with two hundred pesos
salary. Let no alcalde-mayor or corregidor have a deputy except in his
absence, and then without a salary. I charge and command you that,
when you arrive at the said islands, you thoroughly investigate all
the aforesaid matters, and secure information thereon; and ascertain
what offices, salaries, and extra expenses have been added, and the
reason and justification for doing so. You will correct and reform
what there is to remedy and reform, so that, by taking the necessary
precaution in everything, whether it be in the administration of
justice or other matters, you will prevent as much as possible any
waste of my funds; for you see how necessary this is, on account of
the many expenses and works which must be supported by the treasury.

I have also heard that one of the things by which my exchequer is
most defrauded, and the inhabitants of the islands most wronged,
is to be found in the lading and despatch of the ships for Nueva
Espana with merchandise; for the governors, for several years, have
appointed to that duty various personal dependents and friends, who
have succeeded through illicit means in lading the ships with their
own goods and even those of their relatives, friends, and others;
and all the cloth which is shipped beyond the general apportionment
goes without paying the duties. To remedy this it would be expedient
that hereafter the allotment of freight be made in the presence and
with the supervision of the governor and other persons appointed for
it--an auditor and a royal official, appointed each year in turn,
beginning with the oldest ones; and that immediately after the said
apportionment the royal official make a copy of it. The persons to
whom the said cloth is allotted should go with their inventories in
order to value the goods and pay the duties in the presence of my
officials, who would give in return a permit for lading. One or two
of the officials should be present in the port of Cavite, the place
where the ships are laded. Likewise the lading of the ships ought to
be witnessed by the freighters who are usually appointed, and by an
auditor, in order to prevent the lading of goods not included in the
apportionment and for which no permit was given by the said officials,
as an acknowledgment that the duty was paid. Since it is not right to
allow opportunity for the irregularities and fraud which are reported
to have occurred, and of which the citizens have complained, I charge
and command you to restore order and to employ the remedy which most
fits the occasion, appointing for the allotment of the merchandise
and the lading of the ships persons in whom great confidence can be
placed. You will see that all this be done according to equity, by
being yourself present at times, if that seem best, and you will take
the necessary measures that my royal rights be in no manner defrauded.

I have heard that the ordinances are disregarded in assigning
encomiendas of Indians, and that some persons who are enjoying
encomiendas for life relinquish these, in order that they may be
bestowed on others whom they choose, and influence the governors to
assign the encomiendas to those persons. Since through many decrees of
the emperor and king, my sovereign, it is decreed and ordained that
no such relinquishment and renunciation of Indians be made, and that
encomiendas of this sort may not be allotted, I command you to observe
and strictly carry out what is ordered by the instructions sent to the
governors your predecessors, regarding the equitable manner in which
the Indians of those islands must be allotted to the persons who are
most deserving, and have rendered most service therein. Again I order
and command you not to confer relinquished encomiendas, or assign them
again, without notifying me of it, so that I may order what seems
best to me. In case you shall have disposed of such encomiendas,
I order that such allotment be null and of no effect.

I have been informed that it has become the custom in these islands to
grant at the cost of my treasury the wine for the celebration of mass
to the priests of the orders--not only to those in the encomiendas
allotted to my crown, but to those in private encomiendas; and that
there is no obligation to grant this aid to the doctrinas in private
encomiendas. I therefore command you to give orders that no wine
for the celebration of the mass be granted on the account of my
treasury to the secular priests, or to those who give instruction
in private encomiendas, for it is the duty of the encomenderos to
provide the wine.

Orders were given that for just reasons, and for the welfare and
preservation of that commonwealth, the governors your predecessors
were to name and appoint a certain number of regidors from trustworthy
men; but I have been told that the said governors have, through bribes
and other means, appointed to these offices certain persons who have
not the requisite and desirable qualifications therefor. I therefore
charge and command you to make a thorough investigation of the matter,
and to remove the regidors whom you find to have been appointed through
questionable means, or who are unfit for the office. You will replace
them with men possessing the necessary character and ability. Let
there be only eight regidors, which seems to be a sufficient number
for a city of that population. You will inform me of the men whom
you appoint, and of their qualities.

By a clause of the ordinance establishing the Audiencia there, it
is provided that its president and two auditors at the beginning of
every year audit the accounts of the officials of my royal exchequer,
and settle them in the course of two months, for this allowing each
auditor twenty-five thousand maravedis. This was done also in the
time of the previous Audiencia, and an accountant was appointed
who received another fifty thousand maravedis. I have learned that
afterward Governor Gomez Perez Dasmarinas, without any orders,
created for that purpose a position of accountant-in-ordinary, with
a salary of five hundred pesos, and a secretary with two hundred
and fifty pesos. This could have have been avoided by pursuing the
former method, with no other expense than the said hundred thousand
maravedis. It has seemed best to me to refer this matter to you,
as I do, in order that you may examine it and apply such remedy as
you think best. You will inform me of the steps you take in the matter.

I understand that the office of clerk of the regimiento in Manila has
been filled by the secretaries of the governors, and that on this
account justice is no longer sought for certain injuries inflicted
not only on the Chinese but on the citizens. I also learn that it
would be best to sell this office to a person who is not a servant
or a relative of the governors. Since it is not befitting that this
office should be filled by any secretary or follower of yours, or of
an auditor or an official of the Audiencia, you will not allow any
such appointment. You will nominate three from deserving men of those
islands, who in your estimation possess the necessary qualifications
for the office, and will send me their names, in order that I may
elect the one who seems best to me. In the meantime you will make
arrangements for the suitable performance of the duties of that office,
and so that no difficulties will arise. With this I shall order to
be sent you copies of two clauses of a letter, in which are proposed
two expedients which may benefit my exchequer in recompense for the
expenses which are incurred by it in those islands. One of these
relates to the cloves which could be obtained from the Malucas,
carrying thither the produce of the island of Panay in exchange;
and then bringing the said cloves to Nueva Espana on my account. The
other proposal suggests that a monopoly be established in the raw
silk brought from China--allowing each ship to carry only a certain
quantity of it, and that to be carried to Nueva Espana on my account
and not for any other, as you will understand more fully from the said
clauses of a letter, which I have thought best to send you. Thus after
you have discussed the matter with my royal Audiencia, and heard the
opinion of my royal officials and of such persons of experience and
intelligence as you think best, you can ascertain what can be done
in the matter, the benefit and advantage which may result from the
said measures, and the difficulty or facility which they offer. You
will send me a detailed account of all, with your opinion.

I have understood that, by way of remedy for the illegal acts committed
by the magistrates, and the wrongs which the Indians suffer, it would
be of great importance to have the official inspection of affairs in
those islands--which according to the ordinances constituting the
Audiencia there, and to my orders, the auditors ought to make in
turn. The latter have refused to do so, on acount of the expenses
and danger which they incur. Since it is necessary that the said
inspection be made, I charge and command you to cause it to be made
in the land which has been pacified, and where there is no obstacle;
and that in this inspection the auditor who is selected in turn,
conformably to the said ordinances, be accompanied by no soldiers
or other people who might prove to be burdensome or injurious to the
Indians. You will endeavor to make the said inspection bring about the
good results for which it is intended; and will give the auditor to
whose lot it falls a vessel of fair size with which to sail from those
islands of Luzon to the others, at the expense of my treasury. As for
the additional pay or gratuity which should be allowed to the said
auditors beyond their salary, and beyond what is granted them by the
ordinances and decrees, you will send me a report, with your opinion.

I have heard that the said islands contain many poor and needy
persons, to whom on account of their services and those of their
fathers a remuneration is due out of the profits of the land and
appointments to offices; but that as these sources of revenue are so
few, and the governors confer them on their relatives, servants, and
followers, as I have heard they have done, the others have remained
without anything. It is not just that there should be opportunity
for such appointments; therefore I order you to observe and fulfil
in this matter exactly what is enjoined by the decrees, provisions,
and instructions sent to the governors, preferring the most deserving
and the older inhabitants of the land, who have best and most served
the country without having been yet rewarded.

I have been informed that the ships which go to those islands from
Nueva Espana carry each year, without a merchandise register, a large
quantity of money from that country and Piru--which is not found on
reaching the port, on account of the care with which they hide it;
and that it was necessary to make investigations and inspect the
said ships before their reaching port. Since I understand that there
is some foundation in this, and that many irregularities occur in
this respect, I charge and command you to prevent and correct this
evil in a fitting manner; and to see that the fiscal shall go with
the officials of my exchequer to inspect those ships, at such place
as they find convenient. Let the penalty be rigorously enforced in
connection with what is found and discovered to be brought without
register and against orders, adjudging to the informer the share
which may seem to be best to my royal Audiencia of those islands.

Since I have learned that the office of treasurer of my exchequer in
those islands has very little work attached to it, since its duties
consist mainly in those of factor and accountant; and that therefore
there is no need of the said treasurer, and that office could be
fused with that of factor and the latter could act as treasurer, as
was done before--I command you to send me a report of what would be
expedient in this matter; also, of the duties of the said treasurer,
and if, as it has been said, dispensing with the office, the factor
and the accountant could take sufficient care of the administration
of my exchequer.

I have learned that the governors, your predecessors, have often
interfered in the affairs pertaining to the administration of my
exchequer, which is entrusted to its officials; and that, contrary
to the orders given them, they have not allowed the said officials
suitable freedom in the exercise of their offices. Since in matters
of this nature it is right to keep in mind the necessary security
of my exchequer, I order you to observe and cause others to observe
the ordinances and decrees which were issued in regard to this. You
will maintain friendly relations with the officials of my exchequer
in everything, and will give them the favor and aid necessary in
the exercise of their offices, so that they may fulfil their charge
and see that nothing is lacking to my service, and to the security,
accounts, and order of my exchequer.

The accountant and the treasurer of my exchequer have written to
me that my storehouses in the city of Manila have been in charge of
the factor, who placed over them a man with the title of "lieutenant
of shipping," whose duty was to keep an account of the receipt and
distribution of what came under his supervision, thus relieving the
work of the factor. A few years ago, on account of an information sent
against the factor, it was ordained that each of the said officials
should have his own key, and a person at the said storehouses in order
to have all transactions pass through three hands, and that two hundred
pesos a year should be paid to each person. They complained of this,
saying that they were unable to furnish a man for this on account of
their small salaries, which they needed entirely for their own support;
and they besought me to free them from this obligation. Since I desire
to be informed of the facts and occurrences therein; and how and under
whose charge, and on whose account, the said storehouses have been
usually kept; and the reason for ordering each of the said officials
to have his own key to the said storehouses; and whether they are more
secure for that precaution; and what sort of persons are placed there
by the said officials and at what salaries--I command you that, after
having examined the orders that have been given, and obtained thorough
information of what is expedient to do, you send me an account of it,
together with your opinion about the matter.

Although, as there are so excellent judges and officials in the
Audiencia of Manila, it is reasonable to believe that justice is
administered therein, I have learned that in certain cases there
has been laxity, and especially in two--namely, when Melchor Ramirez
de Alarcon, being intoxicated in the said city of Manila, and being
reprimanded by his son-in-law, Pedro Munez, gave the latter a blow
with his fist, receiving in return nine dagger-thrusts, of which he
died; and when, in the city of Cazeres, Captain Pedro Cid killed Joan
Martin Morcillo in a duel. In spite of the gravity of these cases,
the delinquents were not sent to prison, but were set free on paying
a fine of eight hundred pesos each--a procedure which caused censure
and discontent among the people. Since it is right that similar cases
be not left unpunished, I charge and command you that, as soon as you
reach the islands, you demand and copy, without declaring your purpose,
the record of the proceedings in regard to the said two murders,
and examine it in company with the licentiate Don Antonio de Rivera,
auditor of the Audiencia; and with the consent of the fiscal; and,
if you find sufficient cause for action, you will have the culprits
seized, and will make all the investigations and efforts necessary for
ascertaining the truth. If it seem to you that the administration of
justice requires it, you will send the prisoners under arrest to Nueva
Espana, together with the records of their cases, and will inform me
of what has been done and of the investigation made. You will always
take great care that justice be done and administered in every case,
and that crimes which merit punishment receive it, so that disorders
may be repressed and justice exist and be feared, and that it shall
not set a bad example or occasion lawless conduct in the land.

I have learned that many of the decrees and orders issued for those
islands are not being executed, and that there is laxity in this
respect, especially as concerns the ordinances about the equity with
which the positions of profit in that country should be apportioned,
and those persons who have not yet been remunerated should be
rewarded. When my fiscal demanded the observance of the decrees,
and especially in the case where the governor appointed Captain
Cerban Gutierrez de Cespedes to the office of alcalde-mayor while
he possessed an encomienda of Indians worth fifteen hundred ducados,
and the fiscal asked that the said captain be not allowed to exercise
the office until the completion of the trial, the Audiencia postponed
its final decision, and meanwhile the said Cerban Gutierrez continued
to exercise the office, and finished his term before the case was
settled. I have thought best to refer this case to you, as I do,
because in similar cases you will take suitable measures to prevent
difficulties of this sort. It is especially necessary to observe and
minutely fulfil the ordinances concerning the distribution of the
profits of the country and the grant of rewards to persons who have
not received them.

I charge and command you to examine the copy of a letter which I send
you with the present, and which was written to me from those islands
on matters concerning the Sangleys of the Parian, and on what ought
to be provided and remedied in the islands. You will inform me of
all matters and advices contained in the said letter. Meanwhile you
will provide and ordain whatever may seem necessary for the spread of
the Christian faith, and for the cessation of the troubles already
mentioned and others which may be expected, anticipating everything
as is most convenient.

I send you, besides, a copy of what has been written to me from those
islands concerning the precautions which should be taken in matters
of war and defense of the land. That letter also gives information
that the governors without any other reason but their own private
aims and interests, are wont to abolish the companies of infantry
and other offices of war, on account of which complaints arise. It
also states that they have been accustomed to appoint captains of the
number in the city of Manila, who are entirely useless, and that we
could dispense with the appointing those captains and granting their
commissions, as well as those of captains-general and masters-of-camp
which the governors have hitherto granted. You will examine all the
references made to the above-mentioned matters, and what pertains
to the garrisons and defense of the forts and fortified towns. You
will take the necessary precautions in these things, in order that
no loss or trouble may result from them; and will not fill the said
offices of captains-general and masters-of-camp--except that, when they
shall become vacant, you will appoint men to serve in these offices
until the appointments are made by me; and in the appointments of the
captains you shall consider very carefully the persons, and the need
that there is of them.

I am writing to the provincials of the religious orders the letters
which go with this, regarding the kind treatment of the Indians; and,
that the Indians must not be molested by the religious who give them
instruction. You will give them these letters and will take special
care to see how my commands are fulfilled, and that those natives
shall not receive injury from anyone. You will have great care taken
in teaching and instructing them in our holy Catholic faith.

The said Don Francisco Tello writes me that the work on the cathedral
of Manila has been stopped for lack of means to carry it on; but
that it would not take much money to build a tower and a sacristy,
which would complete the church. Although he said that he would aid
the work by various grants and imposts, and that, if any balances
should result from the auditing of accounts which he had ordered to
be made in the funds which he had set aside for that work, he would
have them collected for that purpose, I charge and order you to take
special care in helping and furthering the work on the said church
as much as you can, so that it may be promptly completed. You will
notify me in what manner this shall be done.

The said Don Francisco Tello writes to me that the two hospitals of
the city of Manila, for Spaniards and Indians respectively, are in good
and prosperous condition, and that he has taken possession in my name
of that for the Indians. He adds that the accounts of the latter have
been audited by his order, and that those of the Spanish hospital were
audited every year. This meets my approval; and I charge you always to
be attentive to the preservation and prosperity of the said hospitals,
and to notify me of the result when the accounts are audited.

Don Francisco Tello also informed me of the good condition in which
remained the Seminary of Santa Potenciana in the city of Manila,
where some young girls and other women were sheltered; and that all
were living in great retirement and offering a good example. He added
that many of them desired to remain in that seclusion, and that the
viceroy of Nueva Espana, whom he had asked to send two nuns for the
said monastery, had replied that no one of them dared to go. Since
I shall write to the viceroy about this matter, you will make the
necessary efforts that the said religious may go there; for this will
be of great importance in fully establishing the said monastery and in
completing the training of the nuns who have been sheltered there. You
will aid and heartily favor this work as being so desirable for the
service of God.

The said Don Francisco writes me that when the king my lord (may
he rest in glory) charged the governors your predecessors to found
a seminary where the children of the native chiefs of these islands
could be taught and receive instruction in the ways of civilization,
Don Luis Perez Dasmarinas, governor of the islands, made a contract
with the religious of the Society of Jesus for the foundation of the
said seminary, and assigned to it a perpetual income of a thousand
pesos yearly. To begin the work, he immediately gave them six hundred
pesos and for the income he set aside a fund in the treasury of the
fourths; but as the income was uncertain, on account of the needy
circumstances of the said treasury, and the amount of money given to
commence the work was small, and it was of great importance that the
work be begun, the said Don Francisco entreated me to be responsible
for this income, and thus make it perpetual. He also asked me to
give him permission to assign the said seminary a repartimiento of a
thousand Indians, the first one that should be vacant. Since I desire
to receive a report from you on the whole matter, I command you to
send me one, notifying me, with your opinion, of any other means,
besides the Indians, by which aid can be given to the said seminary,
and in what condition its endowment is.

Don Francisco Tello informs me that in the Parian of the Sangleys of
Manila--which was founded only for some of them to live in, and those
to be workmen, in such number as to be sufficient for the service of
the commonwealth--houses have been gradually built; and that by this
time there are more than three hundred of them, and three thousand
Sangleys who do nothing but eat up the provisions and enhance the
price of commodities in the land. He adds that this could be remedied
only by abolishing the Parian altogether, and letting the Sangleys
sell their merchandise in the streets or in their ships as they
were accustomed to do when there was no Parian. This would bring the
commonwealth a gain of more than one hundred thousand pesos a year,
and would give more security to the land; for, having no houses of
their own, the Sangleys would frequent that country less, and would
endeavor to sell their goods as soon as they reached the islands;
they would also sell at a moderate price, and there would be no
hucksters. He ends by saying that he was considering the necessary
steps to take in this regard. Since this is a matter whose importance
and consideration ought not to be overlooked, I charge and order you to
examine and discuss the question with the Audiencia and the prelates;
and to inform me of your opinions, decisions, and agreements before
taking any decisive action or making any changes--taking care in
the meantime, as I have already charged you, to see that all be done
prudently and for the security of the land.

The said Don Francisco Tello notified me that he had erected buildings
for the cabildo, and had placed thereon the coat-of-arms which was
granted to the city of Manila. This is well done; and, if my royal
coat-of-arms is not placed on the said house of the cabildo, you will
cause this to be done, placing it above the coat-of-arms of the city.

The said Don Francisco Tello writes that because he did not carry with
him the instructions which were given to him, he did not execute
what he was therein ordered to do when passing by the Ladrones
Islands--namely, that he was to provide for the religious instruction
of those Indians, leaving there such persons as he should select. He
said that, with the consent of the Audiencia, he wrote to the viceroy
of Nueva Espana, requesting him to fulfil that command by ordering the
officers of the ships which were to sail for those islands last year,
sixteen hundred, to leave there two religious, with ten soldiers for
their guard. He added that this work would prove of great service
to God, as those islands were thickly settled with Indians who were
docile, and inclined to receive instruction; and that, if religious
should enter that region, there is reason to expect that they would
convert many of the natives. And because this means no less than
the salvation of so many souls, I charge and order you that, if the
viceroy has not fulfilled the above order, you yourself shall do so,
in accordance with the orders regarding it which were given to the
said Don Francisco in his instructions. You will notify me of what
is being done in this matter.

The instructions order Don Francisco Tello to carry to those
islands from Mexico a certain number of farmers to cultivate the
land, who should be associated with the natives, and teach them
agriculture. This he did not then do, because the instructions did
not reach him there. I wrote, however, to the viceroy of Nueva Espana
to send them at the first opportunity; but, if he has not done so,
you will endeavor to have the said farmers conveyed to the islands,
because they are so necessary to make that land productive. You will
also make diligent efforts to introduce there, and carry over from
Nueva Espana, mares and horses of good blood for breeding purposes,
since this is of great importance for the service of the people.

The copy of a portion of a letter which accompanies this, which
was written to me by the said Don Francisco Tello, will show you
how he wished to enter the kingdom of Siam; and how he despatched
Captain Juan de Mendoza on an embassy to the king of that country,
requesting him to consent that four monks should go there, of the
Order of St. Domini, of which order the king had already a friar with
him. You will inform me how the matter stands, and report the answer
which the king will have given you. You will notify me of it, and
will encourage, so far as you can, the conversion of those infidels
and the preaching of the gospel to them.

The said Don Francisco Tello writes that, although it has been decreed
that the Indians shall not be condemned to pay money fines, it would be
advisable to make them, although with due moderation, pay some fines in
money, because on account of their disobedience and natural disposition
they feel more the punishment of paying one real than that of a hundred
lashes; the result is that we do not gain the expected result--namely,
to have them engaged in cultivating the fields and raising fowls,
cattle and other articles for the general need and welfare. Since I
desire to learn from you the facts, and what takes place in regard
to the aforesaid matter, and what measures are expedient in regard
to punishing them for their crimes and offenses by money fines,
and whether this causes or may cause some difficulties, I order you,
after having examined the question thoroughly and discussed it with
the Audiencia, archbishops, and ecclesiastical cabildo, to let me
know the result and the opinion of all.

I have heard that the buildings which have been erected for the
Audiencia and for the president's residence are in great need of a
hall in which the president and the auditors might hold their meetings;
for it is not convenient for them to meet in a hall of the president's
house, where the desirable secrecy cannot be observed because their
discussions can easily be overheard. Therefore it would be expedient
to build the said hall beyond the hall of the Audiencia, and next to
it, on the side where the clock is. As it is so important that the
said meetings be held in a suitable hall, and that great secrecy
be maintained in regard to the affairs transacted by them, it has
seemed good to me to notify you of this, and to charge you as I do,
that with the advice of the Audiencia you erect such building in
suitable style; so that the above-mentioned difficulties may cease,
and occur no longer on account of the authority and secrecy which
should prevail in the said meetings.

I have learned that Governor Don Francisco Tello, your predecessor,
went to the Audiencia and attended its meetings and visitations,
in unbefitting garments; and that at times he went half-dressed,
without sword or jacket. Since in positions of that sort, in places
and regions so remote, it is necessary to exercise the authority and
propriety due to those offices, I charge you to be very careful in
that respect, and always to attend meetings and courts with the garb
and decorum which befit the occasion.

The fiscal of the Audiencia of the said islands, to whom is entrusted
the protection of the Indians, has informed me that, as their lawsuits
are many and involve much work, with the Audiencia's permission he
appointed a solicitor, with a salary of two hundred pesos, and an
interpreter with a salary of eighty pesos, at the expense of the
encomenderos. I charge you that, as soon as you reach the islands,
you discuss this matter with the Audiencia; and, if it be necessary
to retain the said solicitor and interpreter, to see that their
salaries be paid, and that they be trustworthy men and competent to
fill those offices. You will always take special care to see that
the Indians be relieved from burdens, and protected and favored in
all permissible ways, and that their affairs be promptly settled,
endeavoring to avoid lawsuits whenever possible. At Zamora, on the
sixteenth day of February in the year one thousand six hundred and two.

I, The King

Countersigned by Juan De Ybarra




Two Royal Decrees



Colonists for the Islands


The King: To the Conde de Monterrey, my kinsman, and viceroy,
governor and captain-general of Nueva Spana, or to the person or
persons in whose charge the government thereof may be: The kingdoms
of infidels and enemies of our holy Catholic faith, with which the
Philipinas Islands are surrounded, being so numerous and so great, the
most advisable thing for its safety and defense is to settle it with
Spaniards. That colony, I am informed, is not only not being augmented,
but is not even being preserved in its present state; for the people
who are sent to those islands are few compared with the number of
those who die from the unhealthful climate of the country, and those
who are dispersed in expeditions, and because most of those who go to
the said islands do not intend to abide there, and accordingly return
with their wealth. It is considered expedient to give such persons
permission to return, so that others may be willing to go to the
islands; and it is necessary to give others such permission, either
because they are married in Espana, or because they are Peruvians, a
people who are injurious to the community. Consequently there is always
a lack of people, and those who remain there are the poorest. As it
is expedient to attend with great care to the settlement of the said
Islands and their conservation, I charge and command you to provide
for and send thither useful people, and to see to it that settlers
of good character go thither. In order that this may be done, and
that they may live and remain there, you will see to the careful and
rigorous execution of the orders already given concerning the trade of
the Philipinas with your country of Nueva Espana, and that the object
be attained for which it is permitted--that is, that it be directed
to the settlement and conservation of the said islands and applied to
the benefit and advantage of the citizens--taking care that nothing
be done which shall transgress any order which has been given in the
matter, or which may be so given in the future, and with great care
favoring the interests of the said islands. In this you will please me.

Given at Zamora, on the sixteenth of February, in the year one thousand
six hundred and two.

_I, The King_

Countersigned by

_Joan de Ybarra_

Signed by the Council.

[_Endorsed:_ "To the Viceroy of Nueva Spana, concerning the settlement
of the Philipinas Islands, and directing him to send useful people
there."]




Nuns for Santa Potenciana


The King: To the Conde de Monterrey, my kinsman, and viceroy, governor
and captain-general of Nueva Spana, or to the person or persons in
whose charge the government thereof may be: Don Francisco Tello, my
governor and captain-general of the Philipinas Islands, has informed
me of the prosperous condition of the seminary of Sancta Potenciana
at Manila, where girls are sheltered, and of the retirement and the
exemplary lives which they lead, and that many of them intend to remain
in the said seminary. I wrote to you to send them, from Nueva Spana,
two religious women for the said seminary, but you answered to the
effect that none of them dared to go. As this is of great importance,
and should be carried out, for the establishment of that seminary and
the settlement there of professed nuns, and that its inmates may be
thoroughly trained in piety, I charge and command that you that, in
any event, you make arrangements to send there the said two religious
women from one of the convents of your country, and that they shall
be persons of approved character--and this on account of the great
service which this will be for our Lord; and you shall advise me of
what is done in the matter.

Given at Camora, on the sixteenth of February, in the year one thousand
six hundred and two.

_I, The King_

Countersigned by

_Joan de Ybarra_

Signed by the Council.

[_Endorsed:_ "To the viceroy of Nueva Spana, directing him to send
thence to the Philipinas certain religious for the establishment of
a seminary."]





Pintados Menaced by Mindanao Pirates


_Testimony which Captain Gallinato sent to the governor of the
Filipinas concerning the help which the king of Terrenate is giving
to the Mindanaos._

On the sea, off the tinguis ["hills"] of La Caldera, on the
twenty-ninth day of the month of May in the year one thousand six
hundred and two. The purveyor-general, Juan Juarez Gallinato. Whereas
Ensign Antonio de Alarcon, commander of the patrona, [54] took with
his galley from a vessel of Lutaos an Indian of San Buangan [_i.e._,
Zamboanga,] who is supposed to be a spy, I command, in order to learn
the truth and the design of the enemy, that his confession be taken;
and so I order it and sign my name.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato_

By his order:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary

_Deposition_. Then on the day, month, and year aforesaid, the
purveyor-general caused to appear before him the said Lutao, who was
questioned by the interpreter Pedro Navarro, encomendero of Canamucan
and Baibay.

He was asked what his name was, of what place he was a native, and
if he were a slave or a timagua; and he replied that his name was
Saliot, that he was a native of Sanbuangan, which is near La Caldera,
and that he was a timagua. This was his answer.

When asked for what purpose he was coming yesterday when he was taken,
and who sent him, he said that he was sent by a chief named Bato, a
native of the witness's village, who told the witness to take fowls
and wax and fish, and go to the place where the fleet was, or was
coming, and find out who was in it, what sort of ships there were,
where it was going, what people it carried, and how many ships;
and the witness came to do what the aforesaid chief had ordered,
and was captured. This was his answer.

He was asked what ships there were in the river of Mindanao, armed
to set out; and where they were going, who was going as commander
of them, and what fighting men there were. He said that there were
a hundred ships in the aforesaid river of Mindanao, large and small,
intending to go out to plunder Pintados and Cebu, and Oton, and all the
regions that they could; and that for commander there goes Silonga,
with Raxamora and Buysan. He said that a large number of men were
going on the war-vessels, because they take a hundred men from each
village; and he said that within ten days they would set out from
the river for Pintados. This was his answer.

When asked if the Mindanaos knew that the Spanish fleet was going to
help Pintados, or what they understood about it, he said that a son of
Liguana, called Ssapay, with Gumapas and Nasa, were sent from Mindanao
as spies in order to know what the Spaniards were doing, and where
they were; and that they told where the Spanish fleet was, and what
it was doing. He said that the Lutaos who came with him yesterday had
returned to give news of the coming of the fleet. This was his answer.

He was asked whether Liguana, chief of Taguima, had planned to
go to Pintados with the enemy's fleet. He said that he had, and
that likewise his sons were going with him, and all the chiefs of
his country; and thirty-five vessels were going from Sanbuangan,
Tragima, and Basilanban. This he said to be the truth, according to
the obligation of his oath, which he had taken after his custom. He
said that he was about twenty years old; and he did not sign this
paper, but the interpreter signed it.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato Pedro Navarro_

Before me:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary

_Official act_. On the sea, off the mainland of Dapitan, on the
thirtieth day of the month of May in the year one thousand six hundred
and two. The purveyor-general, Juan Juarez Gallinato. Whereas Ensign
Pedro de Carrion, while scouting among the little islands opposite
the kingdom of Xolo in the last few days, captured a Lutao in a
[_MS. defective_] and was fleeing; it is proper, in order to know
the design of the inhabitants of the aforesaid kingdom, that his
deposition be taken; and thus I command it and sign my name.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato Pedro Navarro_

By his command:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary

_Deposition_. On the aforesaid day, month, and year, the aforesaid
purveyor-general ordered to appear before him the aforesaid Indian,
in order to take his deposition, through the interpreter Pedro Navarro,
encomendero of Baibay. The following questions were asked of him.

After he had taken the oath according to his custom, and after he had
promised to tell the truth, he was asked what his name was, where he
lived, what his occupation was, and if he was a slave or a timagua. He
said that he was called Onarano; that he was a Lutao of the village of
Lumian, which is near Xolo; that his occupation was always to fight;
and that he was a timague. This was his answer.

When asked if it was true that the son of Diguana, called Sapaz, [55]
was with the natives of Jolo on the morning on which they attacked the
Spanish quarters, and if Diguana knew of the attack, he said that he
did not know; nor had he heard it said, because the witness was not
in that affray, for he had gone away to fight at that time. This was
his answer.

He was asked if it was true that the king of Xolo sent to Mindanao
to seek help against the Spaniards. He said that it was, and that
a chief of the aforesaid kingdom, called Diaga, went in a ship to
seek it on behalf of the king; but that it was not known what reply
he brought back. This was his answer.

He was asked if it was true that the Mindanao enemy was preparing a
great fleet to come against the provinces of Pintados and against the
Spaniards. The witness said that he had heard from other natives of
the kingdom of Xolo that, as long as the Spaniards remained in the
aforesaid kingdom, all the natives of Mindanao would go with a large
fleet to Pintados, to plunder it. This was his answer.

He was asked other questions in regard to the matter, but he said that
he did not know anything more than what he had already declared; and
this he affirmed. He did not sign this paper, but the aforesaid Pedro
Navarro signed it. He declared that he was more than fifty years old.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato Pedro Navarro_

Before me:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary


_Official act_. In the port of Biara, which is on the mainland of
Dapitan and Mindanao, on the thirty-first day of the month of May in
the year one thousand six hundred and two. The purveyor-general, Juan
Juarez Gallinato. Whereas Captain Benito Gomez Descobara y Esquivel
captured on a little island (or rather on the sea-coast) an Indian,
a native of Sanbuangan, who is supposed to be a spy; I command, in
order to learn if he is one, and to ascertain about the enemy's fleet,
that his confession be taken; and thus I order it and sign my name.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato_

By his command:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary


_Deposition_. Thereupon, immediately, on the day, month, and year
aforesaid, the said purveyor-general caused to appear before him
the aforesaid Indian, in order to receive his confession, through
Agustin de Sepulbeda--who swore in due form to fulfil the office
of interpreter well and faithfully, and administered an oath to the
Indian according to the latter's custom. He promised to tell the truth,
and the following questions were asked of him. He was asked his name,
where he lived, his occupation, his age, and whether he was slave or
free; and he replied that his name was Panran, that he was a native
of the town of Linpapa (which is near Rabos), that he was a slave
of Sumanpie, chief of the said village of Linpapa, and that he was
about twenty years old. This was his answer.

He was asked what ships had gathered and from what nations, and
also where they were and for what purpose. He said that from Maluco
there had come fifty vessels--Terrenatans, Sangils, and Togolandans
[56]--which were brought by Buisan, who is master-of-camp to the one
whom they call Captain Lant. The rest which are going from Mindanao
consisted of forty large caracoas and twenty carangailes and bireyes,
with one caracoa and two bireyes from Sanbuangan and Tagima. All these
had agreed that, if the Spaniards were in Jolo, they should fall upon
them; and that, if they were not there, they should go to plunder in
Pintados, Cebu and Oton. This was his answer.

He was asked where it was said that they were to go. He said that
those who were returning from Oton had agreed to pass through some
little islands which are opposite Quipit; and that those going to
Cebu were to go from Similon, which is opposite Dapitan; and that
they were to return that way. This was his answer.

When he was asked how he knew this that he had said, he replied that
it was generally known and reported among the chiefs of Sanbuangan
and among the Lutaos.

He was asked what agreement Liguana had made with the chiefs of Tagima
and Sanbuangan, and what he said to them against the Spaniards. He
replied that the aforesaid Liguana had ordered the chiefs and the
Lutaos to be assembled together, and in readiness, along with the
Mindanaos, against the Spaniards. This was his answer.

He was asked how many days it would be before the fleet would set out
for Pintados; and he replied that the fleet was ready in Mindanao,
and that he had heard that it was to start shortly, within ten days,
and that five of these had passed. This was his answer.

He was asked other questions in regard to the matter, and he replied
that what he had said was the truth; and he affirmed this and ratified
it. He did not sign this, but Agustin de Sepulbeda signed it.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato_
_Agustin de Sepulbeda_

Before me:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary


_Official act_. On the sea, near Dapitan, on the fourth day of the
month of June in the year one thousand six hundred and two. The captain
and sargento-mayor, Juan Juarez Gallinato, purveyor-general and head
of the provinces of Pintados for his Majesty. Whereas it has come to
his notice that yesterday, Monday, the third of this month, Captain
Garcia Gutierres Guerrero and Ensign Domingo Martir and Diego Mendez
went in a caracoa to the river of Sioco to get water; and that, while
they were doing so, there came to them an Indian, the chief of the
said river, who told them that it was he who had given notice to the
captains about the enemy's fleet, in order to warn the Spaniards: now
therefore, in order to ascertain whether this is so or not, I command
that the depositions of the aforesaid men be taken; and I order it,
and sign my name.


_Juan Juarez Gallinato_

By his command:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary


_Deposition._ Thereupon, on the day, month, and year aforesaid, the
said purveyor-general caused to appear before him the said Captain
Garcia Gutierrez Guerrero, in order to receive his deposition. He took
oath in due form of law, and promised to tell the truth; and, when
questioned in accordance with the above order, the witness declared
that he had gone to the bank of the river of Sioco, where some Indians
who pay tribute to him live; and that when he had arrived there the
witness caused an arquebus to be fired, at the noise of which there
came up an Indian, the chief of that river, called Tumarahoc. The
said chief came to where the witness was, and told him that he had
told the Indians of Dapitan--those who took fowls to the Jolo army
for the commander--that they should warn the Spaniards that in the
river of Mindanao a great fleet was being prepared, with many men,
which they said was to go to Jolo and Pintados; and the aforesaid
Indian likewise told the witness that he would be on the watch, and
that he would warn the Dapitans if the fleet should set out, and where
it was going; and he said that he would also tell the witness. This
he declared to be the truth, under the oath which he had taken; and
he affirmed and ratified it, and signed it, and declared that he was
about forty years old.


_Garcia Guerrero_
_Juan Juarez Gallinato_

Before me:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary



_Deposition_. Then, on the day, month, and year aforesaid, the said
purveyor-general caused to appear before him Ensign Domingo Martin,
in order to take his testimony. He took oath in due form of law,
and promised to tell the truth. When questioned in accordance with
the above order, the witness said that he went in company with
Captain Guerrero to the bank of the river of Sioco to get water;
and that when they arrived there they fired an arquebus-shot from the
witness's caracoa, and that, after they had fired it, there came to the
aforesaid bank an Indian, the chief of the river, who was a friend of
the Spaniards and paid tribute to the aforesaid Captain Guerrero. When
he reached the caracoa, he told the witness and Captain Guerrero that
he had told the Dapitan Indians (who had gone to Jolo with fowls for
the commander), that they should warn the Spaniards that a large number
of ships were being gathered in the river of Mindanao; and that a very
great number of men was to depart in them to go against the Spaniards
in Jolo and to plunder Pintados. The said chief also said that he had
told the said Indians that if they did not warn the said Spaniards he
would have them beaten with sticks; and that he would be on the watch,
and that he would warn the Dapitan chiefs and Captain Guerrero of what
happened. This he declared to be the truth, under the oath which he
had already taken; and he affirmed and ratified it, and signed it;
and he said that he was about twenty-eight years old.


_Domingo Martin_
_Juan Juarez Gallinato_


Before me:

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary


These agree with the originals, which are in the possession of the
purveyor-general, who signed here with his name; and it is exact and
accurate. And to the fact that it was accurately copied, corrected,
and made to agree, were witnesses: Ensign Juan Rodriguez de Santa,
and the royal ensign Pedro Mendez de Sotomayor, and Francisco
Hernandez. Done in Dapitan, on the fourth day of the month of June
in the year one thousand six hundred and two.

_Juan Juarez Gallinato_

In testimony of which, I have affixed my name and the customary
rubrics.

_Rafael de Sarria_, notary



Letters to Felipe III



Sire:

Don Pedro de Acuna, [57] to whom your Majesty granted the favor of
sending him to govern this land, arrived here with a very considerable
reenforcement of troops. This and his arrival are so important and
timely that I think there must follow many results beneficial to
the service of God and of your Majesty, as also the correction of
important matters--which have greatly needed it, as I have informed
your Majesty at greater length in a report and letter that treats of
this matter, and of the great and urgent necessity for your Majesty
to command that the town and fort of Maluco be occupied as promptly
as possible. From this will result the greatest advantages, and great
danger to this land will be averted; and thus may be repaired the many
losses and destructive raids which this country may suffer, which may
result from the inroad of those demons of English and Dutch heretics,
with their intentions and desires. We should have aid, and means
of communication, and strongholds in these regions, and especially
in this one of Maluco, which is the most important, dangerous, and
near to these islands, and whose people are unfriendly. Our enemies,
the Xoloan and Mindanaos, avail themselves of it, and are succored
therefrom, and with this aid have inflicted many damages, which they
will continue to do, if they are not checked. Great cost and expense
must be incurred in these islands, merely to preserve and defend them;
and there are great hindrances and difficulties in the way of their
growth. By gaining this fort the door is closed to notable evils and
troubles, and benefits of the utmost importance, both spiritual and
temporal, through which God our Lord and your Majesty will be well
served, the Christian faith and the extension of the gospel will
be assured and increased in these regions; and the crown and royal
possessions of your Majesty, and the reputation of Espana, well
maintained and accredited, as is not the case now. Other important
undertakings and expeditions which may hereafter be made will be
facilitated; for that place is the capital, and has most reputation;
and it rules as subjects and tributaries many surrounding peoples,
who may be easily reduced after the conquest of this stronghold, and
after those who so greatly fear and respect us have been vanquished and
chastised. Moreover, expenses for supplies and garrisons which must be
maintained, and which are necessary until this is accomplished, will
be saved; and a large amount of property and income will be left for
other expenses and affairs in the service of your Majesty. In short,
until this is once for all assured and established, a certain amount
of damage must be expected, and will inevitably result; and it is very
evident that for the aforesaid reasons it is necessary sooner or later
to undertake this expedition for the preservation and security of these
regions. It is also better not to postpone it, and not to wait until
that place has greater fortification, strength, and defense, thereby
rendering its conquest more difficult and costly. I conclude, Sire,
by saying that as God and your Majesty have sent Don Pedro de Acuna
to this government, and he has inclination and desire for military
service, and for the faithful fulfilling his performance of what
pertains to his office and to the service of your Majesty, (as has been
observed), and besides has experience and the qualifications suitable
and necessary for this undertaking, may your Majesty not defer it, or
wait for another governor to perform this most important service. The
opportunity of having a person so well fitted for such a contingency
(which is by no means unimportant) is not to be lost. To say this
and what else pertains to this matter, Sire, I am constrained only
by the duty which I owe to the service of God and His church, and to
your Majesty and your crown, and to the general welfare of these most
important regions. If this were not so, nothing in this matter would
concern or could influence me; for it has cost me most dear and was
so disastrous to me that I lost by it my father and a great amount of
property, and met other losses to which I shall not refer. For this
reason, I desired to prosecute this expedition after the death of my
father; but I could not do so, on account of the great fear and dread
of hostile Chinese and Japanese. As a man, Sire, I can but desire the
accomplishment of that thing which my father and I had tried to achieve
and had almost succeeded in doing. But may our Lord not permit that
this or any other enterprise should be abandoned, for lack of desire
and effort to secure a result so desirable for the said objects;
and may it come through the hand and means which God shall choose,
and by which He shall be served. May His Divine Majesty guard your
Majesty as He can, and as we all desire and need. At Manila, June 8,
in the year 1602.

_Luis Perez Dasmarinas_

[_Endorsed_: "April 27, 1604. To the Conde de Lemos. Suitable provision
has already been made; at Valladolid, [58] May 14, 1605."]




Sire:

As I was in doubt whether the letter which I wrote last year regarding
the matter in this was received by your Majesty, I give an account
of the same matter in this letter.

Toward the close of the previous year, 1600, there entered into
these islands, by way of the Strait of Magallanes, Oliver de Nort,
a Hollander, with two ships of war belonging to Count Mauricio. He
took prizes and caused damage, until he established himself at the
mouth of the bay of this city, intending to await the merchant ships
from China, and the galleon "Santo Thomas" from Nueva Espana, with
the silver for two years belonging to the business men of this kingdom.

As military affairs were at that time little cared for in these
islands, and there was no sort of preparation, the royal Audiencia
of your Majesty, at the petition of the president, Don Francisco
Tello, was obliged to take measures to provide aid in so urgent a
necessity, with all possible haste and efficiency. For this end I was
commissioned to go immediately to the port of Cabite, and place and
keep it in a state of defense; and to arm several ships, with which
to meet the pirate and divert him from his intention. Accordingly,
I did so to the best of my ability, and put two ships of moderate
size in readiness in a short time, there being no others.

The president ordered me again in your Majesty's name, and in
writing--as he considered that by no other authority, in view of
the state of affairs, could the expedition be made--to go out with
this fleet in my charge, against the enemy, and fight until I should
destroy him. In compliance with this I sought him, and encountered
him outside the bay of this city. We engaged the enemy in a long and
obstinate battle, which occurred between the two fleets on December
14. The outcome is related in the certified account by the president
and governor, which accompanies this, by which your Majesty will
be informed of the punishment which was inflicted upon this enemy,
and how our aim was attained as we had wished, and likewise of the
dangers and hardships which I encountered and underwent on this
occasion. In this I should be content if I had, for my only reward,
succeeded in serving your Majesty; for this aim alone drew me from
my home at so much danger to my honor, life, and children.

I humbly beg your Majesty to be pleased to pardon whatever fault there
may have been, in consideration of my good intention and desire to
obey, and to succeed in what I was commanded to do. God protect the
Catholic person of your Majesty. At Manila, June 30, 1602.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_




Sire:

Although the obligation to advise your Majesty of the state of this
your province, of the Order of our father St. Augustine, is always
binding, yet for many new reasons it is especially binding this year;
for at the recent meeting cf the chapter here, by acclamation, and
without voting, father Fray Pedro Arze (concerning whom your Majesty
must already have a report), was elected provincial, with the consent
of all. From this we hope that, with the favor of God and your Majesty,
he will be successful in his government, since its commencement is
so propitious. The letter and mandate which your Majesty sent last
year serves him as a guide for the correction of what stands in
need of remedy, and the severity necessary to prevent disobedience;
accordingly, the province is enjoying the greatest peace and quiet
that it has ever had. In the meantime there came this year Fray Pedro
Sossa, with a commission as visitor, sent by Fray Christoval de la
Cruz from Nueva Espana, in virtue of several messages which he bears
from the father-general, Alejandro Genense. We did not receive him,
not because we did not desire a visitation--which, on the contrary,
we do desire, and humbly seek from your Majesty, for the justification
of this province--but because he did not come by order of your Majesty,
and for other reasons which the Audiencia of these islands examined;
and because some other and further messages which he bore from the
father vicar-general Fulvio relating to us appeared suspicious. In what
concerns this matter, we refer your Majesty to the said Audiencia,
which, we believe, will advise your Majesty with due fidelity. Your
Majesty has therein two very faithful vassals and servants, namely,
Doctor Antonio de Morga and the licentiate Tellez Almazan--both the
fathers of children, excellent judges, poor, and deserving of whatever
favor your Majesty may extend to them; and especially of being removed
from this country, which is poor and of scant resources, and where
they cannot provide for the fortunes of their children. In this way
we consider that your Majesty would do a great service to God.

The bearer of this is the father definitor, Fray Diego Cerravi, [59]
who came to these regions from Castilla about eight years ago, and has
served your Majesty and the order here very advantageously. He is a
learned and virtuous religious, who speaks the truth; accordingly your
Majesty may credit what he says. He is a man of so many good qualities
that, to tell your Majesty in a word, he leaves us at his departure
lonely, sad, and disconsolate at losing him--although we are consoled
by our confidence in the favor and grace which your Majesty will show
this province and to him in its name, by ordering that aid be given to
him in the business which he has in his charge; and especially that he
may bring us friars from the province of Castilla, who are here much
approved for their virtue and learning. And we are confident that
your Majesty will favor us in all matters as our protector, patron,
and only defender; we trust no less that our Lord will protect for
us the royal person of your Majesty, according to the needs of your
kingdoms and seigniories, and of us, your ministers and chaplains. We
beseech, etc. From this your Majesty's convent of the Order of our
father Saint Augustine. In the city of Manila, on the fourth of July
in the year one thousand six hundred and two.


_Fray Pedro Arce_, provincial
_Fray Agustin de Tapia_, definitor
_Fray Bernave de Villalovos_, definitor
_Fray Diego Cerrabe_, definitor
_Fray Pedro de Salzedo_, definitor


[_Endorsed with the following order_: "Join this with the letter from
the Audiencia, and bring them in on January 28, 1604."]



Sire:

Since the last year, 601, an account has been given to your Majesty
of the expedition which I conducted at the close of the previous year,
1600, by order of the governor and president, Don Francisco de Tello,
against Olibert de Norte, a corsair from Holland who entered among
these islands, taking prizes with two ships of war; and of the outcome
of the expedition, by which the said corsair was punished and harassed.

Francisco de las Missas, factor and overseer of your Majesty's
exchequer in these islands, whom I inspected a short time ago
... [under a] [60] special commission from your Majesty, and passed
sentence upon him ... penalties and restitutions as will appear by
the report of the inspection which I have sent to your ... [Majesty]
by three routes. He has been so hostile ... that he displays his
jealousy of me in all matters [in so far as] he can. Accordingly,
on account of this--as well as to cover his fault at the time of
the despatch of the fleet which I took, by sending me unsupplied
with sailors and other things necessary, which it was his duty to
furnish--among other measures which he has taken since the past
year, one has been under color and appearance of proceeding from
the licentiate Salazar de Salzedo, fiscal of this Audiencia (whom,
for private reasons, he holds quite in his power). The said factor
induced the fiscal, in the affair of his investigation, to draw up a
secret information with suborned witnesses--sailors and others, who
are at his call--by which it is intimated that he furnished me well,
and that the commander's ship was lost through my fault, imputing to
me by the statements of these men other and illegal actions, in order
to disparage my faithful service; by this may be seen the malice and
passion of those concerned in this affair. That document was sent to
your Majesty and the ministers before whom this matter is considered.

In like manner Captain Joan de Alcega (his intimate friend,
and likewise a partisan of the said fiscal and factor), whom I
took as admiral, in order to cover up his own guilt--for which he
was arrested by the president and governor, and is being proceeded
against officially because, at the beginning of the fight, he left the
commander's ship unsustained, contrary to the order which he had from
me in writing; and on account of other illegal acts, and because he
took a part of the benefits of the success which resulted--he also,
driven by the same heat of passion, has taken secret measures and
procured documents with which to inform your Majesty in a sinister
way to my prejudice.

Since it is just that in all matters your Majesty should be informed of
the truth, I send certain documents which are not drawn in secret, nor
cunningly, nor maliciously, whereby the truth will appear--especially
the information which was drawn by the alcalde-mayor of the province
of Valayan (on whose coast and in whose district the ship was lost),
the very next day, and obtained from the men who were saved from the
wreck. By this may be seen what passed in this region, and the guilt
of the said factor, and that of the admiral, as has been pointed out.

Beside this, in the ships which leave here this year goes a religious
of the Order of St. Augustine, Fray Francisco de Valdes by name, who
was sent, in company with Fray Diego de Cerrabi, by his order to the
court of your Majesty on the business of the order. This religious
can inform your Majesty of all which occurred on the said expedition,
as his order sent him on it to confess and administer the sacraments;
and he was present during the fight on the commander's ship, and saved
himself by swimming. As a trustworthy and disinterested person, he will
tell the truth, without being influenced by personal considerations.

I humbly beg your Majesty that, with this understanding, your Majesty
may be pleased to command that opportunity be not given for distortion
of facts in such a way, by persons so jealous and so suspicious, who
are moved alone by anger and passion to avenge themselves and procure
satisfaction from the ministers who, for the service of your Majesty,
have administered (as they still do) justice in your behalf; and
that you will command that the illegality which appears to have been
committed in this be punished, as is most fitting for the service of
your Majesty. God protect the Catholic person of your Majesty. Manila,
July 8, 1602.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_



Sire:

I, the licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo, your fiscal in
the royal Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands, say that on the
sixteenth of January of the year one thousand six hundred your Majesty
was pleased to command that a royal commission be given to Don Pedro
de Acuna, governor and captain-general of these islands, empowering
him, when he should reach them, to cause the royal officials to give
him a report of what they have collected from Don Francisco Tello,
his predecessor, toward the sixteen millions [of maravedis?] which
were still due from the balance which was incurred by him at the
time when he was treasurer of the Sevilla House of Trade; and also
to cause that whatever remained to be paid should be collected from
the said Don Francisco Tello and from his property.

In the course of the execution of this commission by the said Don
Pedro de Acuna, the royal officials certified that the said Don
Francisco Tello had paid them twenty-seven thousand two hundred
pesos of common gold, which should be twenty-eight thousand one
hundred and eighty-four pesos, according to your command by a royal
decree dated in San Lorenco, on the thirteenth of September in the
year one thousand five hundred and ninety-five. The said officials
decided that the eight thousand pesos which were lost in the year
one thousand six hundred in the ship "Santa Margarita" should be
for your Majesty's account--because, since the debt was contracted
in the Sevilla House of Trade, the payment should be there; and
the said Don Francisco Tello must run the risk as far as that. They
also decided that what was ordered in the aforesaid royal decree of
the thirteenth of September, ninety-five, was that each year three
thousand ducados should be deducted from the salary of Don Francisco
Tello, which were to be sent each year; and, as he failed to pay in
the years ninety-six, ninety-seven, and ninety-eight, for the rest
of the time it came about that eight thousand pesos were sent each
year. It was thus that the aforesaid eight thousand pesos were lost
which were going in the said ship "Santa Margarita;" whereas, if the
aforesaid royal decree had been followed and three thousand ducados
sent, no more than that sum would have been lost.

The governor gave me authority to follow up the matter, and I asked
from him an order of execution for the whole sum, with the assurance
that I would receive on account whatever seemed lawfully to have been
paid; it was given to me on the person and goods of the aforesaid
Don Francisco Tello, but property was not found to the value of four
hundred pesos. He opposed the execution, saying that he had paid in
Sevilla with the income of his family estate, together with what he
had paid here, all the balance that was due. I replied to this that
this did not appear, from the aforesaid royal decree of January, one
thousand six hundred, and that a forced sale would have to be made
for the amount that was therein ordered--not taking account of the
payments that had been made here until they should arrive at Sevilla,
as the official judges of these islands have decided--and that what
was lost must be at the risk of the said Don Francisco Tello.

This was proper, since at the time when the said royal officials
gave the said money to the masters of the ships to be delivered to
the treasury of Mexico, the aforesaid Don Francisco Tello, by the
authority of his position, gave orders that the said masters should
give him the money; and he invested it in merchandise, which, if it
had arrived in Mexico, would have gained a great deal. It was right
that, since he was to have the profit, he should bear what risk there
was--which was greater than if he had allowed the royal officials to
send the money as it suited them. Since each year a great quantity
of money is sent from the treasury of Mexico to the one here, they
would have given orders that, instead of sending the money from here,
it should be deducted from what was to be sent from Mexico, in order
that that quantity might be sent to Sevilla. In this way the risk of
going and coming would have been avoided; and, even if there had not
been any opportunity for this, they might have sent the said money
in gold--which is a less risk, because it is of less bulk and weight
than reals--and thirty per cent would have been gained in Mexico.

Both sides brought evidence, but that for the opposition was of no
importance; so the governor gave judgment according to the opinion
of the licentiate Luis Ortis de Padilla, reporter of the aforesaid
royal Chancilleria, ordering that his property be sold to the highest
bidder, in order to recover the amount for which the execution had been
granted--deducting from it all which the royal officials certify to
have been paid here, and also, eight thousand pesos for what he says he
has paid in Sevilla. I consented to the judgment as far as concerned
what was favorable, and I appealed from what was in opposition, to
what I had asked to have received as evidence. The opposing side has
denied this, and made a declaration of nullity against the aforesaid
royal decree of the year six hundred, saying that, according to it,
it was ordered that the accountants of the royal Council of the
Indias should make a record of this matter, which they did not do;
so that everything that was done by its authority is void. Thus the
suit remains in this position.

Seeing that I did not find any property of the said Don Francisco
Tello with which to fulfil the aforesaid commission, and hearing that
he had some property which he kept secret, I asked for and received
letters of excommunication and censure against those who might know
of property belonging to the said Don Francisco Tello, in order that
they should make it known. They opposed this, and tried to delay it
as much as possible; but nevertheless it was ordered that the three
letters should be given. They appealed from this, and menaced me with
the aid of fuerza [61]--with the result that until the sixth of this
month the last letter could not be read, so that the examination of
the depositions that were taken has been delayed. According to them,
it appears that he has no property of any account in these islands,
but that what he has is in Nueva Espana; and whatever I have been able
to hear of I give notice to the viceroy of that country to attach,
because the ships are about to sail, and the governor is in Cavite,
and I cannot get a warrant for it. God keep the Catholic person of
your Majesty, according to His power. From Manila, on the tenth of
July of the year 1602.

The licentiate _Hieronimo de Salazar y Salzedo_

[_Endorsed_: "Examined on the second of July, 1604. Let it be put with
another from the royal officials of Philipinas, of July 18, 1603."]






Bibliographical Data


All documents in this volume save two are obtained from the original
MSS. in the Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla; and their pressmarks
therein are indicated as follows:

1. _Ordinances of the Audiencia_ (concluded).--See _Vol_. X, No. 15.

2. _Hospital for Indians._--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia de Filipinas;
cartas y expedientes de personas seculares, vistos en el Consejo;
anos 1595 a 1606; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 35."

3. _Letters from the fiscal, 1599._--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y espedientes del presidente y oidores de dicha
audiencia vistos en el Consejo; anos de 1583 a 1600; est. 67, caj. 6,
leg. 18."

4. _Letter from king of Borneo._--The same as No. 3, save that the
dates read, "1583 a 1599."

5. _Letters from Telia._--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia de Filipinas;
cartas y expedientes del gobernador de Filipinas vistos en el Consejo;
anos de 1567 a 1599; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 6."

6. _Letters from Felipe III._--The first one: "Simancas-Filipinas;
cartas y espedientes del presidente y oidores de dha Audiencia vistos
en el Consejo; anos de 1600 a [1606]; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 19." (The
second: in "Cedulario Indico" of Archivo Historico Nacional, Madrid,
"Tomo 38, f. 131.6, n. 101.")

7. _Pacification of Mindanao._--The same as No. 6, first part.

8. _Van Noordt's attack._--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia de Filipinas;
cartas y expedientes del presidente y oidores de dicha Audiencia vistos
en el Consejo; anos de 1600 a 1612; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 19;" but
on the last of the papers in this group the dates read, "1600 a 1606."

9. _Morga's report of battle._--The same as No. 8.

10. _Letter from Garcia._--"Simancas-Secular; cartas y espedientes
de personas eclesiasticas vistos en el Consejo; anos 1570 a 1608;
est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 42."

11. _Letter from the fiscal, 1601._--The same as No. 8.

12. _Complaint of cabildo._--The same as No. 2.

13. _Letter from Morga._--The same as No. 6, first part.

14. _Grant to Jesuit school._--"Simancas-Audiencia de Filipinas;
consultas originales correspondientes a dha Audiencia desde el ano
1586 a 1636; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 1."

15. _Instructions to Acuna._--"Audiencia de Filipinas; registros de
oficio reales ordenes dirigidas a las autoridades del distrito de la
Audiencia; anos 1597 a 1634; est. 105, caj. 2, leg. 1."

16. _Royal decrees, 1602._--The same as No. 15.

17. _Pintados menaced._--The same as No. 8.

18. _Letters to Felipe III._--The first, second, and fifth, the same
as No. 8; the third, the same as No. 10, save that the heading reads,
"Simancas-Eclesiastico;" the fourth, the same as No. 6, first part.

_Annual letters from the Philippine Islands, 1601._--This document
is obtained from a compilation of missionary letters by John Hay,
S.J., entitled _De rebus Iaponicis Indicis, et Pervanis_ (Antverpiae,
M. DC. V), pp. 950-968. Our translation is made from a copy of this
book in the Library of Congress.







NOTES

[1] Evidently a reference to the memoir of Fray Juan Plasencia upon
the customs of the Tagal natives (_Vol_. VII. pp. 173-196), which was
long used as a guide by Spanish magistrates and officials in their
dealings with the Indians.

[2] A counsellor-at-law appointed by the supreme court to make the
briefs of the causes to be tried; he reads them before the court, after
they have been first examined and approved by the parties concerned.

[3] The reference or act of delivering written judicial proceedings
to the other party, in order that, on examination of them, he may
prepare the answer.

[4] Inserted among these decrees is a copy of the account written by
Fray Juan de Plasencia, O.S.F., of the customs of the Tagal Indians--a
document presented in vol. VII of this series; also (unsigned and
undated, but probably by the same writer) a paper entitled, "Remarks
on the customs which the natives of Pampanga formerly observed in
their lawsuits."

[5] _Cuarteles_: referring to the cost of quartering soldiers on
the citizens.

[6] So in the official transcript from the original MS.; but apparently
an error for _bar--i.e., bahar_, which is an Arabic weight, computed
in the Moluccas at about five hundred and ninety pounds (Crawfurd's
_Dictionary_, p. 103).

[7] The Spanish translation of this letter is written on the back of
the letter itself.

[8] The words in brackets throughout this letter are conjectural
readings.

[9] _Marginal note, apparently made to facilitate reference_: "That
at the end of July, 1599, information was received through letters
from the captains of the forces at Malaca and Maluco that at Sunda
and Terrenate were a number of English ships, whose designs were
not known; that help was asked for Maluco, but the request was not
granted, it being impossible for this kingdom of the Phelippinas to
do more; and that it is necessary that we be provided with troops,
arms, and money from Nueva Espana, of all of which advices have been
given the viceroy."

[10] The letters here mentioned are found at the end of this document;
they are all written in Portuguese. They are not presented here,
as all that is essential in them is contained in Tello's letter.

[11] _Marginal note_: "That the troops and artillery are to retire
from the fort of La Caldera, and proceed to Cebu, as they are needed
there; and the fort is burned."

[12] Spanish, _que van por el agua mas de una legua_; apparently some
word or phrase is missing. Montero y Vidal (_Hist. de la pirateria_,
i, p. 144) says that the fort of La Caldera was two and one-half
kilometers (a little more than one and one-half miles) from Zamboanga.

[13] _Marginal note_: "That information regarding the English has
been given to the viceroy of Nueva Espana, in order that he may send
reenforcements."

[14] _Marginal note_: "That the work of casting artillery is being
continued."

[15] The Strait of Sunda, which separates Java from Sumatra.

[16] This is followed by notarial attestations regarding the drawing
and collation of the above copy of instructions from the original,
at the order of Pedro de Acuna and Antonio de Morga, in 1602, and
the certification as to the qualifications of the government notary,
also dated in 1602.

[17] The ship ranking second in a fleet.

[18] Preceding this document, which is a copy and not the original,
is a notarial declaration attesting that the present copy was made
from the original by order of Antonio de Morga, for use in a suit
brought by him against his admiral, Joan de Alcega, for deserting the
flagship during the battle, which caused the loss of the flagship. At
the close of the instructions is the notarial attestation of Joan
Paez de Sotomayor as to the correctness of the copy, under witness of
Geronimo Xuarez and Joan de Aldave, and bearing date of August 27,
1602; and the further attestation by three notaries that Paez de
Sotomayor is entitled to act as notary.

[19] Francis Drake; see mention of this voyage in _Vol_. IV, p. 313.

[20] Thomas Candish; see _Vol_. VII, p. 52.

[21] Oliver van Noordt; he was a native of Utrecht, and led this
expedition in behalf of a commercial company which had been formed in
1598 by certain citizens of the United Provinces. Although the main
object of their enterprise was trade, the commission issued to Esaias
de Lende (q.v., _post_) shows that the Dutch government gladly seized
this opportunity to attack Spanish possessions in the Orient. See
the detailed account of Van Noordt's voyage in _Recueil des voiages
... des Indes Orientales_ (Amsterdam, MDCCXXV), ii. pp. 1-117.

[22] Maurice of Nassau, born in 1567, succeeded his father as governor
of the United Provinces in 1584, and was for forty years the leader
of the Dutch cause; but he did not become Prince of Orange until the
death of his elder brother in 1618. Maurice died in 1625.

[23] This was Jacob Claasz; he was sentenced to be set ashore and
abandoned at the Strait of Magellan. A little bread and wine was given
him, and it was expected that "he would die of hunger in a few days,
or else be captured and eaten by the savages" (_Rec. des voiages_,
ii, p. 30). The same record says that Peter de Lint was promoted to
Claasz's post.

[24] This vessel was named "El buen Jesus."

[25] A corrupt phonetic rendering of the name of Sir Richard Hawkins,
son of the noted English freebooter Sir John Hawkins. The reference
in the text is to the fight between Richard Hawkins and the Spanish
admiral Beltran de Castro, off the coast of Peru, June 20-22, 1594;
after a long and desperate contest, the English were forced to
surrender. Hawkins was taken a prisoner to Spain, but afterward sent
back to England; he died soon after 1620.  See his work, _Observations
... in his Voyage into the South Sea_ (London, 1622; reprinted by
Hakluyt Society, 1847, and again in 1877), 99. 182-225.

[26] As is shown by another document in the same legajo, this patache
was named "San Xacinto;" it came from Malaca some time before the
battle with the Dutch, and with news that they had been seen in those
waters; it was commanded by Estevan Rodriguez de Paez. An embargo was
laid upon this vessel, in order to secure it for use against the Dutch;
but this was removed on November 22, 1600. The decree releasing the
vessel was one of the documents used in a lawsuit brought by Paez
in regard to the freight charges for the merchandise carried by
the patache.

[27] Screens of canvas, spread along the sides of a vessel to prevent
an enemy from seeing what is done on the deck.

[28] Since the independence of the United Provinces was not recognized
by Spain until 1609, these Dutch prisoners might have been executed
as rebels against their former lord the king of Spain--an argument
doubtless emphasized by the tenor of De Lende's commission, which
follows this account of the battle.

[29] Spanish, _le mas perro_--literally, "the most of a dog."

[30] This descriptive paragraph is found in another copy of De
Lende's commission, preserved in the same legajo with the original
of the document just presented. We use this second copy, partly for
the sake of this description, partly because it is more exact in the
spelling of proper names. The estates belonging to the house of Orange
were Nassau, Catzenellenbogen, Vianden, Dietz, Veer, and Vlissingue
(anglicized to Flushing).

[31] Alluding to the Holy Roman Empire, which, founded by Charlemagne
in the year 800, was long the temporal arm of the ecclesiastical
power in Europe. Carlos I of Spain was its head, under the title of
Charles V, during his reign as king of Spain. The Holy Roman Empire
came to an end in August, 1806, with the resignation of its head,
Francis II of Austria.

[32] Francisco Vaez was born at Segovia in 1543, and received into
the Jesuit order in 1566. After his ordination he was sent to Mexico,
where he filled various responsible offices, among them that of
provincial. He died at Mexico, July 14, 1619. Sommervogel does not
mention his presence in the Philippine Islands. The letter by Vaez is
translated from the Latin version published by John Hay (1546-1607--a
Jesuit of Scotch birth, noted for his disputes with Protestants),
under the title _De rebus Iaponicis, Indicis_, etc., as seen in the
title-page herewith reproduced (Antverpiae, M. DC. v). But the letter
had already been printed, two years earlier, in the _Relatione breve_
of Diego de Torres, S.J. (Milano, MDCIII), the title-page of which
is also given here. Torres held various high official positions in
his order in Peru, Paraguay, and other South American countries;
and Sommervogel says (_Bibliotheque Comp. Jesus_, viii, col. 132):
"Father Torres, having been sent to Rome as procurator of his province,
profited by his sojourn in Rome to have his relation printed; it is
dated at Rome, February 25, 1603." It is not certain whether either
of these versions is the original production of Vaez; but as he
was a Spaniard, and writing to the general of his order, it seems
probable that he wrote in Latin, and that the Latin version which
we follow is Vaez's own composition, rather than the Italian--which
latter may have been Torres's translation from the Latin original,
to suit better his own account written in Italian.

The Latin title-page reads thus in English: "Recent letters on affairs
in Japan, India, and Peru; collected in one volume by John Hay, a Scot,
of Dalgatty, of the Society of Jesus. Antwerp; from the printing-house
of Martin Nutius, at the sign of the two storks; in the year 1605."

The Italian title-page is thus translated: "A brief relation by
Father Diego de Torres, of the Society of Jesus, procurator of the
province of Peru, regarding the fruit which is being gathered among
the Indians of that realm; for the consolation of the religious of
that Society in Europe. At the end is added the annual letter from
the Philippine Islands for 1600. At Milan; by the heirs of the late
Pacifico Pontio, and Giovanni Battista Piccaglia, partners; 1603. By
permission of the superiors."

[33] Pedro Lopez de la Parra was a native of Salamanca; entering
the Jesuit order, he completed his studies and was ordained at
Mexico--where for some years he was both an instructor and preacher,
being regarded as an unusually eloquent orator. Desiring to be a
missionary in the Philippines, he came to the islands, but found
that he could not master the language of the natives; discouraged
by this, and finding that no other employment was available, he
obtained permission from the visitor Garcia to return to Mexico; and
on the voyage perished by shipwreck, as here related. (La Concepcion,
_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 391, 392.)

[34] The word _collegium_, as used here, means rather "residence" than
"college;" but we retain the latter rendering because the Jesuits were
then actually conducting an educational institution at Manila, in which
they gave instruction to the Spaniards and to some natives. This was
the college of San Jose, for which provision had been made as early
as 1585; but for various reasons it was not opened until 1600. Its
first rector was Pedro Chirino; among its first students (thirteen
in all) were Pedro Tello, a nephew of the governor, and Antonio de
Morga, a son of the auditor. See La Concepcion's detailed account,
in _Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 403-409.

[35] La Concepcion states (_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 386-387)
that St. Polycarp was chosen by lot, in a solemn and public assembly
as the especial patron of the city of Manila, for its protection
against earthquakes, as Santa Potenciana was its patron in hurricanes
and tempests.

[36] Antipolo is a town lying about thirteen miles east of Manila,
near the northwest corner of Laguna de Bay.

[37] La Concepcion gives (_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 409-412)
an interesting account of the labors of this bishop, Fray Pedro de
Agurto, during the year 1600. Assembling the clergy and friars of his
diocese, he proposed to them various measures, especially intended to
facilitate the instruction and conversion of the natives. The catechism
of the church had been already translated into the Visayan speech;
but this version was now entrusted to a committee of six (equally
divided between the Jesuits, Augustinians, and regular clergy)
for revision. This assembly resolved to attempt the suppression of
polygamy among the heathen Indians subject to the Spaniards, and
to check the easy divorces prevalent among them. Agurto undertook a
visitation in Leyte and Samar, but could not complete it on account
of those islands being invaded by pirates from Mindanao.

[38] Miguel Gomez entered the Jesuit order at Alcala in 1582; after
his ordination was sent to the Philippines; during his stay there
was for some time an instructor in the college at Manila; and died
there December 28, 1622.

[39] Ledesma was born in 1556, and became a novice in the Jesuit order
at the age of sixteen. In 1596 he came to the Philippines, where he
filled high positions in his order--rector at Zebu, rector at Manila,
and provincial of the islands. He died at Manila, May 15, 1639.

[40] Christoval Ximenes was born in 1573, and entered the Jesuit order
in 1588. Coming to the Philippines in 1596, he spent thirty-two years
in the Visayan missions; he died at Alangatang, in Leyte, December
3, 1628. He was noted as a linguist, and composed various works,
religious or poetical, in the Visayan tongue; one of these was a
translation of Bellarmino's _Doctrina Christiana_ (Manila, 1610).

Gabriel Sanchez is not mentioned by Sommervogel.

[41] See La Concepcion's account of the work of the Jesuits in Bohol
(_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 356-362). Gabriel Sanchez and Juan
de Torres were the first of their missionaries there. The Boholans
did not, like the other natives of those islands, practice polygamy;
thus their conversion was greatly facilitated.  The fathers gathered
many of the natives into a reduction; and they healed many sick
persons with holy water. Among their converts was Catunao, a chief
one hundred and twenty years old, who had guided Legazpi to Cebu.

[42] Apparently the same as the present Tubigon, a considerable town
on the western coast of Bohol.

[43] Dulag is a town on the eastern coast of Leyte; and Alangalang
(named in the last section of this letter) is in the northern part
of that island, some twenty miles up the Cabayong River.

[44] "Go ye, swift angels, to a people wrenched up and torn, a fearful
people, after whom is none other."

[45] In MS., _treze_ (thirteen)--apparently an error in transcription
(probably arising from almost illegible writing in the original),
since Vaez, in the document preceding this, makes the number of Jesuit
priests in the islands to be thirty (_treinta_).

[46] La Concepcion relates (_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii,
pp. 380-382) the labors accomplished in less than a year by Garcia
as visitor. Collecting over one thousand pesos of contributions,
he restored the Jesuit church at Manila, which had been ruined by
earthquakes; and appointed Pedro Chirino as rector of the college. He
reorganized the missions of the Society, and their administration, and
presented a more liberal interpretation of the rule and constitution
of the order. He visited the various missions; and the missionaries
who had been stationed in different villages were gathered by Garcia
into a few central residences, from which they made journeys to carry
on their labors. La Concepcion writes in a critical tone, regarding
Garcia as an innovator, and as doing more harm than good by some of
his too radical measures. Sommervogel does not mention Diego Garcia.

[47] For interesting accounts, descriptive and historical, of early
ships, see article by Admiral George H. Preble on "Ships of the
Sixteenth Century," and similar papers on those of the next three
centuries, in _The United Service_, November, 1883-June, 1884. See also
Edward Shippen's account of galleys and the life of the galley-slaves
("Galleys of the Sixteenth Century"), in the same periodical,
September, 1884. On galleons, cf. note in _The Spanish War_, 1585-87
(published by Navy Records Society; London, 1898), pp. 337-341.

[48] The document here referred to (dated January 15-June 12, 1601),
and another recording a similar investigation made by Morga (July 6-9,
1602), are in the Sevilla archives, bearing the same pressmark as
the fiscal's letter in our text. Both are too long and unimportant
to be here presented.

[49] On June 13, 1597, Felipe II issued a commission to Antonio de
Morga to investigate charges of peculation which had been made against
this man, as factor of the royal exchequer in the Philippines.

[50] See La Concepcion's account of the loss of this ship (_Hist. de
Philipinas_, iii, pp. 428-435).

[51] Spanish, _colegio_; see note 32, _ante_.

[52] A fund, the interest of which is required by the Spanish laws
for the support of an ecclesiastic.

[53] Mauban is a town and anchorage in the northeast corner of
Tayabas province, Luzon; it lies on the Pacific coast of the island,
and southeast from Manila.

[54] In a squadron, the galley next in rank to the flagship or
_capitana_.

[55] These names appear thus in the text; but they evidently refer
to the same persons who are previously mentioned as Liguana and Ssapay.

[56] Sangir (or Sanguir) is a small island midway between Mindanao
and Celebes; Tagolanda is another one, south of Sangir, about fifty
miles northeast of Celebes.

[57] At the beginning of this letter is a brief summary of its
contents.

[58] In 1601 the capital of Spain was removed from Madrid to
Valladolid; but this measure proved so disastrous that Felipe III
found it necessary to return to Madrid in 1606.

[59] Diego Cerrabe entered the Augustinian order at Burgos in 1584. He
came to the Philippines in 1595, and after various official services
there, and two years' ministry at Pasig, he went to Spain with
messages from his chapter at Manila; apparently he did not return to
the islands. (Perez's _Catalogo_, p. 47.)

[60] The MS. is worn or mutilated at the places marked by leaders;
the words in brackets are the translator's conjectural readings.

[61] See definition of fuerza in _Vol_. V, p. 292. The reference here
indicates that Tello or his friends, in order to oppose the fiscal's
proceedings, secured the interference of some ecclesiastical judge,
who thus committed fuerza.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***

***** This file should be named 14685.txt or 14685.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/6/8/14685/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
