The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Art of Soul-Winning, by J.W. Mahood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Art of Soul-Winning

Author: J.W. Mahood

Release Date: January 17, 2005 [EBook #14716]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF SOUL-WINNING ***




Produced by Kathryn Lybarger and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.






THE

ART OF SOUL-WINNING.


(SPECIALLY ADAPTED FOR PERSONAL WORKERS.)


BY

J.W. MAHOOD, EVANGELIST,

Author of "The Missing Wheel Found," and joint-author of "The Young
People's History of Methodism."


"_And he brought him to Jesus._"



CINCINNATI: JENNINGS & PYE.

NEW YORK: EATON & MAINS.

1901




PREFACE.


Never was there such great need for a mighty, Pentecostal revival in all
our Churches; and the key to such a revival is earnest personal work.
But the membership of the Churches are not prepared to enter upon this
work. Multitudes know nothing of a personal Pentecost. Many are utterly
indifferent. They do not realize their opportunity and responsibility
before God. If they did, the revival would come at once.

With the hope that many professing Christians may be awakened to duty,
and hear God's call to personal work in soul-winning, this little volume
is written.

Let the pastor see that a copy is put into every home one month previous
to the time set for special revival-meetings. Let him secure a pledge
from the people to read the study for each day, commit the memory
verses, and meditate upon the Scripture suggested.

Once each week, either at a special meeting appointed for this purpose,
at the week-night prayer-meeting, or at the young people's devotional
meeting Sunday evening, let the studies for the week be reviewed and the
memory verses recited. Short talks may also be given on each topic by
persons previously selected.

When the entire Church membership shall begin to think and speak upon
these vital themes; when the spirit of grace and supplication shall take
the place of formality and worldly desire; when the Holy Ghost of
Pentecost shall come upon the waiting, praying Church, then the times of
refreshing will be sure to come from the presence of the Lord, and the
perishing multitudes will be saved.

Sioux City, Iowa.




CONTENTS.


FIRST WEEK--THE SOUL-WINNER'S MOTIVE.

"THE LOVE OF CHRIST."

                                            PAGE
STUDY      I  Foreword and Appeal              9
STUDY     II  The Lord's Command              12
STUDY    III  By Personal Effort              15
STUDY     IV  Trophies of Personal Effort     18
STUDY      V  The Worth of a Soul             21
STUDY     VI  The Death of a Soul             24
STUDY    VII  The Supreme Motive              27


SECOND WEEK--THE SOUL-WINNER'S LIFE.

"YIELD YOURSELVES TO GOD."

STUDY   VIII  A Definite Experience           33
STUDY     IX  A Complete Surrender            36
STUDY      X  The Spirit's Witness            39
STUDY     XI  Every Weight                    42
STUDY    XII  Prayer                          45
STUDY   XIII  Faith                           48
STUDY    XIV  Self-Sacrifice                  51


THIRD WEEK--THE SOUL-WINNER'S EQUIPMENT.

"COMPLETELY FURNISHED."

                                            PAGE
STUDY     XV  Knowledge of the Scripture      57
STUDY    XVI  Tact                            60
STUDY   XVII  Earnestness                     63
STUDY  XVIII  Perseverance                    66
STUDY    XIX  Tenderness                      69
STUDY     XX  Burden for Souls                72
STUDY    XXI  A Personal Pentecost            75


FOURTH WEEK--THE SOUL-WINNER'S METHODS.

"BY ALL MEANS."

STUDY   XXII  Direct Approach                 81
STUDY  XXIII  Correspondence                  85
STUDY   XXIV  Tracts and Books                88
STUDY    XXV  The Prayer List                 91
STUDY   XXVI  Work Among Students             93
STUDY  XXVII  Meeting Objections              96
STUDY XXVIII  No Effort in Vain              100




THE SOUL-WINNER'S MOTIVE.

"FOR THE LOVE OF CHRIST."




STUDY I.

FOREWORD AND APPEAL.

Memory Verse: "And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of
    the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars
    for ever and ever."--(Dan. xii, 3.)

Scripture for Meditation: Matt. vi, 19-23; Rev. iii, 14-22.


Fred B---- was a medical student. He was stricken, with that dreaded
scourge, consumption. The physicians advised a trip to the mountains.
During the first few months among the Rockies he improved rapidly, and
hope and ambition flamed anew; but it was only a brief respite from
suffering before the final collapse. Lying in a Denver hospital, he was
visited by some consecrated young people, who sang and prayed with him.
He yielded himself to Christ, and the peace of God filled his heart.

They brought him home to a little Iowa city to die. The day after his
arrival the pastor was summoned to his bedside, when the young man
related the circumstances of his conversion. The pastor said, "Then you
are not afraid to die?" "No," said he, "_not afraid, but not ready_."

When asked why he was not ready, he replied: "I have done nothing for my
Master. I have won no souls for him. Could I have six months more to
live that I might bring some souls to Jesus, and thus not go into his
presence empty-handed, I would be satisfied to die. _I am not afraid to
die, but not ready._" Just then the door of the room opened, and the
dying boy's father, an old, white-haired man who had been absent from
home and had not seen his son since his return, came in. The old man was
not a Christian. Then occurred a pathetic scene. The young man threw his
arms about his father's neck, and drew him down upon his knees at the
bedside, urged him to give himself to God, and then, with shortening
breath, uttered such a prayer of intercession as is seldom heard. The
old man sobbed aloud, yielded to Christ, declared his faith, and the
dying boy had won one soul for his Master. In a few hours he had gone
into the presence of the King; _but not empty-handed_.

O ye to whom God has given the strength and vigor of manhood and
womanhood, and who have pledged your allegiance to the Christ of
Calvary, are you winning any souls for your Master? Or are you going
into his presence _empty-handed_? What if in the judgment-day it shall
be seen that some souls who might have been saved have been lost through
your neglect? What if it shall then be seen that the crown of many stars
which you might have won is given to another? And what, if in the great
day of his appearing you shall be found, having gathered no sheaves and
_empty-handed_?




STUDY II.

THE LORD'S COMMAND.

Memory Verse: "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every
    creature."--(Mark xvi, 15.)

Scripture for Meditation: Ezek. xxxiii, 1-11.


By the Master's final words to his disciples the obligation is laid upon
every Christian to be a soul-winner. "Ye shall be my witnesses," is the
risen Lord's message to all his followers. No one is excused. "Follow
me," said Christ, "and I will make you fishers of men." And when his
face was set toward Calvary, he said to the Father, "As thou hast sent
me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world." By the
mouth of the prophet Ezekiel, God distinctly says that, if we neglect
"to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand." We are all
_sent_, and if we shrink or excuse ourselves from our great mission we
shall come into condemnation.

The unsaved multitudes know that every Christian should be an ambassador
for Christ, and when we fail to do our duty we are condemned in their
eyes as well as before God. A writer in the _Epworth Era_ says:

"A college professor who was noted among his fellow-teachers for his
habit of addressing young men upon their personal relations to Christ,
was asked by one of his fellow-professors, 'Do they not resent your
appeals as an impertinence?' He replied: 'No! Nothing is of such
interest to any man as his own soul and its condition. He will never
resent words of warning or comfort if they are prompted by genuine
feeling. When I was a young man, I felt as you do. My wife's cousin, a
young fellow not yet of age, lived in our house for six months. My dread
of meddling was such that I never asked him to be present at family
worship, or spoke to him on the subject of religion. He fell into the
company of a wild set, and was rapidly going to the bad. When I reasoned
with him I spoke of Christ. "Do you call yourself a Christian?" he
asked, assuming an astonished look. "I hope so," I replied. "But you are
not. If you were, he must be your Best Friend. Yet I have lived in your
house for six months, and you have never once named his name to me; no,
he is nothing to you!" I have never forgotten the rebuke.'"




STUDY III.

BY PERSONAL EFFORT.

Memory Verse: "And he brought him to Jesus."--(John i, 42.)

Scripture for Meditation: John i, 35-45.


Have you ever noticed that much of the work which the Master and his
disciples did was "personal work?" Some of our Lord's greatest sermons
were preached to one person. The apostles were all won individually.
Turn to your Bible now, and read the account of the visit of Nicodemus
to Christ, and of the meeting with the woman of Samaria at the well. If
you take the time to follow this theme through the Gospels and through
the Acts of the Apostles, you will be sure to see that the work of
winning souls for Christ by personal effort is the work of every
Christian.

And a conviction of this is the greatest need of the Church to-day. It
is the key to the twentieth-century revival. The world would be
evangelized in this generation did each professing Christian win only
one soul each year for Christ; and the great social and labor problems
of the day would be speedily solved were the great Christian Church
actively engaged in leading men and women to Jesus of Nazareth. Mightier
than the influence of great sermons and fine music and splendid ritual
is the influence of a life consecrated to personal effort in seeking the
lost.

That remarkable soul-winner, Dr. J.O. Peck, now translated, said: "So
great is my conviction of the value of personal effort, as the result of
a lifework of winning souls, that I can not emphasize the method too
strongly. If it were revealed to me from heaven by the archangel Gabriel
that God had given me the certainty of ten years of life, and that as a
condition of my eternal salvation I must win a thousand souls to Christ
in that time; and if it were further conditioned to this, that I might
preach every day for the ten years, but might not personally appeal to
the unconverted outside the pulpit; or that I might not enter the pulpit
during these ten years, but might exclusively appeal to individuals, I
would not hesitate one moment to make the choice of personal effort as
the sole means to be used in securing the conversion of one thousand
souls necessary to my own salvation."

Dr. Theodore Cuyler once said concerning the three thousand souls he had
received into Church fellowship during his ministry, "I have handled
every stone."




STUDY IV.

TROPHIES OF PERSONAL EFFORT.

Memory Verse: "And he that is wise winneth souls."--(Prov. xi, 30, R.V.)

Scripture for Meditation: 2 Cor. v, 14-21.


Is it not a suggestive fact that nearly all those men who have shone
brightly in the galaxy of martyrs, preachers, and reformers in the
Christian Church through the centuries have been won to Christ by the
personal effort of some consecrated life? Think of some in our own age.

Dwight L. Moody, when a clerk in a store, was visited by his
Sunday-school teacher, who put his hand upon the young man's shoulder
and talked to him about Christ; and Mr. Moody says, "I had not felt I
had a soul till then."

Colonel H.H. Hadley, who has kneeled and prayed with over thirty-five
thousand drunkards, declares that one of the agencies which led him to
Christ was a brief interview with Chaplain (now Bishop) McCabe on a
railway-train in Ohio just after the Civil War.

Lord Shaftesbury, one of the greatest Christian philanthropists of the
nineteenth century, was won for Christ in early boyhood by the effort of
Maria Willis, a servant-girl in his father's home.

The conversion of Diaz, the great Cuban evangelist, was due to the
faithfulness of a consecrated young lady of Brooklyn. She found him in a
hospital at the point of death, procured a Spanish New Testament, read
to him the words of mercy and invitation, pointed him to Christ; and he
went back to his own country, a flaming herald of the gospel.

J. Wilbur Chapman, one of the most successful pastor-evangelists of this
generation, says that while in a revival-meeting, when a boy, his
Sunday-school teacher touched him on the elbow, and said, "Do you not
think you had better stand?" and that one touch, as much as anything
else, pushed him into the kingdom.

Joseph F. Berry, whose name is a household word in the Methodist
Episcopal Church, was led to Christ by two young friends who took the
young printer to his father's barn, and held a prayer-meeting with him,
which resulted in a glorious conversion.




STUDY V.

THE WORTH OF A SOUL.

Memory Verse: "For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world,
    and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his
    soul?"--(Matt. xvi, 26.)

Scripture for Meditation: Luke xv, 1-10.


What is a life worth? What is your life worth? What is the life of your
son or daughter or mother or wife worth? What would you take for a life?
But if the life of a dear one be worth so much to you, what must be its
value in God's sight, who sees to what depths a soul may plunge and to
what heights it may rise? It may be a small matter to you that in yonder
saloon is a man dissipated and drunken. But what if he were your father
or brother or husband? It may be a very small matter to you that the boy
whom you met on the street is puffing a cigarette and wears already
upon his face the marks of an evil life. But what if he were your boy or
your brother? Yet, in God's sight, his life is as valuable as if he were
your boy or your brother; and every soul is of infinite worth.

Jesus Christ set a high estimate upon human life when he left his
Father's throne and came into this sin-cursed world to suffer and die
that he might redeem us from death.

The Church of to-day needs a new vision of the worth of a soul. We need
to stand beside Calvary and see the price that was paid there for human
life.

John Keble, the poet-preacher of the English Church, said that the
salvation of one soul is worth more than the framing of the Magna Charta
of a thousand worlds.

It was meditation upon the words of the memory verse of this study that
fired the souls of Ignatius Loyola and Francis Xavier with a holy
enthusiasm to rescue the perishing multitudes. Had their successors and
disciples been, filled with the same enthusiasm, and kept themselves
free from the machinations of politics, they would have long since
evangelized the world, and Jesuitism would not have been "the scandal of
Christianity."




STUDY VI.

THE DEATH OF A SOUL.

Memory Verse: "Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from
    the error of his way shall save a soul from death."--(James v, 20.)

Scripture for Meditation: Luke xvi, 19-31.


What is death--the death of a soul? What is it to die eternally? In the
passage for meditation our Lord gives us a glimpse into the realms of
death. Surely the Son of God is not trifling here; nor does he speak to
confuse. For a moment the curtain is drawn, and we see what is actually
transpiring in the future world. In these days there is a disposition in
some quarters to make light of the future punishment of the wicked. Some
preachers are dumb upon the awful punishment of sin, or preach only half
a gospel, saying, as Bishop Warren puts it, "You must repent, as it
were; be converted, in a measure; or you will go to hell, so to speak."

But Christ did not speak with any uncertain sound about the future
punishment of the impenitent. He is authority. Take your Bible and read
such passages as Matt. xxv, 41, 46; Matt. viii, 12; Luke xvi, 23; John
v, 29.

In the light of these words, we must see that the death of a soul means
eternal separation from God, from mercy, and from heaven.

And yet how indifferent we are concerning the unsaved multitudes all
about us who are drifting into a hopeless eternity. The Church needs a
vision like that of the little lad in Olive Schreiner's "Story of a
South African Farm," who, waking at midnight, sees multitudes drifting
over the precipice into eternal night, and throws himself on his face on
the floor, crying out in the agony of his burdened heart to God to have
mercy.

Some one tells of a shepherd in the Far West who, on a dark, stormy
night, found three sheep missing. Going to the kennel where the
faithful shepherd-dog lay with her little family, he bade her go to find
the sheep. An hour afterwards she returned with two. When these had been
put in the fold, he said, "One sheep is yet missing. Go!" The faithful
dog took one mute look of despair at her little family, then was off in
the dark and the storm. In two hours she had returned with the lost
sheep, but was torn and bleeding, and, as she staggered toward the
kennel, fell dead at the door. But if a poor, dumb brute, with no
immortal hope, be obedient, even unto death, what shall we say of men
and women who know the destiny of the soul, and whom the King of kings
has bidden seek the lost, yet are disobedient, indifferent, and
thoughtless as to the dying multitudes about them?




STUDY VII.

THE SUPREME MOTIVE.

Memory Verse: "For the love of Christ constraineth us."--(2 Cor. v, 14.)

Scripture for Meditation: 1 Cor. xiii, R.V.


But the supreme motive in all our efforts to win others should be "the
glory of God." Possessed of an undying love for him who first loved us,
we will have an inspiration to seek the lost for whom he gave his life.
And all our efforts shall be, as Paul puts it in his letter to the
Ephesians, "unto the praise of his glory."

    "The love of Christ doth me constrain
     To seek the wandering souls of men."

Love never faileth. Love knows no impossibility. He who works for wages
and he who works for love live in two different realms. A lot of men
were entombed in a coal-mine, and great crowds gathered to help clear
away the earth and rescue the miners. An old, gray-headed man came
running up, and, seizing a shovel, began working with the strength of
ten men. Some one asked to relieve the old man. "Get out of the way," he
cried; "I have two boys down there."

Love will triumph; and he whose heart throbs with love to Christ will
find real joy in rescuing from sin those who are the purchase of his
blood, _that his name may be glorified_.

Study his life of self-sacrifice. See again his suffering for sinful
men. Linger in Gethsemane, and behold the agony of Calvary. Then your
heart will begin to throb with love to him "who first loved us."

Get a new vision of your crucified, but now risen, Savior, until the
beauty of his matchless life charms your heart and you are ready to say:

    "Come, and possess me whole,
       Nor hence again remove;
     But sup with me, and let the feast
       Be everlasting love."

Then you will possess the highest motive that moves human hearts, and
personal work in soul-winning will become a real delight.




THE SOUL-WINNER'S LIFE.

"YIELD YOURSELVES UNTO GOD."




STUDY VIII.

A DEFINITE EXPERIENCE.

Memory Verse: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born
    again, he can not see the kingdom of God."--(John iii, 3.)

Scripture for Meditation: John iii, 1-15.


In a prayer-meeting a young lady was asked, "What is the first thing we
must do if we would win others to Christ?" She replied, "_We must live
holy ourselves._" She was right. Just as the telegraph wire must be
insulated, so must the life of him who expects to be the messenger of
God be insulated from the old life of sin before he can hope to carry
the loving messages of the gospel to other souls.

This implies a definite experience of conversion. He who would engage in
this most fascinating of all work must have nothing short of an inner
consciousness of sins forgiven and of the presence of Christ in his
life. He must be able to say, like Andrew and like Philip of old, "I
have found him." He must know what it is to have "a new heart" and to
have peace with God.

William Butler, the veteran missionary and soul-winner, now translated,
wrote the author of these studies a letter, in which he said:

"First and foremost, I thank God for a true conversion. When I got
religion, I got it good and thorough. Christ became everything to me.
The law of sin, or temptation to worldly conformity of any kind, was
completely eradicated from my heart; and from that hour to this the law
of Christ has fully satisfied my soul, and made me gloriously free and
independent of the world and its maxims and pleasures. And now, after
fifty-five years' enjoyment of peace with God and humble devotion to his
service, I bless him that I ever gave him my heart and devoted myself to
his work. I am happy. The consoling comforts of the grace of God are
with me by day and by night, and the blessed future is radiant with the
hope of being 'numbered with the saints in glory everlasting.'"

In these days of compromise and doubt we need to have as definite an
experience of salvation as had William Butler. He who would win others
to a new life must himself possess that life, and know it, being able to
say with Paul, "I know whom I have believed."




STUDY IX.

A COMPLETE SURRENDER.

Memory Verse: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God,
    that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
    unto God, which is your reasonable service."--(Rom. xii, 1.)

Scripture for Meditation: Rom. vi, 1-13.


John Wesley said, "Give me one hundred preachers who fear nothing but
sin and desire nothing but God, and I care not a straw whether they be
clergymen or laymen, they alone will shake the gates of hell and set up
the kingdom of heaven upon the earth."

A life surrendered to God will be an invincible life, while the life
only partly surrendered will know nothing but defeat. Someone says that,
in the transfer of property, any reservation implies, also, reserved
rights. If a man sells a ten-acre lot, and keeps a yard square in the
center for himself, he has a right of way across what he has sold to
get to his reservation. And if, in our surrender, we keep back anything,
"that constitutes the devil's territory, and he will trample over all we
call consecrated to get to his own." Therefore a complete surrender of
the life to God is absolutely necessary.

To the rich young man who came to him, Jesus said, "One thing thou
lackest." He demanded an unconditional surrender of every interest of
his life. But the young man was not willing to make the surrender, and
went away sorrowful. Of every man and woman Jesus asks the same
surrender. But many now wander off in the darkness of formality and
doubt because they are not willing. Three things are implied in such a
surrender: (1) An acknowledgment of the Divine ownership and human
stewardship in all temporal affairs; (2) A complete submission of the
will to God; (3) The supremacy of Jesus Christ in the heart and life, so
that the interests of his kingdom are first, always, and everywhere.

There is an old story of a monk who, having been disobedient to the
rules of the monastery, was told he must die. They took him out into the
graveyard, stood him upright in a grave, filled in the earth about his
feet. Then they asked, "Are you dead yet?" He said, "No." The earth was
then filled in about him to his waist, and the question again asked. He
replied, "No." Then they filled in the earth until he was covered, all
but his head, and could scarcely breathe. When asked if he would die, he
replied, "Yes, I will give up; I will die." So may we die to the old
life of self and sin, and live the new life of entire surrender to our
risen Lord!

    "If Christ would live and reign in me,
       I must die, I must die.
     Like him I crucified must be,
       I must die, I must die.
     So dead that no desire may rise,
     To pass for good, or great, or wise,
     To any but my Savior's eyes,--
       Let me die, let me die."




STUDY X.

THE SPIRIT'S WITNESS.

Memory Verse: "The Spirit Himself beareth witness with our spirit that
    we are children of God."--(Rom. viii, 16, R.V.)

Scripture for Meditation: 1 John v, 1-15.


When the life has been wholly surrendered to God, and Christ, the
crucified and risen Savior, is enthroned in the heart and confessed
before men, then the blessed assurance of our sonship with God will be
clear and joyous. No longer shall we say, "I hope I am a Christian," or,
"I am trying to be a Christian;" but, like Paul, we shall exclaim, "I
know whom I have believed."

The witness of the Spirit will give a holy confidence to the
soul-winner.

    "What we have seen and felt,
      With confidence we tell."

Much of the timidity and reluctance shown by Christians toward personal
work may be traced to a refusal or neglect to live the surrendered life
and have the clear assurance of acceptance with God.

This direct testimony to our adoption is given only by the Holy Spirit,
and given only to believers because they are the sons of God. It is
God's seal which he places upon his own, and we then no longer receive
the spirit of bondage unto fear; but we receive the spirit of adoption
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The voice of God is heard in the soul
bearing witness to our acceptance, and then the fruit of the Spirit
speedily follows in the life to corroborate the inner voice and "give
unmistakable confirmation to the testimony which was primary and
direct."

To some, this assurance comes like a sudden flash from the sky; to
others, like the gentle breathing of the evening zephyr. But it comes,
_it surely comes_; and no soul should be satisfied until it comes; for
it is essential to a useful, joyous life. Look up now, and with eager
expectancy await the "blessed assurance."

    "Why should the children of a King
       Go mourning all their days?
     Great Comforter, descend and bring
       The tokens of thy grace.

     Assure my conscience of her part
       In the Redeemer's blood;
     And bear thy witness with my heart,
       That I am born of God.

     Thou art the earnest of His love,
       The pledge of joys to come;
     May thy blest wings, celestial Dove,
       Safely convey me home!"




STUDY XI.

EVERY WEIGHT.

Memory Verse: "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so
    great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the
    sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
    race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and
    finisher of our faith."--(Heb. xii, 1, 2.)

Scripture for Meditation: 1 Cor. viii, 9-13; ix, 24-27.


We hear much about "personal liberty" in these days, and, to hear some
talk, one would think that personal liberty was a gift to be selfishly
guarded rather than to be sacrificed for the good of others. But Paul,
the apostle, sacrificed his liberty for the sake of others; so did
Onesimus, the Christian slave. Surely those professing Christians who
make "personal liberty" their plea for engaging in some form of worldly
amusement (such as dancing, card-playing, or theater-going), and those
who are given to some filthy habit (such as the use of tobacco), have
not studied the life of Jesus, or of Paul, or of Onesimus.

If there were no other reasons why these things should be renounced,
that they injure our influence as soul-winners would be sufficient; for
who ever heard of a man or woman who engaged in these forms of
questionable amusement becoming illustrious as a soul-winner? To say the
least, they are "weights," and must be laid aside.

In a revival service, a lady rose, and, with tears raining down her
face, said: "I have taught a Sunday-school class of sixteen young men
for three years, and have not seen one of them converted. I believe I
know why, and now confess my sin. Being a teacher in the city schools, I
thought I must see a Shakespearean play, and went to the theater one
night. I saw several of my class there, and they all seemed to be
looking at me as if surprised. Next day I met some of them, and they
confessed surprise that I was at the theater. I have been conscious
from that time that I had lost my influence to win these young men to
Christ." Within one week after this confession was made this lady had
won seven of her class for the Savior.

A young lady, once a society belle and fond of worldly amusements,
consecrated her life to the Lord's work. In a rescue mission she was
asked to speak to a poor wreck of a man who had been a gambler. He
looked at her suspiciously as he asked, "Do you play cards, or dance, or
go to the theater?" "No, not now," she replied. "Well, then you may talk
to me; but I won't listen to one word from you fine folks who are doing
on a small scale the very things that brought us poor wretches to where
we are." And the young lady afterwards said she had found more real joy
in leading that lost soul to Christ than she had ever found in the
pleasures of the world.

_Lay aside every weight; lay aside every weight, just now._




STUDY XII.

PRAYER.

Memory Verse: "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth
    much."--(James v, 16.)

Scripture for Meditation: Gen. xxxii, 24-30; Luke xi, 1-13.


Nothing is more essential to the soul-winner than prayer. Prayer will
generate a spiritual atmosphere in the individual life. The prayers of
many will generate a spiritual atmosphere in a community. In answer to
prayer, the Holy Spirit will do his office, and produce such pungent
conviction of sin that men will carry out, as on the day of Pentecost,
"Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

In the Life of Mr. Finney it is related that, during a revival at Rome,
New York, the air seemed surcharged with Divine power. A sheriff, who
had laughed about the meetings, came over from Utica. He felt this
strange influence when he crossed the old canal, a mile west of town.
When he sat in the hotel dining-room, he had to get up and go to the
window two or three times to divert his attention and keep from weeping.
After dinner he hurried away, but was afterwards converted.

See what spiritual triumphs and great revivals the early Church
witnessed; but the secret of it all was that "they continued steadfastly
in prayers." Why is it that to-day many have so little courage and so
little power to win others to Christ? They neglect prayer. "They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and
not faint." How little time we spend daily in prayer! Study the life of
Paul, and Savonarola, and Catherine of Siena, and Martin Luther, and
John Knox, and see how they all gave themselves continually to prayer,
and so prevailed. All they who have become illustrious as great
soul-winners have been, without exception, men and women mighty in
prayer. They came to understand that God's storehouses of wisdom,
prayer, and grace are inexhaustible, and with the key of prayer they
unlocked every door.

Prayer avails for the salvation of others when every other means seems
to fail. The disciples spent ten days in prayer. Then came Pentecost and
a revival that brought thousands into the kingdom. John Livingstone,
with a few friends, spent a whole night in prayer, and the next day five
hundred persons gave themselves to Christ. Two sisters agreed to spend
the night in prayer in behalf of an unconverted brother. That night,
although twenty miles away, the young man tossed on his bed in agony of
conviction, and next day started for home, and found salvation.

Prayer is omnipotent; and, if we would see the kingdom of Christ come
speedily in the world, we must have a great revival of prevailing
prayer.




STUDY XIII.

FAITH.

Memory Verse: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me,
    the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these
    shall he do; because I go unto my Father."--(John xiv, 12.)

Scripture for Meditation: Heb. xi.


Not the mystery of faith, nor the philosophy of faith, does the
soul-winner need to study; but the simplicity, the childlikeness of
faith. To believe God implicitly is to have victorious faith. "I can do
all things through Christ which strengtheneth me," said Paul; and
everywhere in the Bible we find the clear teaching that "God and one
make a majority." To realize this in one's own life is to live the
victorious life.

But perhaps we should distinguish between trust and saving faith. Trust
gives the life to God; faith takes from God that which he has promised
in his Word. Trust is continuous; faith is a definite act. "Faith is
the giving substance to things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen." (Heb. xi, 1.)

It is true that we walk by faith now; but faith has a clear eye. Faith
can see the clouds full of chariots and horses. Faith can see legions of
angels marshaling themselves for our defense. Faith can see that every
promise of God is steadfast, and will surely be fulfilled, and can claim
its fulfillment.

    "Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
       And looks to that alone;
     Laughs at impossibilities,
       And cries, 'It shall be done.'"

Of Barnabas it is said, "He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost
and of faith." The fullness of faith will make unbelief and moral
darkness impossible in the soul, and will generate a triumphant
confidence in God.

To have faith is to have power; and the little child, as well as the
grown man, may possess this power, and exercise it in winning souls for
Jesus. A little girl who had bowed at the altar and given her heart to
God, pulled the pastor's coat at the close of the service, and said,
"Will you please pray for my mamma?" "Certainly," said the pastor. And
the next evening the little girl brought her mother to the service. When
the invitation was given, she took her hand and led her to the altar.
That little girl's faith won her mother to Christ.

Faith will give courage for personal work. With a strong, unfaltering
confidence which takes God at his word, we shall not hesitate nor fear
to approach the unsaved and seek to win them to the Savior.

Faith is nourished by the Word. "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God." If we feed our faith upon the Word, and exercise it,
then we shall have the faith of those mentioned in the eleventh chapter
of Hebrews, and we shall prove the promise of the Savior, "All things
are possible to him that believeth."




STUDY XIV.

SELF-SACRIFICE.

Memory Verse: "For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and
    whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it."--(Matt.
    xvi, 25.)

Scripture for Meditation: Matt. xvi, 24; 2 Cor. iv.


The words of Christ, "If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me," can not be mistaken. The
earthly life of Jesus was a supreme example of self-sacrifice. All the
way from Bethlehem to Calvary his life was a constant denial of self.
The early Church followed their Master. They were ready to sacrifice
all. Men sold their fields and houses for the work's sake. They counted
nothing too good for sacrifice, even to life itself; and many went
gladly to the arena and the fiery stake rather than be untrue to their
Lord. As long as the early Christian Church maintained this spirit, she
went from victory to victory. Nothing could withstand her progress. And
when the followers of Jesus Christ in this twentieth century shall again
put on the beautiful garments of self-sacrifice, the Church will become
invincible.

There is now a great opportunity for men and women to sacrifice, in
personal liberty, in popularity, in social standing, and personal
comfort, for the sake of the perishing multitudes. None are too poor,
none too old, to do something to win souls.

An aged widow, who had all her money invested in a farm in a
drouth-stricken part of the West, found herself almost penniless. She
was compelled to find shelter in a Refuge Home. At first she was
discouraged and heart-broken; but God put upon her heart the multitudes
of perishing women in India. She tried to occupy her mind piecing a
quilt. This she sold, and the money was sent to India. Then she made
another for Africa, then another for Japan, until now, in six years,
she has given four hundred dollars to home and foreign missions, and has
six people at work as her substitutes in foreign lands. And she says, "I
was surely called of God to teach that no one is too poor to give to
missions, or too old to work for God and souls."

A young man, twenty-four years old, working on a farm for twenty dollars
a month and board, has, in nineteen months, sent six substitutes, and
says, "I pray God to make me a Christian drunkard, that I may spend my
time and money for him as the drunkard does for the devil." And when the
whole Church shall begin to show the same spirit of self-sacrifice in
giving time and money, and in sacrificing pleasure and comfort and
social standing for the Lord's work, and for dying multitudes about
them, then we shall soon see the dawn of the millennial day.




THE SOUL-WINNER'S EQUIPMENT.

"COMPLETELY FURNISHED."




STUDY XV.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE SCRIPTURES.

Memory Verse: "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
    wisdom."--(Col. iii, 16.)

Scripture for Meditation: Heb. iv, 12; 2 Tim. iii, 13-17; Ps. cxix,
    1-11.


A thorough knowledge of the Word of God is essential to success in
soul-winning. The Word is "the sword of the Spirit," "the hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces." If we are not skilled in the use of the
Divine sword and the Divine hammer, then we can not expect that the
Spirit will use us.

In an excellent little book on "How to Obtain the Fullness of Power,"
Dr. R.A. Torrey says:

"There can be no fullness of life and service if the Bible is neglected.
In much that is now written on power; also in much that is said in
conventions, this fact is overlooked. The work of the Holy Spirit is
magnified; but the instrument through which the Holy Spirit works is
largely forgotten. The result is transient enthusiasm and activity, but
no steady continuance and increase in power and usefulness. We can not
obtain power, and we can not maintain power, in our own lives and in our
work for others, unless there is deep and frequent meditation upon the
Word of God.... Of course, it is much easier, and therefore much more
agreeable to our spiritual laziness, to go to a convention or
revival-meeting, and claim a 'filling with the Holy Spirit,' than it is
to peg along, day after day, month after month, year after year, digging
into the Word of God. But a 'filling of the Spirit,' that is not
maintained by a persistent study of the Word will soon vanish....
Evidently Paul knew of no filling with the Spirit divorced from deep and
constant meditation upon the Word."

The most remarkable movement among young men in this generation is the
World's Christian Student Federation, organized by Mr. John R. Mott.
Through this movement multitudes of young men the world over have been
led to keep what is called "The Morning Watch," by which they rise at
least half an hour earlier than usual each morning, and spend the time
in devotional Bible-study and prayer. What a mighty impetus would be
given to Christian work everywhere if all Christian young people would
form the habit of keeping "The Morning Watch!"

Have a plan for your Bible study, and faithfully follow it. Commit to
memory the texts found in Study Twenty-seven, and thus be able to use
skillfully the Sword of the Spirit.




STUDY XVI.

TACT.

Memory Verse: "I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
    means save some."--(1 Cor. ix, 22.)

Scripture for Meditation: 1 Cor. ix, 19-27.


The successful business man knows the value of tact, and the Christian
worker should know the value of consecrated tact. A special study of the
life of Christ to notice his methods of dealing with various people, and
to see the aptness with which he used parable and exhortation, would
prove very helpful to every soul-winner. The life of Paul might also be
studied in the same manner with profit. He knew how to become all things
to all men to save some.

Christ's exhortation to his disciples was, "Be ye as wise as serpents,"
but how little wisdom many seem to have in seeking to win the unsaved to
Christ! And this, too, when we have the promise, "If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not: and it shall be given him."

"Now if I could tell you," said a pastor to an unsaved business man, who
had been relating how much a friend had helped him in business, "how
much Christ has helped me, and what he has been to me, I believe I could
win you to him."

The value of tact was well illustrated in an incident which occurred
during Mr. Finney's meetings in New York City. The big cutlery firm of
Sheffield, England, had a branch house in New York. The manager was a
partner of the firm, and very worldly. One of his clerks, who had been
converted in the meetings, invited his employer to attend. One evening
he was there, and sat just across the aisle from Mr. Arthur Tappan. He
appeared affected during the sermon, and Mr. Tappan kept his eye on him.
After the dismissal, Mr. Tappan stepped quickly across the aisle,
introduced himself, and invited him to stay for the after-service. The
gentleman tried to excuse himself and get away, but Mr. Tappan caught
hold of the button on his coat and said, "Now, do stay; I know you will
enjoy it;" and he was so kind and gentlemanly that the cutlery man could
not very well refuse. He staid, and was converted. Afterwards he said,
"An ounce of weight upon my coat-button saved my soul."

To watch for opportunity, and then to know how effectively to make use
of the opportunity, is all-important in soul-winning. And there is no
better teacher than the Holy Spirit, of whom it is said, "He shall teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance."




STUDY XVII.

EARNESTNESS.

Memory Verse: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
    might."--(Eccl. ix, 10.)

Scripture for Meditation: Mark ii, 1-12.


The testimony of Charles H. Spurgeon should have weight here. He said:
"If a man is to be a soul-winner, there must be in him intensity of
emotion as well as sincerity of heart. You may repeat the most
affectionate exhortations in such a half-hearted manner that no one will
be moved either by love or fear. I believe that for soul-winning there
is more in this matter of earnestness than in almost anything else."

When we become as much in earnest to rescue our friends and dear ones
from eternal death as we are to save them from physical suffering and
death, then we shall see the rapid spread of the kingdom of Christ. A
man falls overboard from the deck of a vessel, and his wife screams:
"Stop the boat! My God! My husband is drowning!" But no one criticises
the woman for her passionate outcry, or bids her keep still. It was so
natural for her to cry out for help. And when the Church of Jesus Christ
becomes thoroughly awake to the worth of a soul and the awful danger to
which all out of Christ are exposed, it will be the most natural thing
in the world for them to show an undying earnestness in seeking the
lost. Then propriety, and reticence, and restraint, and rules of
rhetoric will be thrown to the winds, and a divine passion will possess
the life. The world may sneer at it as fanaticism, but it is the
fanaticism of Pentecost. When the crowd saw the intensity of emotion
shown by the newly-anointed disciples, they exclaimed, "These men are
full of new wine." Here was shown an enthusiasm that leaps over all
difficulties and rises above every discouragement--the enthusiasm of
Pentecost; and every soul-winner must have it. Then, like Paul, wishing
himself accursed that Israel might be saved, or like John Welch, wrapped
in his plaid, kneeling in the snow, unable to sleep, and praying
mightily for the souls of men, this holy earnestness will not let us
rest until we see the salvation of the lost.

It will tell in look, and tone, and manner. It may lead us to do things
that may shock the sense of propriety of the dead, formal Church member,
such as being obedient to the Master's command, "Go ye out into the
highways and hedges, and compel them to come in." Jeremiah preached
repentance in the streets; and the early Church preached everywhere, on
the streets, by the river's bank, in the market-places, and in prisons.
John Livingstone stood on a tombstone, and preached with such power in
the midst of a falling rain that multitudes were born in a day. So did
John Wesley. O that the great Church of Jesus Christ might now have the
enthusiasm of Pentecost!




STUDY XVIII.

PERSEVERANCE.

Memory Verse: "Ye that are the Lord's remembrancers, take no
    rest."--(Isa. lxii, 6, R.V.)

Scripture for Meditation: Luke xv, 1-10.


How we are willing to persevere to save our friends from physical
suffering and death! No night is too long to watch, no sacrifice too
great to make, no burden too heavy to bear, that the life of a loved one
may be saved. But should we not be just as persistent in our efforts to
save from eternal death those whom we love?

Perhaps we have no more illustrious example of devotion to soul-winning
than evidenced in the life of Uncle John Vassar. Two incidents, related
by the Rev. Walter B. Vassar, illustrate the perseverance with which he
sought the perishing.

A young man was noticed to come night after night to revival-meetings,
but would slip away before one could grasp his hand. Mr. Vassar felt he
must see this soul, and walked five miles to the farm where he lived,
arriving as the family was about to eat an early dinner, of which he was
urged to partake. After being seated, the face of the young man not
appearing in the family group, Mr. Vassar excused himself from the
table, and hunted through all the farm-buildings where a man might
possibly be in hiding. At last, when about to confess himself defeated,
he walked to the further end of the corn-crib, and there, in an old
hogshead, he found the fellow lying low. He confessed afterward that he
had taken satisfaction in looking through the bunghole of the hogshead,
in believing Uncle John would not find him there. But this "winner of
souls," knowing his opportunity, leaped over by the side of the runaway,
and then and there turned, as Charles Spurgeon has said, "the hogshead
into a Bethel," and won a soul for heaven.

An Irish woman in a village was told about a strange man calling about
her place, and affirmed he would not be kindly treated if he knocked at
her door. Mr. Vassar, not knowing her feelings, came there in his
visits, but the moment she saw he was the man--according to the
description of him--she slammed the door in his face. He sat at once
upon her doorstep and began to sing:

    "But drops of grief can ne'er repay
     The debt of love I owe."

In a few weeks she wanted admission into the Protestant Church, and all
her experience was, "Those drops of grief, those drops of grief; I could
not get over them."

See how men persevere to get rich or to gain political prestige! See how
insurance agents, and book agents, and traveling men persevere in their
efforts to convince men! They seek most favorable times, and then often
go again and again. And shall we who win immortal souls be any less
diligent?




STUDY XIX.

TENDERNESS.

Memory Verse: "I am the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd giveth his life
    for the sheep."--(John x, 12.)

Scripture for Meditation: Luke xv, 3-7; John x, 1-18.


What infinite depths of tenderness are revealed in these sweet parables
of the Lost Sheep and the Good Shepherd! The tender, loving heart of the
Savior goes out in eager compassion and pity for the straying. What
boundless sympathy is revealed in the words, "He calleth his own sheep
by name;" "He goeth after that which is lost;" "When he hath found it,
he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing!" The seeker after souls must
be like his Master. A heart ready to melt at the sight of human
suffering and human need is necessary to successful soul-winning. There
are many whose hearts are hardened by long years of rebellion against
God; whose power of will is emasculated by long years of neglect; and
they will never be saved until some earnest Christian worker shall find
them, whose heart has been touched with the same sorrow that Jesus felt
when he stood on the Mount of Olives weeping over Jerusalem.

J. Hudson Taylor, of the China Inland Mission, tells that when he was a
college student he had charge of a man with a gangrenous foot. It was
his duty to dress the man's foot every day. He soon learned that his
patient was not a Christian, and had not been in a church for forty
years. Such was his hatred of religion that he refused to go inside the
church at his wife's funeral. Young Taylor made up his mind to speak to
this man about his soul every time he visited him. The man cursed him,
and refused to allow him to pray. The student persisted in presenting
Christ until one day he said to himself, "It's no use," and was leaving
the room. When he reached the door, he turned around and saw the man
looking after him as if saying, "Why, you are going away to-day without
speaking to me about Christ!" Then the young man burst into tears, and
returning to the bedside, said: "Whether you wish me to or not, I must
deliver my soul. Will you let me pray with you?" The man assented, began
to weep, was converted. Mr. Taylor says, "God broke my heart, that
through me he might break this wicked man's heart."

Ask now that the Holy Spirit may give you a tender heart, and make your
eyes a fountain of tears, that, with the sympathy of Christ, you may
seek the lost and perishing.




STUDY XX.

BURDEN FOR SOULS.

Memory Verse: "For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ
    for my brethren."--(Rom. ix, 3.)

Scripture for Meditation: Gen. xviii, 16-33.


How the great heart of the Savior was burdened for the lost! See him
standing on Olivet and weeping as he said: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee,
how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!"

Where there is no real soul-burden for sinners, there will be no
revival. The early Church travailed in pain for the souls of dying men.
One preacher said, "As I entered the pulpit, I could scarcely stand
erect because of my concern for the people and solicitude for souls;"
and another said, "I spent a whole night in prayer, and what I passed
through was inexpressible." When we get a glimpse of the worth of a
soul, and then of the death of a soul, and begin to realize that we
stand between lost men and heaven or hell, then we shall have real
concern, and the Lord will hear our prayer of intercession.

When Mr. Moody first went to London he preached in a Congregational
Church, Sunday morning. There was no particular stir. That evening he
spoke to a large audience of men in the same place, and scores expressed
a desire to become Christians. He went to Dublin next day, but was
recalled by a telegram saying that a great revival had broken out. And
Mr. Moody accounts for this wonderful work of grace which followed by
telling that, on that Sunday morning, a lady went home and told her
invalid sister that Mr. Moody from America had preached. "I know what
that means," said the invalid. "We are going to have a great revival. I
have been praying for months that the Lord would send him here." She
would not eat any dinner, but spent the day in fasting and prayer. The
revival began in that invalid's room.

A gentleman waked his wife up at three o'clock in the morning to have
her join him in prayer in behalf of a neighboring family who were
unsaved; and at daybreak went to his neighbor's house to entreat them to
yield to Christ.

When such concern for the perishing is manifested by the Church, there
is sure to be a gracious ingathering.




STUDY XXI.

A PERSONAL PENTECOST.

Memory Verse: "But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is
    come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem,
    and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
    earth."--(Acts i, 8.)

Scripture for Meditation: Acts ii, 1-4; xix, 1-6.


But, above all, the soul-winner must have _a personal Pentecost_. Christ
does not send us alone to seek the lost. In the fifteenth and sixteenth
chapters of St. John's Gospel, he definitely promises the Comforter. And
again, on the day of his ascension, he bids his disciples tarry at
Jerusalem until the Holy Ghost is come. Then as they waited, "with one
accord in one place," "a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind
filled all the house where they were sitting, ... and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost." Since that day the one supreme
qualification for Christ's witnesses is _the enduement with the Holy
Ghost_. He will give a better knowledge of the Scriptures; he will
re-enforce tact and earnestness and perseverance; he will give
tenderness of heart and the burden for souls.

What a marvelous change the coming of the Spirit wrought in those
waiting disciples! They had forsaken him; they had doubted his word;
Peter had denied him. But now they all became flaming evangels, and
"spake the word of God with boldness."

A personal Pentecost will help the soul-winner to overcome timidity,
give utterance and a holy boldness, and make effective the words he
speaks. It is the supreme need of the Church to-day. God wants men and
women in every vocation of life who are Spirit-filled; and who, by
diligent study of the Word of God, by prayer, and by Christian
testimony, live a Spirit-filled life that is perennial.

The personal worker will succeed only when endued and empowered with the
Holy Ghost. Dr. J. Wilbur Chapman tells of a young Irishman who was a
member of his Church, and who had not had the educational advantages
many young people have. Dr. Chapman says:

"With a heart burdened for the men of the city, I called together a few
of the men of the Church, and laying before them the plan I had in mind,
told them first of all that we could do nothing without the 'infilling
of the Holy Ghost.'

"When this had been explained, I noticed this man leave the room. He did
not return while the meeting was in session. When I sought him I found
him in one of the lower rooms of the church, literally on his face
before God. He was in prayer.

"I shall never forget his petition: 'O God, I plead with thee for this
blessing!' then, as if God were showing him what was in the way, he
said, 'My Father, I will give up every known sin, only I plead with thee
for power;' and then, as if his individual sins were passing before him,
he said again and again, 'I will give them up; I will give them up.'
Then, without any emotion, he rose from his knees, turned his face
heavenward, and simply said, 'And now I claim the blessing.'

"For the first time he became sensible of my presence, and with a
shining countenance he reached out his hands to clasp mine. You could
feel the very presence of the Spirit as he said, 'I have received him; I
have received him!' And I believe he had, for in the next few months he
led more than sixty men into the kingdom of God. His whole life had been
transformed."




THE SOUL-WINNER'S METHODS.

"THAT I MAY, BY ALL MEANS, SAVE SOME."




STUDY XXII.

DIRECT APPROACH.

Memory Verse: "Jesus ... saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and
    tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee."--(Mark v,
    19.)

Scripture for Meditation: John iv, 1-42.


John Vassar, than whom there has been no more successful soul-winner for
a hundred years, accomplished his work through personal conversation,
and declared that the best method of dealing with souls is to strike
home at once with the most direct and searching question possible.
Without a word of introduction he would say, "Have you experienced that
great change called the new birth?" That question could not be easily
evaded.

Study the methods of Christ in dealing with such as Nicodemus, the
Samaritan woman, and the rich young man. How eagerly he used every
opportunity! How his questions search the life! Without any apology,
how he thrusts home warning and entreaty!

How easily we may lose opportunity to speak directly to men of their
danger! While the great Dr. Chalmers was a guest at the home of his
friend, a Highland country gentleman, his friend died suddenly. Dr.
Chalmers had never spoken to him about his soul. He was much distressed,
and said, "If I had only known that he was going to be taken from earth
so soon, how earnestly I would have pleaded with him about his soul!"

Dr. J.E. Carson, of New York City, said to his congregation one Sunday
morning, that every saved man was either a channel through which the
Spirit of God was reaching the unsaved, or a barrier preventing the
Spirit doing his work. One of the trustees of the Church said to himself
on the way home, "Am I a channel, or a barrier?" That night he could not
sleep, and cried out, "O Lord, make me a channel!" Almost the first
thought that came was that there were some men in his employ to whom he
had never spoken a word about Jesus Christ. He confessed his fault, and
told the Lord that if he would make him a channel he would speak to
these men. The first man who entered his office the next morning was his
confidential clerk, who had been with him eighteen years. The merchant
said, "Edward, haven't I been a good employer to you?" "Yes, sir." "Have
not I treated you well?" "Yes, sir." "Why, sir, what have I done," said
the clerk, "that you are going to discharge me?" "Edward, I am on my way
to heaven, and I want you to go with me." Tears came into the eyes of
both men as Edward took the merchant's extended hand and said, "I will,
sir." Dr. Carson afterwards received eleven men into his Church because
this trustee had consented to be a channel for the Holy Spirit.

Dr. Manley S. Hard talked with a physician about his soul, and, two days
after, the doctor entered the revival-meeting just before the
benediction, walked straight to the altar, and begged the people to
wait and pray for him, saying:

"I know it is late and you are all tired, but I want you to stay a
little while and pray for me. This has been an awfully hard day. I have
ridden fifty miles and visited more than twenty patients, but I am the
sickest man of them all. Two sermons have been preached to me; a
faithful one yesterday by my pastor; the other this morning when I had
to tell a woman she had better get ready to die, for she could not live.
As I drove away I said to myself, 'You have warned another, but you are
not ready yourself.'"

To go to a man and speak to him directly and plainly about his
responsibility to God, and warn him to flee from "the wrath to come,"
may take more courage than to preach to a thousand; but it pays, and it
must be done if the dying multitudes are ever saved.




STUDY XXIII.

CORRESPONDENCE.

Memory Verse: "Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with
    mine own hand."--(Gal. vi, 11.)

Scripture for Meditation: Philemon.


What a beautiful letter is that which Paul wrote to Philemon! How it
breathes affection, and sympathy, and tender entreaty! And it was
written _by his own hand_. Study this letter, and have your heart
saturated with its spirit. You will then know how to write "words that
touch" to your unsaved friends.

There are special occasions [Transcriber's note: original reads
'ocasions'], such as the time of bereavement, of sickness, of trial, or
of success, when this method may be employed to advantage. Many a soul
has been won for Christ, and many a lonely life cheered by a
sympathetic, wisely-worded letter, winged by prayer.

Sitting in a public park, a young man was seen poring over a letter
while the tears rained down his face, and he almost sobbed aloud. "It is
from my mother," he said. "She wrote it herself, and though I ran away
from home and broke her heart, yet she says that she still loves me, and
is praying for me, and wants me to come home."

Dr. T.L. Cuyler went to make his first call on a rich merchant. It was a
cold winter evening, and as the door was opened when the minister was
leaving, a cold, piercing gale swept in. Dr. Cuyler said, "What an awful
night for the poor!" The merchant went back and brought a roll of
bank-bills, saying, "Give these to the poorest people you know." Some
days after, Dr. Cuyler wrote him, telling him how his bounty had
relieved many poor, and then added, "How is it that a man so kind to his
fellow-creatures has always been so unkind to his Savior as to refuse
him his heart?" That sentence touched him. He sent for the minister to
talk to him, was converted, and told Dr. Cuyler that he was the first
person in twenty years who had spoken to him about his soul.

Do not allow letter-writing to excuse you from direct personal work; but
watch for opportunity to write, as well as speak, that "by all means you
may save some."




STUDY XXIV.

TRACTS AND BOOKS.

Memory Verse: "And when I looked, behold, a hand was sent unto me; and,
    lo, a roll of a book was therein."--(Ezek. ii, 9.)

Scripture for Meditation: Eccl. xi, 1; 1 Tim. iv, 7-16.


The influence of a tract or of a good book can not be estimated. Rev. J.
Hudson Taylor, of the China Inland Mission, was converted in boyhood
through reading a gospel tract which he found in his father's library.
"He had been frequently troubled about his soul, and had again and again
tried to become a Christian, but had failed so often that he had
concluded that there was no use in trying any more."

An agent of the American Tract Society relates the following:

"A man on a canal-boat received a tract, but to show his contempt for
the tract and its giver, took out his penknife and cut it up into
fantastic shapes. Then he held it up to the derision of the company.

"In tearing it apart, one of the pieces clung to his knee. His eyes were
attracted by the only word on it--'eternity.' He turned it over, and
there was the word 'God.'

"These ideas remained in his mind. He tried to laugh them off; then to
drink, to play cards in order to banish them. But they still clung to
him, and plagued him till he sought God and preparation for eternity."

There is an old true story about a tract, that should be told over and
over again:

A Puritan minister named Sibbs wrote a tract called "The Bruised Reed."
A copy of this was given by a humble layman to a little boy at whose
father's house he had been entertained over night. That boy was Richard
Baxter, and the book was the means of his conversion. Baxter wrote his
"Call to the Unconverted," and among the multitude led to Christ by it
was Philip Doddridge. Doddridge wrote "The Rise and Progress of Religion
in the Soul," and "the time would fail to tell" its blessed influence.
By it Wilberforce was converted, and of his life and labors volumes
could be written. Wilberforce wrote his "Practical View of
Christianity," and this led not only Dr. Chalmers into the truth, but
Legh Richmond to Christ. Richmond wrote "The Dairyman's Daughter," which
has been published in a hundred languages, and many million copies have
been sold.

But he who would make the best use of good literature must be wise. How
little tact some workers have! In a hospital a tract-distributor handed
a leaflet on dancing to a poor fellow who had lost both limbs. Another
zealous young man gave a tract on "The Tobacco Habit" to a beautiful
cultured lady, the wife of a minister. A good supply of common sense is
just as necessary to success in the use of this method as in any other.




STUDY XXV.

THE PRAYER LIST.

Memory Verse: "I will pray for you unto the Lord."--(1 Sam. vii, 5.)

Scripture for Meditation: Luke xviii, 1-8.


One of the highest privileges of the Christian life is the privilege of
intercession for the unsaved. Every Christian may be an intercessor, and
bear to the mercy-seat, in the arms of prayer, some unsaved friend every
day. Have a prayer list. In a little memorandum-book write the names of
those whom you are anxious to see saved. Spread these names before the
Lord daily until your prayers are answered.

One of the greatest Christian movements of modern times started with a
prayer-list carried in the vest-pocket of a commercial traveler, Mr.
E.R. Graves, traveling for a paper-house in New York City. He secured
permission from a merchant to allow his name to be entered on his
prayer-list. The merchant wrote his name in the traveler's book, and
then proceeded to inform Mr. Graves that he had determined not to be a
Christian, and that he had taken too big a contract if he expected to
pray him into the kingdom. But the traveler simply said, "I confidently
expect my prayer to be answered." When they met again the merchant had
been converted, and, amid tears of rejoicing, another name was checked
off the list. The merchant's name was Samuel M. Sayford. Mr. Sayford
became a secretary in the Young Men's Christian Association, and shortly
after met C.K. Ober, then a student at Williams College, and pushed him
out into Association work. Mr. Ober, in turn, found John E. Mott in
Cornell University, persuaded him to enter Association work among
students; and Mr. Mott, in the course of time, started on his journey
around the world, organizing the World's Christian Student Federation.




STUDY XXVI.

WORK AMONG STUDENTS.

Memory Verse: "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
    beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
    to God."--(2 Cor. v, 20.)

Scripture for Meditation: 1 Cor. ii.


No more fruitful and important field for personal work can be found than
in our educational institutions, and Christian students who make
soul-winning a habit of life may win many rich trophies for the Master.
Bishop H.W. Warren, when a Freshman in college, was led to an open
confession of Christ through a Saturday morning walk with a Junior, who
talked to him about his soul.

Dr. J.W. Bashford, in _The Christian Student_, tells about "a Senior in
the Ohio Wesleyan University who was smitten with conviction because he
had neglected personal work for the Master. He intended to be a
minister, but had been indifferent to the spiritual welfare of his
student friends. He offered himself to Christ in full consecration, and
made a list of sixteen friends for whom he felt personal responsibility.
He engaged in systematic personal work with these friends, and had the
satisfaction before the year was completed of seeing every one of them
begin the Christian life. Six of his sixteen friends entered the
ministry, and some of them are even more talented and successful than
the student friend who led them to Christ."

As a rule, young people during their college years are thoughtful and
easily reached; but if not saved before they leave the college halls and
begin the active work of life, they are almost certainly lost to the
kingdom. How often, because of timidity or carelessness, Christian
students and teachers allow this precious harvest time to go by, and
lose the opportunity to win a soul for Christ!

A man, who is now an eminent and widely-known minister, says that he
roomed with a young man at college for two years, and never said a word
to him about his soul. When he was about to leave for home, his
room-mate said, "Why have you not spoken to me about my soul?" Said the
Christian student, "I thought you did not care for me to do so." The
young man replied, "Why, that is the very reason I roomed with you, and
there has never been a day for these two years that you could not have
done so."

Let Christian students set out to win some trophies among their friends
and room-mates for Christ. The results of faithful personal work may not
be immediate or apparent, but the blessed Spirit of God will water the
seed. For thirteen months a college student prayed for and urged a
fellow-student to surrender to Christ, and died without seeing any
result of his efforts. But the seed was faithfully sown, and the young
man was afterwards converted, and became Bishop Hannington, the martyr
bishop of Africa.




STUDY XXVII.

MEETING OBJECTIONS.

Memory Verse: "For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
    adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist."--(Luke xxi,
    15.)

Scripture for Meditation: John ix, 1-41.


The zealous personal worker will be met by objections; but it must be
remembered that these objections are often given for the sake of
argument, and often for the sake of something to say. They should be
squarely met, however, and answered; and the best way to answer such is
by Scripture. There is not an objection advanced by the unconverted that
can not be met and overcome by some passage of Scripture. Just as Jesus
in the wilderness met the tempter's arguments with "It is written," so
we may meet every argument of the objector with the Word.

A faithful study of Christ's conversations with seeking souls, such as
Nicodemus and the rich young man, will also be helpful.

Below are some of the objections usually given, with the Scripture
references that may be used to meet them. This arrangement of texts is
taken from "Personal Work," by S.M. Sayford, by consent of the
publishers:

"I am good enough." (Gen. vi, 5; Ps. li, 5-7; Luke xviii, 19.)

"I am as good as most Christians." (Rom. xiv, 10-12; 2 Cor. v, 10; Rev.
xx, 11; xii, 15.)

"I have never done anything really bad." (Luke xvi, 15; James ii, 10.)

"I can not give up my pleasures." (Eccl. ii, 1; xi, 9; Ps. xvi, 11.)

"I know I shall fail." (John vi, 37; 2 Tim. i, 12; iv, 18.)

"I can not now, but will some time." (Luke xiv, 17; Acts xxiv, 25; James
iv, 13, 14; Luke xii, 19, 20.)

"I am too great a sinner." (Luke v, 32; xix, 10; 1 Tim. i, 15.)

"My day of grace has past." (Ex. xxxiv, 5-7; 2 Chron. xxx, 9; Isa. lv,
7.)

"I do not feel concerned." (Rom. xiii, 11; Eph. v, 14; Heb. ii, 3.)

"I can not know that these things are true." (Acts xvii, 11; John v, 39;
vii, 17.)

"It will cost me my living." (Matt. vi, 33; Ps. lxxxiv, 11; Rom. xiv,
8.)

"It will prevent my becoming rich." (1 Tim. vi, 9, 10; Mark viii, 36,
37; Rev. iii, 17, 18.)

"I can not hold my friends." (Matt. x, 37; xxii, 37; Phil. iii, 8.)

"How may I know that Christ is the Son of God?" (John xx, 30, 31; x,
23-25; 1 John v, 13, 20; Mark iv, 11.)

"How may I know that the Bible is true?" (John vii, 17.)

"Will not God save me if I do my best?" (Eph. ii, 9; Titus iii, 5-8.)

"Why must a man believe in Christ to be saved?" (John xiv, 6; Acts iv,
12; Gal. ii, 16; Rom. iii, 23, 26.)

"How may I know I am forgiven?" (Ps. xxxii, 5; Prov. xxviii, 13; 1 John
i, 7-9.)




STUDY XXVIII.

NO EFFORT IN VAIN.

Memory Verse: "So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
    shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
    please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it."--(Isa.
    lv, 11.)

Scripture for Meditation: John iv, 36; 1 Cor. xv, 58.


"Some day I hope you will preach the gospel," said an aged minister to a
little boy in England. That boy became Charles H. Spurgeon. That great
soul-winner, Mark Guy Pearse, says that when he was a boy his father
took him to see a saintly old lady, who laid her hand upon his head,
saying, "God bless the boy, and make him a minister." Mr. Pearse says
that, through this aged woman, God called him to the ministry.

In a college chapel in Pennsylvania a Christian layman sat down beside a
boy and talked to him about Christ. That boy became Alfred Cookman,
whose name will be held in everlasting remembrance.

An eminent lawyer of Minneapolis, converted a short time since, declares
that the earnest question, "Have you found Jesus?" spoken by a young
lady to his friend who sat by his side in a revival-meeting, and her
startled look, when she was answered roughly, followed him for fifteen
years until he was finally converted.

No sincere effort for Christ can fail. To human eyes there may be little
encouragement, but his Word shall prevail. Every invitation and entreaty
shall in the end be, to those who reject it, the "savor of death unto
death," but to those who accept it, "the savor of life unto life." We
may go forth now, weeping, bearing precious seed; but some blessed day
we shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing our sheaves with
us.

Perhaps we are too anxious to see results now. We do like to number the
converts, and add to the Church roll. Far better do our best for Christ
and souls, then leave the results to God. He will see that the seed,
faithfully planted, is watered, and that _no effort is in vain_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Art of Soul-Winning, by J.W. Mahood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF SOUL-WINNING ***

***** This file should be named 14716.txt or 14716.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/7/1/14716/

Produced by Kathryn Lybarger and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
