The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898: Volume
XII, 1601-1604, by Edited by Blair and Robertson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898: Volume XII, 1601-1604
       Explorations By Early Navigators, Descriptions Of The Islands And
       Their Peoples, Their History And Records Of The Catholic Missions,
       As Related In Contemporaneous Books And Manuscripts, Showing The
       Political, Economic, Commercial And Religious Conditions Of Those
       Islands From Their Earliest Relations With European Nations To The
       Close Of The Nineteenth Century


Author: Edited by Blair and Robertson

Release Date: February 12, 2005 [EBook #15022]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and The PG Distributed Proofreaders Team





                   The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898

   Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
   their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
    as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
   political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
   islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
                    close of the nineteenth century,

                         Volume XII, 1601-1604



 Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
  with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
                                Bourne.









CONTENTS OF VOLUME XII


    Preface      9
    Documents of 1601-1602

        Expedition to the Malucas Islands. Arias de Saldanha,
        and others; 1601-02  29
        Principal points in regard to the trade of the
        Filipinas. Alonso Fernandez de Castro; [undated;
        1602?]      46
        Various documents relating to commerce. Fray Martin
        Ignacio de Loyola, and others; [_ca._ 1602]  57
        Letter to Felipe III. Antonio de Morga; Manila,
        December 1  76

    Documents of 1603

        Three Chinese Mandarins at Manila. Geronimo de Salazar
        y Salcedo; Manila, May 27      83
        Resignation of his office by the bishop of Nueva
        Segovia. Miguel de Benavides; Manila, June 4      98
        Letters to Felipe III. Miguel de Benavides; Manila,
        July 5 and 6      101
        Letters to Felipe III. Pedro de Acuna, and others;
        Manila, July-December      127
        The Sangley insurrection. Pedro de Acuna, and others;
        Manila, December 12-23      142

    Relacion de las Islas Filipinas (to be concluded). Pedro
    Chirino, S.J.; Roma, 1604      169
    Bibliographical Data      323




ILLUSTRATIONS


    Map of China and East Indies (original in colors), in _Voyage
    ofte Schipvaert_, by Jan Huygen van Linschoten (Amstelredam,
    M. D. XCVI), p. 22; photographic facsimile, from copy in
    Boston Public Library.      90, 91
    Title-page of _Relacion de las Islas Filipinas_, by Pedro
    Chirino, S.J. (Roma, M. DC. IV); photographic facsimile,
    from copy in library of Harvard University.  171




PREFACE


The general documents contained in this volume cover the years 1601-03;
they are followed by Chirino's _Relacion_, which was published in 1604,
but the events related therein end in 1602. The two notable occurrences
in this period are the great fire, and the Chinese revolt in Manila
in the year 1603--the latter ending in the slaughter or expulsion
of almost all the Chinese in the islands. Pirates are still raiding
the shores of the northern islands; but the available forces of the
colonial government are diverted to the assistance of an expedition
from India which attempts (but unsuccessfully) to drive the Dutch
from the Spice Islands. Commercial difficulties still affect the
prosperity of the islands, caused mainly by the unauthorized share of
Mexican speculators in the profitable trade between the Philippines
and China; and various expedients are proposed for the regulation of
this commerce. The great fire is a heavy blow to the Spanish colony,
and the people fear the vengeance of the Chinese for the slaughter
of their countrymen. The new archbishop of Manila complains that
the religious orders are in much need of inspection and reform;
some neglect the Indians to whom they should be missionaries, others
keep the infidel Chinese on their lands, and allow the Indians to
be corrupted by the vices of the former. After the Chinese revolt is
quelled, vigorous protests are sent to the home government, especially
by the ecclesiastics, against the laxity hitherto prevailing in the
enforcement of the laws restricting Chinese migration to the islands.

These documents are followed by the noted and rare work of the Jesuit
Pedro Chirino, _Relacion de las Islas Filipinas_ (Roma, 1604). It is
mainly intended as a history of the missions in the islands conducted
by the Jesuits, begun in 1581; Chirino himself arrived there in 1595,
and gives a full and detailed account of the missions from that time
until his departure in 1602. Not only this, but he narrates many things
of interest and importance regarding the people, their customs and
character, their language and state of civilization, their religious
beliefs and worship, and the results of missionary labors and influence
upon them. Much of this information is of special value as one of the
earliest records regarding the Filipino peoples in their primitive
condition, before they had had much contact with the white men; for
the Jesuits went even beyond the outposts of Spanish civilization,
among tribes who sometimes had never seen white men before. Chirino's
_Relacion_ is here presented for the first time in an English dress;
and the Editors are fortunate in securing for this publication some
valuable annotations from the hand of Rev. Pablo Pastells, S.J. of
Barcelona, Spain, who was for some eighteen years superior of the
Jesuit missions in the Philippines. Chirino's work is begun in the
present volume, and will be concluded in _Vol_. XIII.

The presence of Van Noordt's fleet in the Oriental archipelago renders
the Spaniards apprehensive that their possessions therein may be
attacked, especially that of the rich Spice Islands. Accordingly the
viceroy of India determines to send a fleet to drive out the Dutch from
those seas; and (May 5, 1601) notifies Tello of this. On September 1,
1602, a council of war is held at Manila, which decides to furnish
aid for this expedition against the Dutch; its commander has already
captured and subjugated Amboyna. This is followed by a list of the
supplies furnished to the Portuguese fleet; their value amounts to
over twenty-two thousand pesos, including eight months' pay for two
hundred soldiers and a number of seamen. An official statement (dated
October 2) enumerates the proceedings of the Manila authorities in
raising these troops and supplies, and notifies the Portuguese envoys
to be ready to convey this aid to the fleet. On October 26, Governor
Acuna writes to the king a report on the piracies committed by the
Moros. They have made several successful raids, and it is necessary to
provide defenses for the islands against these attacks. An expedition
had been planned against the Moro pirates; but the governor and his
military advisers have deferred it, for the sake of aiding the Maluca
expedition. Acuna is going to Arevalo, to despatch the ships and men
for that purpose. He is doing all in his power to aid the enterprise,
but fears that it will be a failure. Acuna asks permission to aid
sick and needy soldiers from the royal treasury.

Alonso Fernandez de Castro, a lawyer, furnishes (1602?) a
paper containing "principal points in regard to the trade of the
Filipinas." He notes the decrees forbidding Mexicans and Peruvians
to trade with the islands, and their violation; the result of this
illegal trade is disastrous to Spanish commerce. Complaint is made
that the appointments of officers for the ships are made in Mexico,
thus causing great and unnecessary expense. The ships lost in the
Philippine trade, and the causes of such loss are enumerated; and
the kinds of merchandise therein are mentioned. The citizens of
the Philippines are discontented at the partial diversion of their
trade to the American colonies. A violation of the royal decrees is
interpreted by the Mexicans to be not a mortal sin, accordingly they
disregard them; Castro advises more leniency in both the prohibition
and the penalty. Some ecclesiastics recommend that the Holy See be
asked to decide whether such transgression be a mortal sin. The
viceroy of Mexico has ordered an increased duty on goods coming
from the Philippines, to pay the cost of soldiers and artillery to
guard the merchandise on the voyage. The trading vessels lost in the
Pacific are being replaced by new ones built at Acapulco; and the
viceroy has sent over some ships "in trust" of private persons--a
plan which is censured. Mexico should not be allowed to trade with
the South American colonies in Chinese goods.

A group of documents on commerce (_ca._ 1602), although somewhat
fragmentary, contain much interesting information regarding the
trade between Spain and her colonies. Fray Martin Ignacio de Loyola,
bishop of Rio de la Plata, writes his opinion regarding colonial
administration in the Spanish empire. The colonies should be kept in
a dependent and subordinate position, and their high officials should
be sent from Spain. Commerce should be maintained between the colonies
and the mother-country. At present the conditions and results of this
trade are ruinous. Loyola advocates the establishment at Manila of
a "consulate" of trade, like that at Mexico; strict prohibition of
Mexican participation in the China trade; and its monopoly by the
inhabitants of the Philippines. Letters from the viceroy of Mexico
state that the merchants of Peru who trade with Spain are being
ruined, on account of the long time during which they must wait for
returns on their money, and the excessive duties charged on their
goods. As a result, they are sending their goods to Mexico; and they
demand permission to trade direct with China. Monterey recommends
that this be allowed to a limited extent, and that no restrictions
be placed on the use of Chinese goods in Nueva Espana. He has used
severe measures in regard to infringements of the ordinances regarding
commerce, but there is evidently remissness in the customs inspection
at Manila. Another paper gives an abstract of certain points in a
petition sent from the Philippines. It is requested that the officers
of vessels trading with Nueva Espana be inhabitants of the islands;
that no space in the ships be sold; that Peruvian merchants be not
allowed to go to the Philippines; that the troops be paid from a
special and separate account; and that the lading of the trading
ships be placed in charge of the Manila cabildo. All these points
are commented upon by certain bishops whose advice is apparently
requested by the Council of the Indias. Various memoranda follow,
on the trade between the Philippines and Nueva Espana; these include
recommendations for a commercial consulate at Manila, diminished
coinage of money, allowance of a limited amount of trade to Peru,
government custom-houses at Acapulco and Manila, etc. A letter
from Morga (December 1, 1602) informs the king that Governor Acuna
has aided the expedition sent from India to seize Maluco; and that
some of the trading ships sent to Nueva Espana have returned without
crossing the ocean, after great losses by storms, and having risked
seizure on the Japanese coast.

In May, 1603, three Chinese mandarins visit Manila. Salazar y Salcedo,
the fiscal, informs the king of this, and sends him a translation
of the letter presented by the mandarins to the governor (in which
they explain that they have come in search of a mountain of gold,
of which report had reached them); also a copy of the complaint made
by the fiscal to the Audiencia regarding the manner in which these
mandarins have administered justice, according to their own usages,
to the Chinese residing in Manila. The governor forbids them to
continue such procedure, and takes measures to fortify the city
against possible Chinese invasion.

Fray Miguel de Benavides resigns his bishopric (July 4), to become
archbishop of Manila. On the next day he reports to the king his
arrival at Manila, and the present condition of affairs in the
islands, which is very disheartening. The Mindanao pirates have
ravaged the coasts, and carried away many captives. The richest part
of the city, including the merchandise stored in the warehouses,
has been destroyed by fire; and the ships from Mexico arrived too
late for the merchants to ship goods thither this year. The people
are full of anxiety over a possible war with the Chinese; and the
archbishop deprecates the laxity of the royal officials in allowing
so many Chinese to live in the islands. They are so numerous that
their presence is a menace to the Spaniards, and they are corrupting
the natives with their own vicious practices. He urges that most of
the Chinese be expelled from the islands, and that the conduct of
the civil officials be investigated and punished. On the next day,
he writes another letter to ask that certain matters in the islands
be set right. The trade upon which the people depend for support
is being taken from them by unscrupulous Spaniards from Mexico and
Peru. The archbishop has been urged to excommunicate those citizens
of Manila who are engaged in this illegal traffic, but refuses to
do so, not thinking this the right procedure in such a case; and
his efforts to secure redress from the Audiencia are fruitless. He
also complains that offices are given to friends of the auditors;
that the latter and their women-folk monopolize the best seats in
the church; and that various irregularities have crept into the
church at Manila. Benavides criticises the religious orders in the
islands, saying that they often neglect their duties to the Indians;
and asks that the friars be not allowed to leave their charges at
their own pleasure. The Dominicans and Franciscans maintain strict
discipline, but neglect the Indians. The Augustinians are in great
need of inspection and reform. The Jesuits lead exemplary lives,
and are excellent instructors; but the Indians complain that these
fathers have taken from them their lands and property. Benavides asks
the king to redress this wrong. They also keep infidel Chinese on
these lands, who are corrupting the Indians. The bishop demands that
he shall be consulted by the governor in regard to the assignment of
charges to the religious orders; and that priests shall be tried not
by the Audiencia, but by the ecclesiastical courts. He asks various
favors for the city and its people, and that military aid be sent
to the island from Mexico. The cathedral needs repairs, and the
episcopal residence is very small and inadequate to the archbishop's
needs. The Jesuits should not be allowed to have a university, nor
to obtain the funds which were given by the old soldiers in order to
make restitution to the conquered Indians.

The Audiencia of Manila make a report (July 2, 1603) of various
matters and events. Two new auditors have arrived at Manila, and
Morga is transferred to Mexico. They recount the dangers and the safe
return of the ship "Rosario" from Japan; and the losses incurred by
fire at Manila, half of the city being destroyed. They note various
matters about which they have received the royal commands, the most
important of these referring to the personal services rendered by the
Indians--which, the Audiencia state, are exacted only when necessary,
and then paid for at fair rates. Two days later (July 4) the fiscal
advises the king that it would be well to make the archbishop of
Manila the president of the Audiencia--a request which is ignored
by the government. Acuna notifies the king (July 20, 1603) of the
failure of the Portuguese expedition against Maluco, and urges that
the king take prompt measures to conquer that fort.

On November 29, 1603, the king sends instructions to Acuna to deport
the Chinese residing in the islands, and to restrict the immigration
of others, until no more than three thousand are left--these to be only
such workmen as are needed for the service of the country. As a result
of various restrictions imposed upon them, the Chinese revolt (October
9) and attack Manila; but the Spaniards subdue them after several sharp
engagements, many of the Chinese being slain, and the ringleaders are
executed. One of the Jesuits in Manila, Gregorio Lopez, writes to the
king (December 10, 1603) to ask for reenforcements to be sent to the
islands, in order that the Mindanao pirates may be driven back; they
are raiding the Visayan Islands, and endangering the existence of the
Christian communities formed there by the Jesuit missionaries. A letter
from the cabildo of the cathedral (December 11) informs the king of the
revolt of the Chinese, and the subsequent conflagration in Manila. The
Dominican provincial complains (December 15) that the colony is going
to destruction because the royal decrees have not been observed,
especially those restricting Chinese immigration, and calls for a
rigorous investigation of the conduct of the colonial authorities--to
be made preferably by an ecclesiastic. Bishop Benavides writes, at
the same time, a brief letter to the king, similar in tenor to that of
the provincial. With his commendation of Fray Diego de Guevara to the
king go other credentials for that envoy. Letters relating the events
of the Chinese insurrection are sent to Spain by the governor and the
Audiencia (December 12 and 18, 1603). The fortifications of Manila are
being pushed forward, and an envoy has been sent to China to explain
the recent revolt and its punishment. Acuna has also endeavored to
procure military supplies from that country to supply the present
deficiency; he dreads lest the trade with China may be cut off, which
would ruin the Philippine colony. Acuna has enlisted several military
companies among the Indians, who have done good service in quelling the
Sangley insurrection. He recounts his difficulties in equipping a small
fleet for the defense of the islands. The Mindanao pirates have again
raided the islands; but the Chinese insurrection made it necessary
to recall the troops who had been sent to check the pirates. Acuna
relates the chief events of the past year in the Mindanao campaign,
and the present state of affairs there. He complains of the lack of
funds, and entreats that money be promptly sent from Nueva Espana. A
postscript to this letter, dated December 23, asks that the conduct of
the royal officials at Manila be investigated, as they had illegally
allowed so many Chinese to take up residence there.

The chronological order of our narrative is here interrupted to
survey the course of the Jesuit missions as related by Pedro Chirino
in his _Relacion de las Islas Filipinas_. After a brief prefatory
note, he begins by describing the location of the islands and their
discovery and settlement by Spaniards. The finding of the Santo
Nino in Cebu in 1565 is related at length, with an account of the
miracles and the veneration connected with it; and the patron saints
invoked by the Spaniards are enumerated. Among these is especially
prominent St. Potenciana, chosen as their patron and protector
against hurricanes. Chirino briefly describes the dress, customs,
and character of the natives, and the game, fish, and fruits which
serve them as food; and, at some length, the wonderful bamboo plant. He
enumerates the imports into the Philippines from surrounding countries,
and the occupations of the people therein who come to the islands;
and praises the wealth and comfort of that region.

Chirino then mentions the coming to the islands of the various
religious orders, especially recounting the labors and privations of
his own order, the Jesuits, and the beginning of their settlement
at Manila. Five priests, with one lay brother, are the founders of
that work; Suarez dies from overwork, Sanchez goes back to Europe,
and Sedeno conducts the affairs of the mission--laboring for the good
of the colony in all matters, both spiritual and secular. The Jesuits
exert considerable influence over the Chinese and Japanese who come to
Manila. In chapter vi are enumerated the names of the larger islands
in the Filipinas, and their extent is compared with that of Spain.

Chirino next defines the bishoprics and religious provinces in the
islands--inserting in this account a description of the process of
tattooing; and proceeds to relate how the Jesuits extended their
labors to the Indian villages outside of Manila. In the district
of Balayan, they have baptized some seven thousand natives within
ten years. The village of Taitai is removed, by Chirino's influence
and the superstitious fears of the natives, to a more secure and
healthful site. He describes the customs of the natives in bathing,
which is a universal and frequent practice among them. On the shore of
the lagoon of Bai are hot springs, which have already become a noted
health resort. Various trees native to the islands are described at
length, as well as the Chinese method of reducing a large tree to
a dwarf pot-plant. Interesting particulars are given regarding the
Bisayans and Negritos who inhabit Panay, and of a petty war between
those peoples. The Jesuits have done excellent missionary work there,
in the district of Tigbauan; some particulars of this are related. One
of their number, Martin Henriquez, dies from overwork, and Chirino is
ordered to return to Manila. In June, 1595, eight more Jesuits come
with Morga; and the missions of the order are now extended into Cebu,
Leyte, and Samar. A chapter is devoted to the pious labors and death
of Father Antonio Sedeno. In 1596 a large reenforcement of Jesuits
arrives at the islands, headed by Francisco de Vera; and the work
of the order there receives new impetus. The missionaries in all
the religious orders are able to master the native languages with so
little difficulty that "it seems a gift from heaven." Chirino gives
some account of these, illustrated with specimens of three--Tagalan,
Harayan, and Visayan--with the alphabet used by the Filipinos. He
also praises the politeness, in word and act, of the Tagalos, and
gives them credit for much musical ability. A chapter is assigned to
the native alphabet and mode of writing. All, women as well as men,
write and read; and they have already learned to do so in the Spanish
language as well as in their own.

Chirino relates the progress of the Jesuit mission during the year
1596-97. The curriculum of the Manila college is enlarged, and its
church (which is described in detail) is completed. A minute account
is given of a nine days' fiesta in honor of the relics of saints which
are deposited in the church. At this time is begun the practice of
self-scourging as a voluntary penance. The Jesuit church is frequented
by the Indians in great numbers, not only on special occasions, but
throughout the year: and they display the utmost devotion, even forming
among themselves a confraternity in honor of the relics. Their piety
shows practical results, especially in the modesty and virtue of their
women, qualities which the heathen neither value nor desire; Chirino
narrates some instances of triumphant virtue. An account is given of
the foundation and progress of the girls' seminary of Santa Potenciana:
and of the various ministrations of the Jesuits in the hospitals and
elsewhere in Manila. The writer relates the methods of conducting
the mission of Taytay, and events there during the year 1597. Three
fine churches are erected, and the missionaries gain the good-will
not only of those Indians, but even of the savages in the mountains;
the taming and conversion of one of these, the fiercest of his tribe,
is narrated. After him, entire villages come to live near the mission,
the father in charge helping them to establish their homes there;
he even converts all the heathen priests of one tribe. Not only
the Tagalos but the Negrillos resort to the mission, and many are
converted. Chirino laments the idolatries and superstitions which
still linger among even the more civilized natives; and proceeds
to recount their religious and superstitious beliefs. All their
religion is based on tradition and custom, and is handed down in
songs. Their beliefs regarding gods, demons, etc., are mentioned;
Chirino reduces most of these to their adoration of their ancestors,
in whose honor they worship various images. They also worship animals,
birds, and other natural objects; and have many superstitions. Chirino
demolishes the little buildings dedicated to the anitos. Among those
people their priests are also their physicians, or "medicine-men;"
and in both roles they deceive the credulous and ignorant votaries
of superstition. The mode of offering sacrifices is described. In the
mission village at Taytay, certain idolatrous rites have been secretly
practiced, under the influence of the heathen priestesses; but this is
revealed by the faithful among the natives to the missionaries, who
promptly eradicate the evil and demolish the idols. All the heathen
priestesses are converted, and now lead exemplary Christian lives.

Chirino remains alone in Cebu after Sedeno's death (1595). He not only
maintains the usual services in the Jesuit church there, but undertakes
to instruct the Chinese, whose language he soon learns sufficiently
for that purpose. He works in great harmony with the Augustinians
of the city, who aid him in times of need; and with those of other
orders who sometimes come to Cebu. In September, 1596, some of the
recently-arrived Jesuits are assigned to that city, and great activity
ensues in their mission, including a school for children. The Jesuits
extend their labors to Leyte, which island is described by Chirino;
he praises the hospitality and fraternal feeling which prevail among
its people. Five mission stations are established there, and many
conversions are secured. A sketch of the mission labors for 1597 in
each of these posts is given--Dulac, Carigara, Paloc, Alangalang,
and Ogmuc. In Dulac a church is erected, and a school opened, and
many are converted. The station at Caligara is also flourishing, and
especial mention is made of two remarkable conversions there, one of
a boy five years old. At Paloc the fathers encounter some dislike,
apparently inspired by the heathen priests; but this is soon replaced
by affection and religious ardor. Some miraculous cures occur here. At
Alangalang, Cosmo de Flores forms a large mission village from many
scattered hamlets; but dies soon after its foundation. The fathers are
welcomed in Ogmuc, and a school for the children is at once begun;
they are delighted at the cleverness and docility of these little
ones. Many of those people are converted, including several chiefs.

Here Chirino again digresses to an account of "marriages, dowries
and divorces among the Filipinos." He "had lived in the Filipinas
almost ten years" before he knew that some of the natives practiced
polygamy, which was not a custom in Manila, Panay, and other islands
where the Spaniards had long dwelt, but had some currency among the
Visayans. In certain parts of Mindanao, the woman has two husbands;
but monogamy is the prevailing custom of the archipelago. The first
degree of consanguinity is the only one which bars marriage. Various
betrothal and marriage ceremonies are described, and their usage
regarding dowries and divorces. Chirino thinks that polygamy in those
islands has been derived from the "cursed doctrine" of Mahomet.

He next relates the entrance of the Jesuit missionaries into the island
of Ibabao (now Samar); they find the people well disposed toward the
Christian faith, and soon have churches and schools established. On one
occasion, all the people of the island of Maripipi come to the fathers
for baptism, and receive it, as they show themselves well prepared
for it. A mission is begun at Catubig, in the eastern part of Samar;
but for lack of workers it has not been maintained. Another mission
has been established in Bohol, where their efforts are greatly aided
by the prevalence of monogamy among the people, who suddenly abandon
their idols and drunken feasts.

Chirino here describes the funeral and mortuary customs generally
prevalent in the islands. The natives practice a sort of embalming of
the dead. The dead person is usually buried in the lower part of his
own house; and the funeral is succeeded by feasting and carousing--the
immediate relatives, however, fasting. At the death of a chief, a
curious taboo is placed upon the entire village, silence being imposed
upon all, under penalty of death. If a man be slain by violence,
his death is avenged by his relatives, the innocent as well as the
guilty being slain by them. Chirino draws curious parallels to all
these customs from the history of various nations, as recorded by both
sacred and profane writers. He devotes a chapter to the description of
"feasting and intoxication among the Filipinos." They eat little and
drink much; but, even when intoxicated, they do not become frenzied
or incapable.

The labors of Jesuit missionaries in the island of Bohol are further
recounted. They find the people unusually well disposed toward the
Christian religion, and very earnest and devout; all their idolatrous
and immoral practices are soon abandoned, lest they displease the
missionaries. Many are converted, and in an epidemic the lives of
these Christians are preserved by their using holy water as a medicine.

Chirino gives some description of the island of Mindanao and its
characteristics. He praises the bravery of its people, of which he
relates some instances. The Jesuits Ledesma and Martinez open a mission
in the southern part of the island, and soon obtain many conversions,
including those of several chiefs; the circumstances of some of these
are narrated. Juan del Campo and a lay brother accompany Figueroa on
his expedition to the Rio Grande of Mindanao, where the governor is
slain; soon after, the priest dies, of whose life and virtues Chirino
gives a brief sketch.



The thanks of the Editors, for useful information, loan of books,
and other valued favors, are extended to the following persons:
Edward E. Ayer, Chicago; Rev. E.I. Devitt, S.J., Georgetown College,
Washington, D.C.; James H. Canfield, librarian of Columbia University,
New York; Asa C. Tilton, School of History, University of Wisconsin;
Herbert E. Bolton, Department of History, University of Texas;
William Beer, librarian of Howard Memorial Library, New Orleans;
Roland G. Usher, Boston; James A. LeRoy, U.S. consul, Durango,
Mexico; David P. Barrows, Superintendent of Public Instruction,
Manila; T.H. Pardo de Tavera, member of U.S. Philippine Commission,
Manila; Rev. A. Coleman, O.P., and Arthur S. Riggs, Manila;
Rev. Anthony Huonder, S.J., editor of _Katholischer Missionen_,
Luxemburg; Rev. Francesco Ehrle, S.J., prefect, and Mons. Mariano
Ugolini, of Vatican Library, Rome; Mons. Wenzel, Vatican Archives;
Rev. Alphonse Giroux, S.S., Colegium Canadense, Rome; Rev. Antonio
Ceriani, prefect of the Biblioteca Ambrosiana, Milan; Paul Lemosof,
Societe de Geographie, Paris; Antonio Graino y Martinez, Madrid;
Jose Maria de Valdenebro, University of Sevilla; Jose Gonzalez Verger,
Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla; C.J. Zulueta, collecting librarian
for the government of the Philippine Islands, now at Sevilla. Also
to officials of the following libraries: British Museum, London;
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris; Biblioteca Vittorio Emanuele, Rome;
Ecole de Ste. Genevieve, Paris. Favors have also been received from
many of the persons to whom acknowledgment was tendered in _Vol_. I
of this series.

_The Editors_

February, 1904.





DOCUMENTS OF 1601-1602


    Expedition to the Malucas Islands. Arias de Saldanha, and
    others; 1601-02.
    Principal points in regard to the trade of the
    Filipinas. Alonso Fernandez de Castro; [undated; 1602?].
    Various documents relating to commerce. Fray Martin Ignacio
    de Loyola, and others; [_ca._ 1602].
    Letter to Felipe III. Antonio de Morga; December 1, 1602.


_Source_: All these documents are obtained from the Archivo general de
Indias--from MSS., except the second, which is a rare printed pamphlet.

_Translations_: The first document is translated by Henry B. Lathrop,
of the University of Wisconsin; the second, by Jose M. and Clara
M. Asensio, and Emma Helen Blair; the third, by James A. Robertson;
the fourth, by Norman F. Hall, of Harvard University.



EXPEDITION TO THE MALUCAS ISLANDS


Letter from the Viceroy of India to the Governor of the Philipinas

In addition to the necessary occasion for the service of his Majesty
which has arisen, I have desired an opportunity for your Lordship's
service since, by command of his Majesty, I assumed the governorship
of this state. [1] My chief instruction was to put an end to the
navigation of the Hollanders in all these regions of the South, their
commerce being injurious to the service of God and of his Majesty,
and to his Majesty's vassals. As this was the most important thing,
I did not fail to undertake it, as soon as I took possession of
this state, although I lacked all kinds of needful supplies. But,
putting God before me, that I might with His aid prosecute this great
enterprise, and fixing my mind on its great importance, I ordered an
armed fleet to be prepared--the most powerful one that has departed
from this state to any other region; and I appointed as its commander
Andres Hurtado de Mendoca, on account of whose Christian character
and good fortune I hope God will give him success in carrying out
his Majesty's intentions.

He took six galleons, five galliots, and one galley, with thirteen
hundred combatants, and two thousand non-combatants for service. Of
this it seemed proper to advise your Lordship, so that if the
commander should be in need of any assistance you may give orders to
provide it at his request--in order that his Majesty's purpose may
be more thoroughly accomplished, and that the great sum expended
for this fleet may not be lost. I feel assured that there will be
no failure on your Lordship's part; on the contrary, I look forward
without question to the entire success of the undertaking, with your
assistance and favor. I trust that his Majesty will regard himself as
having received better service from what your Lordship may do in this
matter than by the much that I have done in this state; and in behalf
of his Majesty's service I am under obligations to your Lordship. Our
Lord guard, etc. (Written on May 5, 1601; received October 1, 1602.)


Decision of a Council of War at Manila to Send Aid to the Maluco Fleet

At Manila, on the first day of September, one thousand six hundred
and two, there were present at the royal buildings in the said city
Don Pedro de Acuna, knight of the Order of San Juan, commander of
Salamanca, and president, governor, and captain-general of these
islands; Doctor Antonio de Morga and the licentiate Tellez de
Almacan, auditors of the said Audiencia; the commandant of the camp,
Agustin de Arzeo; Don Juan Ronquillo, commander of the galleys;
the sargento-mayor, Captain Christoval Azcueta; Captain Juan de
Bustamante, adjutant; the quartermaster, Francisco de las Misas;
the treasurer, Ventura de Santillana; Don Bernardo de Sande, warden
of the fort at the Point; Captain Gomez de Machuca, Captain Francisco
de Mercado, Captain Gaspar Perez, and Captain Esteuan de Prado. The
said president announced and declared that by letters received from
the Portuguese viceroy of Yndia and from Andres Hurtado de Mendoca,
and by the report of Captain Antonio de Brito Fogaca, and of Father
Andres Pereyra of the Society of Jesus, who brought the letters, he
had been informed that the said Andres Hurtado had come by order of
his Majesty to get control of the Malucas Islands, which the kings
thereof had usurped, and of other islands after the Hollanders had
gained possession of them. For this purpose he had already proceeded
with a large fleet to Amboyno, where the said Andres Hurtado had
already subdued that island and placed it under obedience to his
Majesty. Thence he had despatched the aforesaid persons to report
to the said royal Audiencia and his Lordship how he had proceeded;
and in what need the fleet was of provisions, ammunition, and other
supplies. He begged with great urgency that they would provide and aid
him with the same, as appeared from the said letters, which were read
before the said assembly. Accordingly the president requested them,
after considering the matter and its nature, together with its great
importance, to state their opinions upon the proper course to pursue
under the circumstances.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

Before me:

_Antonio de Ordas_

Immediately and directly the said commandant of the camp, commander
of the galleys, and other captains, after discussing and conferring
upon the aforesaid, declared unanimously that their opinion was
in favor of assisting the said Andres Hurtado de Mendoca with
two hundred men, which was the number asked for by word of mouth
by the said Captain Antonio Vrito Fogaca. They agreed to this,
notwithstanding that for this year the expedition to the river of
Mindanao, already agreed upon, must be given up; because after
considering the importance of reenforcing the naval expedition,
and its usefulness in facilitating the said attack on Mindanao and
causing apprehension in other islands, they regarded the aid of the
said fleet as the more important enterprise for the present. They
also decided to send as much assistance in the way of provisions
and ammunition as was possible, and as his Lordship should direct;
and to despatch everything as promptly as the weather would permit,
considering that Terrenate is the principal point for the security of
these islands, and the place where have originated the mischiefs done
by the Mindanaos and Joloans. To this they affixed their signatures.



Assistance Sent by the Governor of the Filipinas to the Maluco Fleet
Sent out from Yndia

Memorandum of provisions and ammunition which by order of Senor
Don Pedro de Acuna, knight of the Order of San Juan, commander of
Salamanca, governor and captain-general of these Philipinas Islands,
and president of the royal Audiencia which sits therein, were sent by
the official judges of the royal exchequer to the islands of Maluco,
in aid of the fleet sent out by the lord viceroy of India, under
Commander Andres Hurtado de Mendoca:

_Rice_. Five thousand fanegas of clean rice, a little more or less,
at three reals a fanega--the price at which it is received in tribute,
although at present the market price here is a peso and a half a
fanega. Total: one thousand eight hundred and seventy-five pesos.

_Meat_. Three hundred young beeves, at six pesos each, including salt
and earthen jars. Total: one thousand eight hundred pesos.

_Wine_. Two hundred jars of wine, at ten reals apiece, including the
jars. Total: two hundred and fifty pesos.

_Nails_. Eight hundred quintals of nails and spikes, at seven pesos
a quintal. Total: five hundred and sixty pesos.

_Gunpowder_. Forty quintals of gunpowder, at two reals and a half a
libra--the price at which it is given to the infantry because of the
small pay they receive, although it costs his Majesty more than four
reals a libra. Total: one thousand two hundred and fifty pesos.

_Cloth_. Three hundred pieces of cloth from Ylocos at four reals and
a half. Total: one hundred and sixty-eight pesos, and four tomins.

_Idem_. Seven hundred varas of Castilian sail-cloth at six reals a
vara. Total: five hundred and twenty-five pesos.

_Needles_. A hundred sail-needles, at a real: twelve pesos and
four tomins.

_Thread_. Three quintals of cotton thread, at eighteen pesos a quintal:
fifty-four pesos.

_Oil_. Thirty jars of oil for galagala, [2] at a peso and a half:
forty-five pesos.

_Infantry_. Two hundred private soldiers, one hundred and sixty-five
being arquebusiers, at six pesos a month; and thirty-five musketeers
at eight pesos; their pay for eight months comes to ten thousand one
hundred and sixty pesos. The pay of the commandant and two captains,
with their officers, for the said eight months comes to two thousand
pesos.

_Seamen_. Twenty-two seamen to go with the ships carrying the
reenforcements receive a hundred and fifty pesos a year, and
rations. Total for the said eight months: two thousand two hundred
pesos. A pilot, whose pay, at six hundred pesos a year, amounts
for eight months to four hundred pesos. A master, whose pay, at
three hundred pesos a year, amounts for eight months to two hundred
pesos. Three gunners in the ship "Santa Potenciana," at two hundred
pesos a year, and rations; for eight months, four hundred and fifty
pesos. Twenty Indian deck-hands, at two pesos a month. Total: three
hundred and twenty pesos.

Grand total: twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy pesos.

_Francisco de las Missas_
_Jhoan de Bustamante_
_Ventura de St. Tillen_


Official Statement in Regard to the Re-enforcement at Maluco

(_To be sent to his Majesty_)

In the city of Manila, on the second of October, one thousand
six hundred and two, Don Pedro de Acuna, knight of the Order of
San Juan, commander of Salamanca, governor and captain-general of
these Philipinas Islands, and president of the royal Audiencia and
Chancilleria which sits therein, made the following declaration. A
month ago, or thereabouts, he received news and information from Senor
Andres Hurtado de Mendoca that he was in the fortress of Ambona with a
force which he had brought from the city of Goa to conquer and seize
the kingdom of Terrenate, and that to complete the enterprise he was
in great need of assistance from these islands in men, provisions,
and other things. He accordingly requested such assistance, and to this
end had sent Father Andres Pereira of the Society of Jesus and Captain
Antonio de Brito Fogassa, as appears from the letters and advices
in their possession, to which reference is made. His Lordship, the
auditors and fiscal of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these
said islands, and the officers of the royal exchequer--to whom by one
of the ordinances of the said royal Audiencia had been committed by
his Majesty the provision for such cases without waiting to consult
his Majesty personally--considered the importance, advantage, and
benefit to our lord the king, and the profit to these islands in
the peace that they would enjoy if this project were carried into
execution and the desired assistance were sent. With the unanimous
approval of the members of the council of war he had commanded that
the ship "Santa Potenciana," which is one of his Majesty's vessels,
be immediately fitted out and provided with everything requisite,
with a view to sending in it and in some other smaller vessels
what has been prepared. At present the said ship is ready to sail
to the island of Panay and the province of Pintados to receive the
provisions, the troops, and the other supplies to be sent on the said
expedition. Likewise, at the request and desire of the said Father
Pereira and Captain Brito, he has given them a pilot, Vicente Dias,
a Portuguese, to go in the said ship--one of the best pilots now in
this city. Since everything is ready, the season far advanced, and
promptitude is important, he ordered and does order that notification
of the whole matter be given to the said Andres Pereyra and Captain
Antonio de Brito Fogassa, as persons who came for the said assistance
and are to return with it. His Lordship now has the said ship "Santa
Potenciana" ready and fitted out with all things necessary to the
voyage, and they are immediately or at a proper time to embark in her
to go to the island of Panay, in the province of Pintados, where his
Lordship is going in person to hasten and direct in the best manner
the said assistance; and to give and deliver to them the infantry,
provisions, and other supplies which they were to take for that
purpose. And since they are provided with everything necessary,
let them attend to and carry out the undertaking accordingly. The
supplies are not deficient; on the contrary, he has provided them,
and he demands that if by a failure to carry out the enterprise, or
by not departing in season with the said ship, the said assistance
does not attain the desired end, or some loss occurs, or any other
evil result follows, it shall be charged to their account and be at
their responsibility, and not at that of his Lordship. For he on his
part has complied with everything asked from him, by word of mouth
or in writing, by the said Senor Andres Hurtado de Mendoca; and has
done it with the good-will and care requisite in a matter of so great
importance and consequence, and of so great service to the royal person
of the king our lord, and the advantage and peace of this kingdom. Thus
I order, direct, and attest. Let an official copv of this declaration
and the answer thereto be made, that for all time the zeal with which
I have attended to the affairs of the royal service may be made plain.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

Before me:

_Francisco Sarmiento_

_Notification_

In the city of Manila, on the third of October of the said year, I,
clerk of the government, read the above official act, communicated
it word by word, and gave notice of it to Father Andres Pereyra of
the Society of Jesus and to Captain Antonio de Brito in person. When
they had heard the contents thereof they declared that they were
ready to undertake the direction and completion of the enterprise,
and that in execution thereof they would go on the following day, or
the second day at latest, and embark in the said vessel at the port of
Cauite for the island of Panay, as they were directed. This they gave
as their answer. As witnesses there affixed their signatures: Father
Diego Sanchez, of the Society of Jesus; General Don Juan Ronquillo;
and the sargento-mayor Captain Christoual de Azqueta.

_Andre Pereyra Antonio de Brito Fogassa Francisco Sarmiento_

I, Francisco Sarmiento, clerk of the government of these Philipinas
Islands for the king our lord, was present at that of which I make
mention above, and caused this copy to be made of the said official
act which was in the archives of my said office, with the notification
to them of the request made by Senor Don Pedro de Acuna, governor
and captain-general of these said islands. This is a corrected,
exact, and faithful copy. Witnesses of the correction and accuracy
are: Geronimo Suarez and Juan de Aldabe, citizens of this city of
Manila. Made therein, on the seventh of October, one thousand six
hundred and two. Interlineations: _nao, el, Vala_. In testimony of
the truth, I have affixed my seal.

_Francisco Sarmiento_

Gratis.


Letter of Pedro de Acuna to Felipe III

Sire:

By the ships that left these islands this year for Nueva Hespana I
wrote for your Majesty, in duplicate, an account of my voyage and
arrival here, and of the other events which have happened to me; and
as a ship was about to depart for Malaca I was unwilling to let slip
the opportunity to write these lines and to send them in it by way
of Yndia, that your Majesty might be informed of what other events
have taken place and have come under my notice.

In my previous letters I gave your Majesty a detailed account of
the state of affairs in Mindanao and Jolo, and sent a report of
the retreat to Pintados of Captain Juan Xuarez Gallinato with your
Majesty's force that was at Dapitan. The reason of this retreat was
the information received that the enemy were preparing a great fleet
to attack Pintados, which rendered it desirable to place the force
at a point whence it could better be transported to the region where
it might be needed. The result showed the importance of the retreat;
for the enemy, being informed of it, dared not go to the said islands
of Pintados, but advanced with a squadron of ships against Cuyo and
the neighboring islands, distant from Pintados, where they pillaged
everything and killed and took captive more than seven hundred
persons. [3] This is misery enough; and, as I wrote your Majesty,
this unfortunate condition of affairs _cannot be remedied except by
arming galleys [underlined in original]_ or large galliots, with which
it will be possible to hasten from island to island. In many regions
the mere knowledge of their existence will be sufficient to put a
bridle on the audacity of these barbarians; and with them it will be
possible to hunt out the enemy at home. With garrisons no beneficial
results can be expected, in view of the great number of the islands;
if we put soldiers wherever they are needed, the whole force of these
provinces would not suffice--no, nor many more. Even if we had the
troops, the cost would be enormous and the gain nothing; for the Moros
come by sea, seize their booty, and take flight, without waiting to
come to close quarters, understanding well how to accomplish their
purposes and desires. Since it is impossible to get to close quarters
with them, I am making all possible haste to build the galleys. For
two I have the wood already cut, and for two others the wood will be
cut next month. I am making plans to provide them with a complement
of rowers; and I believe I shall be able to put them into such order
that we can live with much more quiet than hitherto. [_In the margin_:
"For the council of war--there is no answer;" _and, lower down_:
"Again no answer."] [4]

It was agreed at a council of war that the fleet under Captain
Gallinato should be prepared and put in order, to go on the expedition
for the occupation of Mindanao. It seemed that this was the best
means of putting an end to the great harm done by the inhabitants
of that island and of Jolo and Terrenate, and their confederates, to
your Majesty's vassals. While the orders in regard to the preparations
necessary to that end were being given, two letters arrived, one from
the viceroy of Yndia, and the other from Commander Andres Hurtado
de Mendoca. Copies will be enclosed, from which your Majesty will
understand the condition of the fleet made up in Yndia for Maluco,
and its need of aid. Your Majesty will also learn from the report
of Captain Antonio Brito Fogaca and of Father Andres Pereyra of
the Society of Jesus, who brought the letters, that although the
fleet to which the viceroy refers in his letter set sail from Yndia,
it put into harbor in distress and part of it was lost, as is made
plain from a statement by the said Captain Brito, of which a copy is
also enclosed. A great reduction of the strength of the fleet must
of course have resulted; and we considered the importance of the
undertaking and the great service that would be done by it to our
Lord God, and which your Majesty would receive from its success,
since the king of Terrenate is the principal defender in these
regions, of the accursed sect of Mahoma. We considered these things
and were moved by the disturbances to which your Majesty's vassals
are subjected by the necessity of preparing a defense against the
enemies of our true law--especially against the English and the
Dutch, with whom the Moros make regular treaties and alliances,
not only for the commercial advantages thus obtained, but for their
favor and assistance against us. We also took into consideration
your Majesty's commands and decrees to the effect that when occasion
should arise we should give aid and succor to the vassals of your
Majesty in the states of Yndia, _as appears from the royal decree_
[5] [_underlined in original_] of which also a copy is enclosed. The
whole matter was considered and discussed in two councils of war,
held with the Audiencia, the master-of-camp, and the captains; and it
was agreed that for the present the expedition to Mindanao and the
occupation of that island should be given up, together with all the
preparations made or about to be made therefor; and that aid should
be sent to the said fleet, as the more important matter, in the manner
laid down in the formal votes of the councils of war, _copies whereof
are enclosed [underlined in original]_, together with a memorandum of
the forces sent. I have had a ship of your Majesty's made ready, that
there may be no lack of what is requisite. In it may be transported
the soldiery, the provisions, and the rest; and assistance will
be given by the other vessels, which will supply what is not taken
in the ship. It has already been despatched to the town of Areualo,
since on that island (namely, Panay) are to be collected and prepared
the greater part of the said supplies. Since the expedition seemed
to me of the importance that I have ascribed to it, I was unwilling
to entrust the despatch of this reenforcement to anyone but myself;
and to attend to it with the greatest care, promptitude, and haste,
I depart today for the said town of Areualo, which is ninety leagues
from this town of Manila. While there, I shall give all my energy
to the matter, that not an hour of time may be lost. The result that
can and should follow is in God's hands. Should it be the contrary of
what we desire, life in this archipelago will be attended with many
hardships. When the expedition is despatched, I shall visit the fort
in Octon, which is the one at Areualo, and thence I shall proceed to
Cebu; and in both places I shall give the necessary directions for
their security. Since those places are the two capitals of Pintados,
from which the Indians of these provinces receive aid and protection,
it is essential that those positions should be properly prepared and
garrisoned. [_In the margin_: "Let a copy of this section and of the
summary sent be transmitted to his Majesty, and let him be informed
of the diligence displayed, in order that his Majesty may know of the
sending of the reenforcements, and of the friendly relations between
the Portuguese and the Castilians in the Filipinas."]

From the very day on which Captain Brito arrived, which was the seventh
of last September, he began to give orders for the despatch of his
fleet. Since the weather has been unfavorable to navigation to Maluco,
he has not been able hitherto to depart. Now that the Bendavales
[_i.e._, southwest winds] are moderating, and all is quiet, and so
favorable that unless there is a monsoon, as the Portuguese call it,
nothing is lacking, it seemed best to me to make all possible haste
with them, as your Majesty will learn by the report which I send;
so that, if there be any delay, it may be known that it has not been
by my fault. I wished to make this statement to your Majesty, so that
you might give orders to be informed in the matter because of what may
happen in Terrenate. In my opinion the coming of a fleet from Yndia to
Maluco incurs the difficulties of which I wrote to your Majesty from
Mexico. The voyage is long and dangerous for galleys and galliots;
and the worst is, that the enemy knows that they are remaining three
or four months in Ambueno, waiting for favorable weather. Hence I fear
that evil results may follow, because the troops and other requisites
for defense may be made ready in advance by the islands subject to
Terrenate and by the other friends of their sect.

In these islands there are many veterans who have done good
service. Some are sick or wounded; and since there is here no
occupation or support for them all, and since they are at such a
distance from your Majesty that they cannot come before you to ask that
you will show them favor in return for their services, some suffer
the extremity of want, and feel greatly discontented and discouraged
at seeing themselves in such misery, without anyone to turn to for
relief. Hence it seems that it would be just if they were to receive
rewards and gifts as your Majesty commands, and as is done in Espana
for those who come from other regions to ask for such bounty. Inasmuch
as affairs of greater consequence are entrusted to me, I beg your
Majesty to be pleased to give me authority to aid such persons from
the royal treasury of these islands, bestowing upon them annually such
an amount as their service to your Majesty shall have deserved. I beg
also for authority to give some false musters to such as deserve them,
that they may be able to live and maintain themselves. Such a course,
in addition to being worthy of your Majesty's greatness, will have
the important effect of animating the others to do good service on
occasion, stimulated as they will be by the hope of reward. Our Lord
protect the Catholic person of your Majesty in the happiness necessary
to the good of Christendom. Manila, the twenty-sixth of October, 1602.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

[_Endorsed_: "Manila. To his Majesty; Don Pedro de Acuna, the
[twenty-sixth] of October. Let it be seen if this is a duplicate,
and if the original has been filed." "Filed and registered
within. Let attention be paid to the part on which a consultation
is directed." "Two sections have already been epitomized, and were
sent on to the council of war in Valladolid, on the twenty-eighth of
June, 1605."]



PRINCIPAL POINTS IN REGARD TO THE TRADE OF THE FILIPINAS


First Point

_The quantity of merchandise which may be traded with; and that which,
contrary to the prohibition, is brought from the Western Indias to
the Filipinas._

By decrees of his Majesty, of January 11, 93, and of July 9 and 5, 95,
the trade of the Western Indias with China and the Filipinas Islands
is prohibited. It is only permitted therein that the citizens of the
Filipinas may trade with Nueva Espana; and that two ships, each of no
more than three hundred toneladas, shall sail from Nueva Espana every
year, in which may be sent 250,000 pesos of Tepuzque [6] in coin,
and which may carry back the proceeds thereof in merchandise, which,
under fixed penalties, shall not exceed another 250,000 pesos--that
is, in all, 500,000 pesos.

Notwithstanding these prohibitions, and although the same is also
commanded by other decrees to be strictly observed, two million reals
are usually taken out of the Indias for the Filipinas, according to
advices from the viceroy of Nueva Espana, and from Senor Don Bernardino
de Avellaneda.


Second Point

_To whom it is permitted to trade and traffic in the Filipinas
Islands._

By the aforesaid decree, it is permitted solely to the citizens of
the said islands, for the space of six years. This license is not to
be renewed, and trade and commerce is unqualifiedly prohibited to any
other person whatsoever of the Western Indias, under the penalty of
confiscation of his merchandise.

Nevertheless, under cover of commissions, the citizens of both Piru
and Nueva Espana engage in trade, and they send their money in the
ships going from Nueva Espana--some registered, and some secretly.


Third Point

_That Chinese merchandise be not brought to Piru._

By the same decree it is ordered that the merchandise brought to Nueva
Espana from the Filipinas be not taken to Piru and Tierra Firme; and
that the goods which had already been brought be disposed of within
four years.

By another decree of the same date, like commands were given; and that
the merchandise brought to Nueva Espana be either consumed there or
sent to Espana.

Nevertheless, this merchandise is taken to Piru under pretense of being
that of Castilla. Hence arise many difficulties, and the commerce
of Espana with Piru and Tierra Firme is ceasing, and merchandise
from Espana is not sent to Piru. If this be not checked within a few
years, it is agreed by all that the trade of Espana in merchandise
with Tierra Firme, Piru, and Nueva Espana will cease.


Fourth Point

_The ships which must be used in the trade, to whom they shall belong,
and what has been permitted by the viceroys._

By the decree of January 11, 93, it is permitted that for this trade
two ships, each of no more than three hundred toneladas, may sail
annually from Nueva Espana to China. They may bring in return the
property which is to come, and no ships belonging to private persons
shall be sent. There shall be three ships, in order that one may remain
at the port of Acapulco for repairs. They will sail at the expense of
his Majesty, and the cost will be paid by their freight-charges and
the cargoes that they carry. This order was altered by the viceroy,
the administration of two ships having been given to private persons in
99, for this trade, with the power of appointing the officers thereof,
with salary, and license to take freight, as will be stated later
under the twelfth point.


Fifth Point

_The appointment of the commanders and officers of said ships, and
their number; the expenses incurred by them; and the question whether
it will be expedient to reduce their salaries._

By the decree of his Majesty referred to in the letter of January
11, 93, sent to Gomez Perez das Marinas, governor of the Filipinas,
permission is given to the viceroy of Nueva Espana to appoint the
pilots and officers of the ships bound for the Filipinas.

Complaint is now made of this, from the islands, that there is great
expense to the royal exchequer, in that the viceroys, in order that
there may be offices in which to place their followers, multiply
those of the ships; and, although they have the right to appoint one
pilot to a ship, they appoint a captain-general and many accompanying
him, an admiral, and many captains of infantry, a sargento-mayor, a
royal sub-lieutenant, sub-lieutenants of the companies, and a royal
alguazil. All these are persons of little experience, who are going
to seek their fortunes in the Filipinas at his Majesty's expense;
and they deprive the citizens of their offices.

Information is given, by a letter from the fiscal of the Filipinas,
that but one pilot is sufficient for the ships; that the troops should
be under the command of the captain or master of the ship, without
increase of salary to said captain or master. Thus the aforesaid
officers of the troops may be dispensed with, and one gunner suffices
for each piece or every two pieces of artillery.


Sixth Point

_The losses of ships which have been employed in the Filipinas trade,
and the cause thereof._

Through news brought by the ship "Santa Potenciana" in the year
601, it seems that the ships "San Geronimo," and "Santa Margarita,"
which sailed in the year 600, lost their masts in a storm; and the
"Santa Margarita" drifted to the island of the Ladrones, and the
"San Geronimo" to Luzon, near Catanduanes. Both were driven ashore
in February, 601, without being able to save themselves. This loss
is attributed by some to disagreement among the officers, and by
others to the late sailing of the ships, and to a lack of sailors,
and (what is more nearly correct) to the general overloading of the
vessels. The ship "Santo Tomas" was lost also on the voyage out, near
the channel at Catanduanes; the hulk was lost with some supplies,
small wares, and two millions or more of silver, besides the 500,000
pesos which were allowed to be carried.


Seventh Point

_What property may be taken to the Filipinas, and where it goes._

By the sixth point it appears that in the ship "Sant Tomas" alone,
which was lost at the entrance of Catanduanes, there were over two
millions besides the 500,000 pesos allowed.

This and all else which is carried is placed in the power of the
infidels, who receive it as the price of the Chinese merchandise;
and it can therefore be returned neither to the Indias nor to these
kingdoms. Silks, damasks, taffetas, needlework, hand-mills, cotton
stuffs, earthenware, wax, nails, and other merchandise of little
profit are carried to those regions, thereby depriving his Majesty
of his dues.


Eighth Point

_The discontent of all the islands, on account of depriving them of
the profits which might be had from the purchase of this merchandise;
and the lading of it which his Majesty has granted, by his decrees,
to the citizens of Peru and Nueva Espana._

The citizens of the islands, except one here and there, are very
poor. They wish to abandon the islands, as there are no means of gain
or profit except in trade and commerce. They are deprived of this by
the citizens of Mexico and Peru, who bring over a great quantity of
money, with which they do not hesitate to purchase merchandise at
excessive prices. Then, in order to ship these goods, they hasten
to pay high rates for the tonnage, and thus succeed in occupying
the space which belongs to the citizens; and when the latter ship
their merchandise it is so little that it is not sufficient for their
support. On the other hand, the Portuguese pass from Acapulco to China
with their money, and do not return to Nueva Espana. They either
remain there, sending cargoes therefrom, or they send merchandise
to Portugal, by way of the ports where the Portuguese trade, thus
defrauding the native-born citizens of their rights.


Ninth Point

_That the royal decrees prohibiting trade with the Filipinas are
not observed, chiefly on account of the opinion of Doctor Sacedo,
a citizen of Mexico, that the violation of royal decrees involves
the penalty thereof, but is not a mortal sin. Thus the citizens
of Mexico may carry on commerce in the Filipinas, and those of the
Filipinas may invest money which is sent to them, without burdening
their consciences, or being obliged to make restitution._

The opinion of Doctor Juan de Sacedo, a citizen of Mexico, replying to
the decree of January 11, 93, states that this decree does not show
clearly, and with the explicit statement necessary, that it was his
Majesty's intention to bind strictly to an eternal punishment those on
whom he imposes a pecuniary penalty; or that by its transgression are
obligations to make restitution laid, in conscience, _ipso jure non
expectata judicis sententia_, upon the people of Mexico who trade with
the islands, or consign their property to citizens of Manila--either
goods sent in exchange for the merchandise of the latter, or money
which they remit to these--although both of these are prohibited. If
these things are conceded, they make a profit and have the means of
support. The reply thereto is incumbent upon his Majesty, from whom
the decree emanated. Until his Majesty shall make further declaration,
the decree is purely a penal ordinance, and nothing more. It involves
only the penalty and condemnation to which the transgressor is exposed,
and does not burden the conscience with mortal sin or restitution. For
that, it is necessary that there be an explicit declaration--one
conforming to the most lenient interpretation, which avoids fetters on
men's consciences, and constraining transgressors by only a temporary
penalty, and not by restitution or eternal punishment.

The religious Orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis at Manila,
and the cabildo of the metropolitan church of that city, ask that
this matter be adjusted. The religious assert an opinion contrary
to the above, saying that a mortal sin is involved. They beg that
his Majesty declare his royal will, and provide a person who shall
enforce obedience to the royal decrees and punish the transgressors.

The cabildo of the church declares that no one in the islands will
be sufficiently powerful to enforce the decrees, unless his Holiness
would undertake to decide what the faith teaches, regarding the
authority which the mandatory as well as the penal laws possess in
this matter. They request, therefore, that effective measures be
taken by his Holiness in declaring and deciding the Catholic truth
in this particular; and whether it will be a mortal sin to transgress
the laws of the kingdom when that which is decreed is something very
useful to the commonwealth. [7]


Tenth Point

_His Majesty has granted favor to the citizens of the islands, by
permitting two ships, each of three hundred toneladas, to sail annually
from Nueva Espana to the Filipinas; and they may carry therein from
the Filipinas such property as is to be transported. There shall be
three ships, in order that one may remain in dry dock at the port
of Acapulco. They shall sail on his Majesty's account, paying the
expenses thus incurred from their own earnings._

The viceroy and Don Pedro de Acuna, governor of the Filipinas, are
of the opinion that this tonnage should all be utilized, so that
each ship may carry three hundred toneladas of lading, six hundred
toneladas between the two ships; and these should be the toneladas
of the Southern Sea, which are larger than those of the Northern
Sea. There should be three ships, all alike and of the same model,
each containing four hundred short toneladas of the Northern Sea,
which amount to three hundred. The citizens of Manila shall lade on
each ship two hundred toneladas and no more, which consequently will
amount to six hundred toneladas in all the ships, in order that the
goods may be distributed to better advantage, and the ships may carry
more mariners.

Under this arrangement the expenses are greater, as there is one ship
more, as well as the increased cost of the escorts of soldiers, and the
artillery for the protection of the ships. Therefore the viceroy orders
that henceforth in the Southern Sea, instead of paying thirty-two
pesos on every tonelada, there shall be paid thirty-two ducados on
every tonelada of stuffs coming from the Filipinas. This increase will
amount to 12,000 pesos, more or less, with which may be defrayed the
expenses of the infantry who return as guard of the ships and property
which come from the Filipinas Islands, thereby assuring greater safety.


Eleventh Point

_That ships be bought on his Majesty's account; and those which have
already been bought._

Until the new ships shall be built, the viceroy has supplied the line
with ships in place of those which were lost. He commanded one to
be bought from the mariscal Gabriel de Ribera. That and the "Santa
Potenciana" were conveyed [to the islands] by Don Pedro de Acuna;
also two ships from Piru were in his convoy, moderately laden with
freight. Grace was granted, in the name of his Majesty, for some
permissions for carrying money and a quantity of freight. This was
given as to private persons, but not that the ships should be navigated
on their account or under their administration, or that they should
exercise any more authority than that of a passenger. This did not
deprive the city of Manila of any of the six hundred toneladas which
could be shipped, but merely utilized the surplus space of the ship,
thereby doing no damage to the citizens of Manila.


Twelfth Point

_That the ships of the Filipinas line may be assigned by contract._

The viceroy made the experiment in the year 99, of giving two ships
in trust to Don Fernando de Castro and Alonso de Torres, with the
privilege of appointing officers, a salary of one thousand pesos, and
permission to place in the cargo twenty or twenty-five toneladas of
their own goods; they were obliged to give bonds, and to keep correct
accounts of the profits and expenses. If the profits should exceed
the expenses, the excess should belong to his Majesty; if the costs
should amount to more than the profits, the trustee must supply the
deficit from his own purse.

The officials of his Majesty at the port of Acapulco oppose this plan,
and say that it is very unprofitable, and to the injury of his Majesty
and the royal exchequer, in that the trustees attend only to their
own profit. It is the universal opinion that the "Santa Margarita"
did not come here on account of having been sent out thus in trust.


Thirteenth Point

_That a limit be placed on the merchandise brought from China._



Fourteenth Point

_That there be trading and voyaging to Eastern India._

There are also the general points, that the commerce of Nueva Espana
with Piru and Tierra Firme in silks and Chinese merchandise be
prohibited, without any discrimination of persons, as being a great
damage and injury to the trade of Espana and defrauding the royal dues.

The licentiate _Alonso Fernandez de Castro_



Various Documents Relating to Commerce

Rule 45 on the leasing of the import duties of Sevilla, and likewise
the ordinances made by the prior and consuls [8] of Mexico in regard
to this trade of the Filipinas, are to be considered by the assembly
discussing the trade of the Filipinas, in order to decide what is
best to be done.


Letter from Fray Martin Ignacio de Loyola

_Jesus_

As I could not be present, I have written out my answer in my memorial
on the Filipinas, and it accompanies the present letter, by which your
Lordship will see what I advocate. I assert that, beyond all doubt,
what I here point out would be the only remedy.

This morning when I went to receive your Lordship's blessing, and
offer my respects, it was already late; and I believe that I shall
not be able to do it tomorrow. Therefore I beseech your blessing
in this, as one whom I hold in so great esteem, and to whom I owe
so much. Upon all occasions I shall advise you of my affairs and
matters of importance. As from one from whom I have experienced it,
I shall receive all kindness. May our Lord preserve your Lordship,
as I desire. From San Diego. Your Lordship's chaplain,

_Fray Martin Ynacio de Loyola_

[_Endorsed_: "No date."]


Opinion of Fray Martin Ignacio de Loyola

In order that the Yndias may not be ruined, they should be dependent
upon and subordinate to Espana, and there should be close relationship
between the different parts.

This subordination and relationship consists in two things: first,
in what concerns the government--political, spiritual, and temporal,
and therefore it is advisable that the viceroys, governors, bishops,
vicars, and commissaries-general should be sent from Espana. True,
those who have gone from these parts and fulfil their duties properly
there, should be rewarded since they have worked, and merit this
favor more than those going from Espana.

By reason of the lack of this subordination and relationship, we
know that many kingdoms which were converted to the faith returned to
paganism. A good example of this is furnished in Eastern Yndia, where
the apostle St. Thomas converted innumerable souls in the kingdom
of Bisnaga, Cuylan, Cochin, and Caratuete. But after the death of
St. Thomas, as there was no communication either with Palestina or
Roma, in three or four generations there was not one Christian. Until
now, for two hundred years Babylonian bishops have gone there; and
now there are many Portuguese.

The second thing essential to the relationship between the Yndias
and Espana is that there should be commerce and trade between those
kingdoms. This is extremely needful, for, if commerce should cease,
then communication would cease; and, should the latter cease, within a
few generations there would be no Christians there. That which causes
most inquiry to this commerce and communication, is the diversion
of the commerce between the Yndias and Espana to other kingdoms,
not belonging to his Majesty, but heathen and pagan; such is now the
case between Nueva Espana, Peru, and the Filipinas, which receive
annually two million pesos of silver; all of this wealth passes into
the possession of the Chinese, and is not brought to Espana, to the
consequent loss of the royal duties, and injury to the inhabitants of
the Filipinas; and the greatest loss, with the lapse of time, will
be that rebounding upon the Yndias themselves. All the projects and
prohibitions that have been devised to remedy this loss serve but to
inflict still greater injury, and to cause universal ruin.

As long as the viceroy of Nueva Espana continues to appoint the
captains and officials of the vessels sailing to the Filipinas,
the fitting reform cannot be instituted; for, it is clear that, as
such officials go from Mexico, they will not hesitate to take their
money and that of their friends; and even if other prohibitions may
be issued, they will not cease to do so.

The fitting remedy for this matter consists in having a consulate in
Manila, and in providing there the said officers, and in assigning to
each citizen of the islands the amount of goods that he may export. By
this method, a complete remedy for this evil will be provided, and
the inhabitants of the islands, for their own benefit and interest,
should endeavor to keep the trade themselves, and prohibit trading
or sending consignments of silver from Mexico or Peru.

The trading in, and consignments of silver to, the Filipinas by the
inhabitants of Mexico causes great detriment to the inhabitants of
the islands; for, because of the Mexicans sending so much silver,
the price of Chinese silks and merchandise has risen, so that, while
for twenty years, when only the inhabitants of the islands were
permitted to trade, they were wont to gain one thousand per cent,
now they do not gain one hundred, whence results much resentment in
the Filipinas. Therefore it is most certain that, if the trade be
conceded to them alone, with a just limitation, they will desire to
be the only gainers; and hence will endeavor to see that no Mexicans
send any silver, and will execute whatever penalty his Majesty imposes
on the Mexicans. This they will do, because clearly much advantage
will accrue to the islanders thereby, by the lowering of the price
of the merchandise in Manila and a rise in Mexico. If this reason be
examined closely, my assertion will be quite clear.

I maintain the same in regard to the port of Buenos Ayres; and what
has been ordained but lately I think was by divine ordination; for
hitherto, notwithstanding the prohibition that there should be no
trade, ships entered and cleared, and traded between Brasil and Potosi,
and between Potosi and Brasil and Espana. And, although six judges
were sent to enforce this prohibition, they were unable to effect
a remedy, until the governor, Don Diego de Baldes, gave permission,
as he considered it an extreme necessity, and the ultimate remedy,
for the citizens of Buenos Ayres to reap some slight portion of
the profits--although he erred in this, as it was done without his
Majesty's permission. However, now that this license is confirmed,
the matter, in so far as it touches this port, is remedied; for the
amount of flour which they take cannot be of sufficient consideration
to damage the commerce of Tierra Firme; and the citizens, as they
profit thereby, will prevent anyone from trading outside of the port,
and will execute the penalties imposed by his Majesty on those who
try to trade. I relate all the above because I think great things
will result therefrom to the service of our Lord and of his Majesty.

_Fray Martin Ynacio de Loyola_,
bishop of Rio de la Plata.

[_Endorsed_: "+ Memorial from the bishop of Rio de la Plata, in which
he declares what reform should be effected in the commerce of the
Filipinas and Mexico; and asserts that the action of the council in
Buenos Ayres has had very good effect."]


Extracts of Two Letters from the Conde de Monterrey

The merchants of the corporation of the city of Los Reyes, Peru,
declare that, in the commerce between that kingdom and this one of
[Nueva?] Espana, they regard it as so necessary, that should it
cease, it would mean complete destruction. On this account it must be
preserved, and to this end all the means possible must be sought out.

Further, they declare that the merchandise brought to the kingdom of
Peru from China is not the cause of this decline of commerce between
the Yndias and Espana, but the inadequate regulation of the war and
merchant fleets, and the winter seasons, which are the utter ruin and
destruction of the merchants. This is plainly evident, since before
the wars with Ynglatierra, when this matter was properly attended to,
the commerce was extensive and profitable--although there was no need
of so much merchandise as there is now, when the population of Peru
is so much larger than at that time--and the merchants not only of
Espana but of Peru were amassing wealth. But now they are not doing
so, for the reason that is here named. All is going to destruction:
payments cannot be met when due; and duties are excessive, for in
order to send money to Espana, the shippers pay seven and one-half
per cent for the galleons to guard the money, and when goods are
shipped from Sevilla, they pay as much as three and one-half per
cent. The principal cause of this loss is the time [required to
transact business]; for from the day when the money leaves Callao
(the port of Lima) until it returns in merchandise to the same point
there is an interval of at least three years, counting the winters;
and before they can secure returns from the merchandise another year,
or even a year and one-half, must pass, for not all the merchandise
can be sold for cash. Consequently this money can gain its profit only
once in four years, when it could, as formerly, be thus handled twice
in that time. And however great the amount of the profit, it cannot
approach that of the two profits [in the four years], especially with
the loss involved in the aforesaid duties for the fleets, and the new
impositions of duty for the armed vessels that carry, in the South Sea,
the money from Lima to Panama--and this is in addition to the duties
paid to his Majesty. Thus it results that the merchants of Lima, who
were formerly very rich and had ample credit, have become debtors;
and this is the reason why the merchants of Sevilla do not make the
same profits as formerly. Therefore there is a cry against Chinese
goods, as they imagine that to be the cause of their loss. This is
evident likewise, because the commerce existing formerly between
Peru and Nueva Espana was very slight and now has increased greatly,
and the Peruvian merchants prefer to go to Nueva Espana to make their
investments rather than to Espana, because they can make the voyage
to Nueva Espana in one year; and therefore can make many investments
with their money. And although it is true that they bring Chinese
merchandise in their shipments from that which arrives in that kingdom
of Nueva Espana, still the greater part of the cloth bought by them is
from Espana. Although this costs them more, the shortness of the time
is of so great importance to them that they consider it more profitable
than going to Espana, for the reason expressed above regarding the
delay in time. Thus, with suitable arrangements regarding galleons
and merchant-vessels, commerce is prosperously carried on.

Further, they declare that the kingdom of Peru has greatly increased,
during the last twenty years, in its Spanish population, both in
Spaniards born there, and in those who have gone thither from Espana,
so that there are at least three times as many people. All these
people live very luxuriously. All wear silk, and of the most fine
and costly quality. The gala dresses and clothes of the women are
so many and so excessive, that in no other kingdom of the world are
found such; so that if four merchant-vessels went to Peru annually,
all the cloth goods would be sold, as well as everything else of the
cargo. Because vessels go there only at long intervals, the people make
use of goods from Nueva Espana and China. However, in the case of the
Chinese goods, they are worn only by the very poor, and the negroes
and mulattoes (both male and female), sambahigos, [9] many Indians,
and half-breeds, and this in great number. The silks of China are much
used also in the churches of the Indians, which are thus adorned and
made decent; while before, because of inability to buy the silks of
Espana, the churches were very bare. As long as goods come in greater
abundance, the kingdom will feel less anxiety, and the cheaper will
be the goods. The increase to the royal exchequer will be greater,
since the import duties and customs increase in proportion to the
merchandise; and this increase cannot take place, if the fleets are
laid up for the winter, for by this delay the merchant-vessels cannot
be despatched annually--on which, and upon their money not lying idle,
depend the profits of the merchants.

Therefore the merchants of Peru declare that commerce should be opened
with China, and that they should be permitted to send one million
[ducados] annually in two vessels, and that this million bring back
merchandise to the same port of Callao. This merchandise will yield
six millions, of which ten per cent, paid to his Majesty, will amount
to six hundred thousand ducados. And if the license for one million
is not given, it should be for one-half, the duties on which would
be three hundred thousand ducados.

Further they declare that, if this be not conceded to them, they
should be permitted to buy and carry to Peru the merchandise taken from
China to Nueva Espana. There the duties on this merchandise would be
imposed, and they would pay seven per cent on them, notwithstanding
that only five per cent is paid in Nueva Espana. Paying seven per
cent on the merchandise from China bought in Mexico, it will be seen
of what little importance the four to six millions of ducados that
Sevilla pays to his Majesty are to the royal estate, because it does
not consent that goods from China may enter Peru.

And I assert that, should his Majesty ask me for my opinion, I would
tell him that, if it is true that the Chinese merchandise can in
no way injure the commerce of Espana, while its benefit to Peru is
certain--especially to the poor and common people, of whom there is
a great number--and since it seems desirable, for the adornment of
the churches of the Indians, that there should be goods from China, my
opinion would be that license should be given for only one-half million
(ordering under heavy penalties that this sum be not exceeded), to be
used in the following manner: Four hundred thousand ducados' worth of
merchandise should be brought, and one hundred thousand worth of gold
bullion. The latter is likewise merchandise in China; but traders do
not like to take it as it yields them no more than fifty per cent,
while on the other merchandise they make five hundred per cent and
upward. Thus if this silver should be allowed to them, they would
obtain gold, and this one-half million would yield three millions
in Peru from merchandise which will be worth three hundred thousand
ducados in import duties to his Majesty, besides the other dues imposed
on the aforesaid goods. Thus the customs will increase, and, as said,
these five hundred thousand ducados need not to be considered, as it
is thought that this amount cannot diminish the commerce with Espana;
for every year the merchandise of Peru yields six or seven millions,
and if the trading fleets and armed galleys are sent at the same
time, much more money will go to Espana, which on this account does
not go there. These five hundred thousand ducados have, in previous
years, always gone from China to Peru by way of Mexico; and as the
merchants say truly, the winterings and increased duties and expenses
of the winterings are causing the commerce to deteriorate. This
is proved by the above arguments of the merchants, evidently cited
from actual facts. Thus, if the merchants were provided with money,
and were able to dispose of their cargoes every two years, and with
the proceeds thereof begin new commercial enterprises, they would not
be only exhausted and ruined, but rather they would be placed in easy
circumstances and the country would be relieved from its difficulties
by the gains thus made. With more goods, it is evident that the royal
exchequer would benefit more as aforesaid. Therefore it would not be
advisable to prohibit all commerce with China.

And at the very least, the five hundred thousand ducados should be
granted, so that the merchandise taken to Mexico from China can
be purchased in Mexico. Collecting in Peru the customs on these
Chinese goods purchased in Mexico, seven per cent would be levied
thereon, which plus the five per cent paid in Mexico, makes twelve per
cent. The kingdom would feel greatly aggrieved if they were deprived
entirely of this commerce. And if Mexico continues to have trade with
China, a considerable quantity of Chinese goods will, however many
precautions will be taken, be hidden in the Mexican ships for Peru;
while but very little of it will be seized, and his Majesty will
lose almost four hundred thousand ducados, because the goods do not
enter publicly. Therefore it would be advisable that this license be
granted perpetually, with the above limitation.

+

A great lack of money has made itself felt in this colony; and,
after having thoroughly investigated the cause thereof, it has been
ascertained that it proceeds in part from the very great sum taken
out annually for China. It is also attributed in part to the issue of
the money from the treasury--not that it has been less than in other
years, but it has always been much more limited than it might be,
and than is advisable for a commerce that is increasing in extent
and value so much as is that of this kingdom. And since it would
be greatly to the advantage of the treasurer to coin more money,
they impute to him that, by not spending something at present, he is
thus niggardly in making the necessary provision, and that by this he
loses much and the state more. These two difficulties are reenforced
by another--that since there have hitherto been, for various reasons,
very few traders who were inclined to buy silver from private persons
and send it to the mint to have it coined on their account, it has
resulted that four or five men have made themselves the masters of
this traffic; consequently there has been a great increase this year
in the loss incurred by those who sell their silver in order to be
furnished with coin. All this has been observed at the time of the
vessels and trading fleet; and it is a matter of much moment, in which
it has seemed best to me to inform your Majesty, inasmuch as I have
undertaken to institute a reform. This, please God, will be made with
energy, as in breaking open a package. When the correctives usual
in this region (which are mild) do not suffice, I will propose to
your Majesty other and more severe measures, which might be adopted
by the Council, and one might be of sufficient advantage to your
Majesty. However, it were not advisable to discuss this, but that
the necessity of the public government demands it and invokes it,
since only at such times can it be called just or used as an argument.

I consider your Majesty's permit in regard to the money going to the
Philipinas as liberal and beyond the excess of what is carried as
contraband, which is a very large amount. It is almost impossible to
put a stop to this, notwithstanding that I do not give permission,
expressed or tacit, in that commerce for one real more than the
amount allowed; and I have ordered vigorous investigations on this
point at the time of the despatch of the vessels. But if it is easy
to hide the money, there is little to fear in the penalties, although
orders are given that they be executed. Accordingly, in case of the
cloth that can be brought to and unloaded at Acapulco, I think that,
as it has bulk, it can be locked up in some warehouse and examined,
or (which would be more efficacious), that no limit be placed on the
use of this class of goods in Nueva Espana, so that those persons whom
the viceroy considers needy might not be restricted in wearing it. I
fear greatly that in the case of the money, as it is so easy to hide,
no sufficient reform can be instituted for this evil, as I see that
there is no remedy in other things of like nature, either in the armed
ships or the trading vessels from those kingdoms. There, however,
is less damage; for this is all in money which goes to infidels and
never returns, and thus militates against this country, and that
[Espana], and greatly weakens the commerce of both. I recently made
arrangements with Don Pedro de Acuna (as I wrote to your Majesty on
another occasion) for making a personal inspection at Acapulco; it
was decided that I should reject the money, and, because there have
never been confiscations that cause fear, that some part of each one's
share should be actually applied to the treasury, and that the same
should be done in Manila. Since letters received from there state
that goods are very dear because of the great quantities of money
that go there, it must be that this inspection was not promptly made;
and I fear that there is too much laxity there. For it would appear
that those islands should grow rich with the increase of money,
and that if they buy at high prices they must sell the goods here
at high prices; and on this account regard and favor for that land
must not give the governor and Audiencia opportunity to take severe
measures toward this region. I intend to use rigor at the coming of
the ships this year; for this is demanded by the prevalent excesses
and our actual experience of the difficulties that result therefrom.

[_Endorsed _: "Copies of parts of letters from the Conde de Monterey,
[10] written to his Majesty, May 15, 1602."]



Points in the Petition from the Filipinas Islands in Regard to Their
Commerce

_First point_

That the commanders, captains, and officers of the vessels plying on
the line, be inhabitants of the said islands, and not of Nueva Espana,
so that the losses, frauds, and injuries that they cause in loading
their goods, and in the transportation by the ships of enormous sums
of pesos in consignment and trust, may cease. This would save for his
Majesty's treasury the salaries paid the officers of the vessels,
and would benefit the islands. The citizens of the islands would
receive such posts, when it should pertain to them, as a reward for
their services, as the governors have been ordered to grant them to
meritorious men.

The bishops of Paraguay and Nueva Segovia declare in information
given on this matter, at the order of the Council, that for its remedy
and the aid of the islands, it would be very advisable to establish
a consulate in Manila; and that the [royal] ships, together with
the vessels of the merchants, should go on its account. His Majesty
should be given the hulls of the ships, and the masters and officials
appointed in the said islands, to whom money from Mexico should not
be committed, nor should it be given them in trust. The expense caused
to his Majesty by them would thus be saved.

_Second point_

That the governors be ordered not to sell tonnage in the ships plying
in the line to Nueva Espana, no matter what expenses are incurred.

The bishops assert that it is not advisable to sell any space,
but that, in case of great necessity, it be done by the consulate;
it would be better, however, not to sell it, for if it is sold,
then there will be no freight-money for navigating the vessels.

_Third point_

That the viceroy of Nueva Espana be ordered not to give permission for
any Piruvian merchants to go to the islands from Piru, under pretext
that they are going to become citizens of the islands--because of the
injuries that the islands receive therefrom; because of those merchants
carrying, as they do, large sums of money belonging to themselves and
others, and to companies; and because they only come to invest the same
and return. On this account the prices of merchandise have risen more
than fifty per cent. After investing their money, the commanders and
masters, because of a money consideration, take these merchants back
to Nueva Espana, without it being possible to institute any reform.

The bishops say that it is advisable that they should not go [to
the islands] unless for the purpose of becoming actual citizens,
for there the difficulties referred to in this point exist.

_Fourth point_

That the fund for the pay of the troops be placed in the treasury on a
separate account, and that the said troops be paid therefrom, and from
no other account, in order to avoid the disadvantages that result,
and the many offenses and injuries committed by the soldiers under
stress of their necessities and the opportunities that arise. This
would provide a source for what money might be necessary, not only
for the equipment of ships, and provision of ammunition and other
military supplies, but for the pay of the soldiers, which is now
spent in other things.

The bishops declare this to be inconvenient, and that the half-real
which is given for the prebendaries should also be placed in the
treasury on a separate account.

_Fifth point_

That the cabildo, magistracy, and regimiento of Manila be ordered to
allot annually the lading of the vessels to the citizens of Manila,
for much harm has resulted to the citizens from the governor allotting
it--the lading being made illegally, and the governor having allotted
it to many of his servants and relatives to the prejudice of the
citizens and those born in this country. By this method the allotment
would be honestly made without wrong to any one.

The bishops say that if his Majesty orders the consulate to be
established in Manila, in such case it would be advisable for
the consuls to make the allotment; and the governor cannot feel
aggrieved thereby, since the consuls must navigate the vessels with
the freight-money. However, if there are no consuls, it should be
determined that the cabildo make the allotment, even though the
governor be aggrieved.

The licentiate _Alonso Fernandez de Castro_


Various Memoranda

The question of limiting and restricting the trade between the
Philipmas and Mexico has been discussed recently, and two points
touching this have been determined: one, that it is not advisable for
this trade to take place by way of Yndia; the other that it is not
expedient to prohibit all trade between Pyru and Nueva Espana. There
still remain five other points to be decided concerning this matter:
(1) How many vessels shall take part in this trade. (2) How many
toneladas shall be allowed. (3) What persons shall be permitted to
take part in this trade. (4) Whether those who go from Mexico to the
Philippinas shall be permitted to return. (5) Whether the sending of
Sangleys to Manila be limited.

_Filipinas_

To lessen the coinage of pieces of four and of eight reals. [11]
It should be noted that 200,000 and 400,000 ducados have been minted.

To grant a portion of what is confiscated to the informer.

To regulate the merchant-fleets.

To increase the dues, and impose customs.

The first four sections [12] refer to what is ordained in regard to
this trade.

The fifth declares the irregularity in the appointments of officers
for this fleet.

The sixth, seventh, and eighth treat of the disadvantages which result
from not observing the ordinances, and of their violation.

From the ninth to the thirteenth and last, are given the remedies
that appear suitable for the correction of these evils.

Five points of the recent document look to the correction of illegal
acts, and aim at securing the observance of the ordinances and the
accomplishment of other things.

It is noted that the ordinances permit merchandise to be sent by way
of Rio de la Plata, which the Sevilla merchants have violently opposed.

The tranquillity of the Indians.

Other remedies proposed by the Conde de Monterrey, who states that
he will send others, showing the violations of law. This is in his
letter of May 25, of this year.

The conclusion was, the relationship between the said kingdoms,
and the increase of trade. It is readily seen that the increase in
the manufacture of wines, and in the production of grains, olives,
and other foods, and the maintenance of stock-raising by means of
the cultivation of grain--all aim at the same object.

It should be noted whether it would be advisable to forbid the
coinage of pieces of four and eight, beyond a certain number and
quantity--namely, only that necessary to supply the needs there,
and for what must be brought here.

To make arrangements for the despatch of the fleet.

To ascertain whether the bishop of Yucatan was the one who had those
contentions with the governor, and of whom the friars are talking. He
is proposed for the bishopric of Mechoacan.

_Remedies_

Considering that the trade should be preserved, and that the officials
on the ships should be inhabitants of the Filipinas, and appointed
there. That there be a consulate there, which should control the
pancada. That the coinage of money be diminished. That the third
part [of confiscated goods] go to the informer. That the duties be
increased. That if Peru be allowed to trade, it be to a limited amount;
and that dues and customs be imposed. That the trading fleets and
armed vessels act in concert. That there be a warehouse in Acapulco,
wherein to register the merchandise, and where violations of law may
be detected; and that the same be done in Manila, with goods sent
there. To forbid the use of stuffs for clothing from China.



LETTER FROM MORGA TO FELIPE III

Sire:

In the ships which came this year to these islands from Nueva Espana,
came the president, Don Pedro de Acuna, who thereupon took up the
government; and in the ships which were afterward despatched to Nueva
Espana, account was given to your Majesty of this, and of what else
occurred on all sides.

A few days afterward, the president supplied himself with ships,
military stores, and fighting men in the provinces of Pintados,
in order to go against the hostile Mindanaos and Joloans--who, with
the help of the Terrenate Moros of Maluco, are infesting them and
overrunning those islands every day, with a great deal of damage. Just
then word came from Andrea Furtado de Mendoca that with a number of
galleons and a fleet of your Majesty's, he was descending upon the
fortress of Terrenate to capture it; and conformably with a letter to
the president from Arias de Saldana, viceroy of India, which he sent
at the same time, he begged that reenforcements of vessels and some
men, which he needed, might be sent him, in order that the purpose of
the undertaking might be assured. Recognizing the great importance of
this, and considering that, if that fortress were taken, besides the
great profit from the cloves, [13] these regions would be safe from
so fierce an enemy as that which is harassing and overrunning it,
and especially that these islands would root out those Mindanaos
and Joloans--it seemed to him expedient and necessary that part of
what had been prepared for Pintados should be sent to the aforesaid
fleet. In order to carry this out well, the president decided that
he would go in person to the island of Sibu. May fervent prayers be
offered to our Lord that He may give them the good fortune which is
needed, in order that by it service may be rendered to Him, and that
of your Majesty may be entirely fulfilled.

Of the ships which this year set out from these islands for Nueva
Espana, the flagship and one other put in at these islands at the
end of four months of stormy sailing, having lightened a quantity
of merchandise and then having suffered damage to the goods, very
much to the sorrow and loss of the residents of this realm. The
commander of the flagship, Don Lope de Ulloa, a relative of the Conde
de Monterrey, and an experienced and courageous knight, thought to
make repairs in Xapon and from there, having made ready, to continue
his voyage. So he went in search of a harbor in that kingdom, in the
province of Toca, near the place where, in the year 96 just past,
the galleon "Sant Felipe" entered. The natives gave him assurances
of safety and all facilities for his departure; but when he had
entered a harbor there came a governor of Dayfusama, with a number
of fighting men--arquebusiers, musketeers, and archers. After having
given the men on the ship the same promise of security, and after
having had six Spaniards sent to Miaco with a present for Dayfusama,
[14] according to the custom of the country, he captured on land some
religious and some other Spaniards who had ventured to go out from
the ship; and then made extraordinary efforts to stop the entrance
of the harbor and to seize the ship with all its cargo. Seeing the
deceit and violence which was being committed, it became necessary
for the Spaniards to defend themselves, and to get out of the harbor
by fighting, with loss to both sides and with great difficulty; and
so, through the mercy of God, they came to these islands. When the
Japanese saw themselves deprived of the capture of the ship which they
doubtless already thought their own, we do not know what decision they
may have reached regarding those who remained on land--nor, above all,
what Dayfusama may have done. It appears only that all friendship
with these infidels is dangerous, and that at least the religious
who interfere in this, and consider it certain, allow themselves
to be deceived easily by their ardent desire to enter these lands,
which is caused by their zeal for the conversion [of the infidels];
and thus they facilitate certain matters, and are more confident in
them than is desirable.

It seemed to be necessary, considering the absence of the president
from this city and the arrival of the two ships of this expedition,
to give an account to your Majesty of what was to be known about these
matters, by way of India, in a Portuguese ship which is setting out
from here for Goa. In this I have been influenced only by what is
for the service of your Majesty and in order that your Majesty may
be informed of what is being done in these remote regions, by every
route. I beg your Majesty to pardon my boldness, and I pray our Lord
to guard your Majesty for many long years. From Manila, on the first
of December in the year 1602.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_



DOCUMENTS OF 1603


    Three Chinese mandarins at Manila. Geronimo de Salazar y
    Salcedo; May 27.
    Resignation of his office by the bishop of Nueva
    Segovia. Miguel de Benavides; July 4.
    Letters to Felipe III. Miguel de Benavides; July 5 and 6.
    Letters to Felipe III. Pedro de Acuna and others July-December.
    The Sangley insurrection. Pedro de Acuna, and others;
    December 12-23.


_Source_: All these documents are obtained from MSS. in the Archivo
general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: These documents are translated by Robert
W. Haight--except the second, by Jose M. and Clara M. Asensio.



THREE CHINESE MANDARINS AT MANILA

The licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo, fiscal for your Majesty
in the royal Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands. In the month of
February or March of each year there usually come from the kingdom
of China to this city of Manila thirty ships, and sometimes more,
with merchandise from that kingdom. This year they were detained
until the middle of May, and only fourteen ships came. In one of
them were three mandarins, who are the same as those whom we call
"governors." Three or four days before they arrived at this city,
the chief of them sent a letter to Don Pedro de Acuna, governor and
captain-general of these islands and president of the royal Audiencia
thereof. A copy of the translation of this letter will be sent with
this. In this they gave us to understand that Oyten, a Chinaman who
had been in these islands, told their king that in the port of Cavite
there was a great hill of gold which had no owner, and that the people
of that vicinity availed themselves of it to obtain a great quantity
of gold. Their king had sent him to learn the truth, for there had
been those who contradicted this; and therefore the governor should
have no apprehension, and might rest secure.

On the twenty-third of May the three mandarins landed in this city,
with many insignia of justice which they are accustomed to wear in
China, attended by alguacils, executioners, and other officers, with
wands and cords, and receiving much reverence. They had a small box
in which were carried the patents of their offices. While I was on
that day in the company of the governor, all three mandarins came
in to visit him, and we saw them coming from a window. I told the
governor that those mandarins could not be allowed to carry their
insignia of justice; but he answered me that there was nothing worth
notice in that. A short time after this, Pedro Hurtado Desquivel,
clerk of the court of the said royal Audiencia, in behalf of the
auditors thereof told the governor to take notice that he could not
consent that the mandarins should bear the insignia of justice in this
city. He answered in the same manner as he had replied to me. The
mandarins having taken up quarters in houses which were made ready
for them, I had information that they were sending thither Chinese and
flogging them, in form of justice, according to the Chinese usage. This
moved me to enter a petition in regard to it in the royal Audiencia,
demanding that this be stopped. I was ordered to give an information,
and I did so, as fully appears by the copy thereof which accompanies
this. When the governor learned of this, he was much angered at me,
and complained bitterly of me--saying that this proceeding was in
opposition to him; and that I should have first given him an account
of what I wished to petition, which I should have done very willingly
[_illegible in MS._] had I thought it of any use. But as he had seen
what occurred, it appeared to me--with the report of the Audiencia,
and what I had before said to him in regard to the mandarins not
bearing insignia of justice--that any further discussion of the
subject with the governor might be dispensed with, and that it was
my duty to petition as I did. The Audiencia took no action, because
the governor issued an act commanding that the mandarins should not
administer justice, or bear their insignia of chastisement through
the streets. The Audiencia commanded that this act be joined with the
information which I had given, and the mandarins went back to their
own country. As it appeared to me well that your Majesty should know
of this affair--of which you will find full details in the information
of which I speak--I have thought it best to give an account thereof to
your Majesty, so that your Majesty may be pleased to command that the
procedure be established in the case of mandarins coming from China
to this city, and direct in what state they are to go through the
streets; for the tokens of authority which those mandarins bore were
excessive. I have even gone so far, in order that this may be better
investigated, as to have a picture made of the style in which they
went about, a copy of which will go with this, since the brief time
prevents me from having another copy made. I have also had placed
upon it what each figure signifies, the explanations being in the
petition which I placed before the Audiencia, a copy of which goes
with the documents above mentioned.

On the twenty-ninth of April of this year it was God's will that there
should be so great a fire in this city that, within two hours, there
were burned one hundred and fifty houses, among them the best of the
city, and the thirty-two built of masonry, one of which was mine. [15]
Not having any people to help me, I could not save its contents, and
only with the greatest difficulty did I save my library. The cause
of the lack of people to aid in putting out the fire, and taking out
from several of the houses what they could, was that the governor had
ordered the gates of the cities locked so that no Chinese or Indians
could enter--although they would have been of much use, as they have
been in other fires which we have had. In the passion of my grief,
for I had lost more than six thousand pesos, I said that my house had
been burned through the lack of people and the order to shut the gates
of the city. This coming to the ears of the governor, he became angry
about this also, although he has never said anything to me about it;
for the resolution which he adopted of locking the gates could only be
based on the idea that the Chinese should not enter, lest they might
possess themselves of the city. This could have been guarded against
by letting what seemed to be a safe number of Chinese enter--as they
never carry arms, and are a wretched and miserable people--and by
then shutting the gates of the city and having soldiers to guard
the Sangleys who were going about on the inside; and so everything
would have been provided against. These occasions of annoyance to the
governor might induce him, as he is somewhat hot-tempered, to write
to your Majesty concerning me, seeking to discredit me--which I do
not deserve, considering the desire which I have to accomplish much in
the service of your Majesty, whom I also beseech to be pleased to have
me heard in regard to whatever is imputed to me. May God protect your
Majesty according to His power, with great increase of your kingdoms
and seigniories. Manila, in the Philipinas Islands, July 5, 1603.

The licentiate _Hieronimo de Salazar y Salcedo_

[_Endorsed_: "Manila; to his Majesty, 1603. The fiscal Hieronimo de
Salazar; July 5. Examined on the second of July, 1604. No response
to be given."]

_Copy of a letter which Chanchian, the chief mandarin of the three
who came to this city of Manila from the kingdom of China in the
month of June of the year one thousand six hundred and three, wrote
in the Chinese characters and tongue to Don Pedro de Acuna, governor
and captain-general of the Philipinas Islands for the king our lord,
and his president in the royal Chancilleria thereof, four days before
the said mandarins arrived in the said city; translated from the
original of the said letter by a Dominican religious._

Chanchian, of the lineage of Au, who governs the warriors of the
province of Hoquien, the envoy of the king of the realm of China,
and servant of the eunuch of the lineage of Cou. Because Tio Heng,
who is considered a reputable man, has gone to the king of China [16]
and told him that from this kingdom there could each year be taken for
the king of China a hundred thousand taes of gold and three hundred
thousand taes of silver at his expense, so that his vassals should
not pay tribute or be molested, the king has sent a eunuch who is
called Cochay to take charge of those who have said that there was
gold. This Tio Heng with five companions say that outside of the
boundaries of Hayten in a place called Lician there is a mountain
which is called Heyt Coavite, one lonely mountain in the midst of the
wide-spread sea; and that there is no realm to which it belongs or to
which the inhabitants pay tribute. In that place is collected much
gold and silver. The vassals of that mountain spend gold as freely
as if it were _garbanzos_ [17] and lentils. He has seen that the
vassals of that mountain of Cavite dig and gather it from the earth,
and in every house of Cavite he saw, if it were a poor one, a _medida_
(which is three gantas), and in those of the rich a hundred gantas of
this gold; and they store it up in order to trade with the Sangleys who
come there to trade, so that they may buy their property. And he said:
"At present you have no gold within your house to spend, and you have
no place whence to get it, and it would be much easier to go and get
it from that said place than to ask it from your vassals. It is true
that I have seen it; and now I have come to tell you this; and I do
not ask that you shall give me anything for going for it, but that
you should give me permission to go for it. I alone will find the
people, and spend what may be necessary to go and dig it. And this
year, when they have brought this gold, you can go to see the gold
which the captains and merchants have brought who come each year from
Luzon. In two years from now I will give you twice the gold and silver
that I have promised you, and with this you may be satisfied; and the
kingdom and the vassals will rejoice. This affair is serious and of
great importance." The king gave permission that this should be done,
and the eunuch named Cochay, with these mandarins, is accompanying
Tio Heng to Luzon to reach the mine of gold and see whether there is
or is not such a mine, when they will go back to the king and inform
him. From all provinces there came people to the king to tell him that
this kingdom of Luzon was as small as a cross-bow pellet; and that
they have never heard that there was gold there, as Tio Heng says,
but that he is lying. On this account the merchants of Hayten did
not go to seek permission, nor did they dare to go to Luzon; but the
judge of Chiochio ordered that they should fulfil their contracts with
the said Tio Heng, and see whether there was gold or not. This is all
their business, and therefore the governor of Luzon may rest secure,
and without apprehension or suspicion of evil. I am quite certain
that Tio Heng is lying, and command that they shall go immediately
to learn whether there is gold or not, and order that an interpreter
[_naguatato_] should go with them to see whether or not there is
gold. They say that they wish to hasten their departure, and that they
do not wish to stay in this land, giving occasion for complaints,
and, believe me, you cannot detain us. Dated the thirty-first year
of the reign of Landec, on the tenth of the fourth moon, which is
the present month of May according to their reckoning.

[At the beginning of the Spanish translation are the following
sentences, apparently memoranda by some clerk or interpreter:]

Copy of the letter which the chief Chinese mandarin of the three
who came to Manila wrote at sea to the president, governor and
captain-general of the Filipinas.

Mandarin is the same word as governor in Castilla.

The viceroys of the kingdom of China are for the most part eunuchs,
and to that end the king bring up a number of them in his house;
it is said that there are fourteen thousand from whom he may choose.

Cavite is the principal port of the Filipinas, and lies three leagues
from Manila. Luzon is the name of the island on which Manila is
situated.

_Copy of the petition and information given by the fiscal of the
royal Audiencia of the Filipinas concerning the three mandarins who
came to the city of Manila_.

Most potent lord: The licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo,
your fiscal in the royal Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands,
will relate this as best he can. On Friday, which I reckon to be
the twenty-third of this present month of May, there entered into
this city three infidel Sangleys, who came in the last-arrived ships
from the kingdom of China; and they wear the garments and caps which
are usually worn in that kingdom by the great mandarins--for it is
thus they call those who serve their king in some high office of
justice. They say that they came by his order to see if there is a
hill of gold in the port of Cavite; for he has been informed that his
Chinese vassals who trade and traffic in these said islands bring a
quantity of gold on which they do not pay him duty; and, that they
may pay it, he wishes to know the truth. The said three Sangleys,
who claim to be mandarins, go out from their houses on their way
to this city, seated in chairs upon the shoulders of four Sangleys;
and, attached to their persons, on each side go six of their guards
armed as archers. Before them walk two Sangleys who bear suspended
from their shoulders a porcelain case in which it is said they carry
their chapas which indicate that they are mandarins, which is the same
that we here call "decrees" and "royal commissions." Behind them goes
another Sangley on a horse, who is said to be the secretary of the
three mandarins. Before them go in file six Sangleys with staves upon
their shoulders, on the ends of which are white tablets with characters
of gold, which is said to be the insignia of alguacils. Six other
Sangleys carry little banners of different colors, with characters
written upon them in the Chinese tongue, which are said to indicate
the great authority and wide jurisdiction of the said mandarins. One
Sangley, who they say is a minister of justice, bears a piece of cane
as thick as one's arm, lacquered in black. Among these goes a Sangley
with two small kettle-drums and four others with canfonias and other
musical instruments which they use, all of them playing. Before all
these people go six Sangleys, two of whom carry two iron chains, which
are said to be to put on those whom they are ordered to arrest; two
others carry two cords tied to sticks upon their shoulders, which are
said to be to tie those whom they are ordered to flog; the other two,
who are called _upos_, which is the same as executioners in Espana,
bear two half-canes four dedos wide and a braza long, with which
they flog the delinquents, whom if they wished they could kill with
a few strokes. Between these go two Sangleys each one of whom cries
out in his own language from time to time, with loud shouts; and it
is said that they are calling out, "Make way, for the mandarins are
coming," and as soon as they come out of their houses, and until they
enter them again, these cries are kept up. When the Sangleys meet the
mandarins, they flee from them and hide themselves; and if they cannot
do this they bend their backs very low with their arms extended upon
the ground, and remain in this position while the mandarins pass,
which is quite in the form and manner which is customary in the said
kingdom of China. Sunday afternoon in front of the house of one of the
said mandarins they [_MS. torn_--whipped?] an Indian or mulatto in the
street before the house of the said mandarin (the latter being at the
window), in judicial form according to the Chinese usage. Yesterday,
Monday, they flogged a Sangley in his own house; and another one they
put to the hand-torture, quite according to their usage. Two of those
who are said to correspond to alguazils, bearing the said banners as a
sign thereof (just as the long staves of justice are borne in Espana),
seized a Christian Sangley in the [_MS. illegible_] of the licentiate
Christoval Tellez de Almacan, your auditor of the said royal Audiencia,
saying that they were going to take him before a mandarin, who had
ordered them to seize him; but when they were outside of the house of
Doctor Antonio de Morga, an auditor of the said royal Chancilleria,
he came to a window at hearing the noise, and stopped them. He did
so because this is administering justice, and all these things are
insignia thereof--whence no little scandal has arisen in this city of
Manila, on account of the grave offenses which have been committed
here by the said persons who call themselves mandarins, and by the
others whom they have with them. I give information of this so that
suitable action in this matter may be decided upon and decreed, and
which, if necessary, I offer my services to investigate. I beg and
beseech your Highness to command and decree whatever may be fitting
in such a case, and that information may be given concerning this
my petition, and concerning what may be decreed in regard to it, in
order to inform thereby the royal person of your Highness for which,
etc., I demand justice.

The licentiate _Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo_

In public session on the twenty-seventh of May in the year one
thousand six hundred and three. Let the investigation be immediately
made, and committed to the secretary, and the results brought up for
judicial action.

_Esquivel_

[Then follows the above-mentioned investigation--depositions by
various persons, corroborating the statements of the fiscal; and a
decree by the governor, forbidding any Chinaman to insult or molest
the mandarins, and the latter to exercise any rights of justice in
Spanish territory.]



RESIGNATION OF HIS OFFICE BY THE BISHOP OF NUEVA SEGOVIA


In the city of Manila of the Philippine Islands, on the fourth of
July in the year one thousand six hundred and three, before me,
the notary and the undersigned witnesses. The most reverend Senor
Don Fray Miguel de Benavides, the first bishop of Nueva Segobia
of the said islands, member of the Council of the king our lord,
declared that--inasmuch as his royal Majesty Don Philipe the Third,
our lord and king, had been pleased to choose him, and present him to
the notice of his Holiness the most holy father, the Roman pontiff,
as archbishop of this archbishopric of Manila, and appreciating so
fully the grace shown therein by his Majesty, and desiring to fulfil
the royal will and pleasure as a faithful vassal, and for other reasons
important to the service of God and that of the said king our lord,
and for the good of the souls in this land--from the present moment he
did relinquish the said bishopric of Nueba Segobia. This he has done
as soon as he can and ought, and in conformity with law, in order
that his Majesty may present for the said bishopric whomsoever he
shall please; and he accepted, and does accept, in such form as is
authorized and required by law, the archbishopric of Manila; and he
took, and does take when necessary, the duties and obligations thereof,
and its government upon his shoulders, corporally and spiritually, in
order to administer them conformably to the requirements of canonical
law. And as he makes the said resignation and the said acceptance, he
desires me, the present notary, to make public declaration thereof in
due form, and asks that those present shall witness and sign it. The
witnesses are: The father provincial of the Order of St. Dominic,
Fray Juan de Santo Tomas; the father Fray Juan Bautista, guardian of
the said Order; and the father Fray Pedro de San Vicente, vicar of
the Christian Chinese.

_Fray Miguel_, bishop of Nueba Segovia.

I, Benito de Mendiola, apostolic notary. By the apostolic authority
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition in this archbishopric, I was
present with the other witnesses at the above notarial act, and at
the end affix my signature, in testimony of the truth thereof.

_Benito de Mendiola_, apostolic notary.

We, the undersigned, do hereby certify and declare that Benito de
Mendiola who has sealed and signed this instrument, is the notary
of the Holy Office in this archbishopric, and exercises his office
of apostolic notary for any documents which may be presented to
him. Therefore entire faith and credit must be given to all documents
which have passed or do pass before him in or out of court. That this
may be evident, we give the present; at Manila, on the fourth of July
in the year one thousand six hundred and three.

_Fernando de Alanis_, public notary.

_Francisco de Valante_, public notary.

_Jhoan Fernandez de Aparicio_, public notary.



LETTERS FROM BENAVIDES TO FELIPE III

Sire:

I arrived in this city of Manila, having accepted the favor, so signal,
which your Majesty has conferred upon this his most insignificant
vassal and servant, by the royal decree of your Majesty; this was
presented to the dean and chapter of this church, who complied with
it promptly, and delivered to me the government, in which I am now
installed.

I find this city and country in so afflicted and ruined a condition,
and the minds of many of the Spaniards, including the principal ones
here, so anxious, and desirous of leaving this country, that it causes
me much concern. I am not overcome at confronting the very great and
continuous hardships which result; but, without counting those dating
back to the time of Don Francisco Tello, those of this year alone are
enough to put us in great straits. Even the Indians have taken such
courage against the Spaniards, that they came from Mindanao in battle
array, to harry our coasts; and they have taken captive Spaniards,
and even two priests--to say nothing of innumerable Indians, whom they
seize to sell into slavery among infidels, where it is very likely that
they will abandon the faith. They have destroyed villages and churches,
and taken away much valuable spoil; and at one time it was only through
the mercy of God that they failed to capture the governor, Don Pedro
de Acuna. Other Indians, called Camucones, [18] a wretched people,
have also brought misfortunes upon our people. There arrived this year
two of the ships of those which went to Nueva Espana. The cloth sent in
one of them came back badly wet, and ruined. On this day, the first of
May, occurred in this city a conflagration--a most grievous loss, for,
according to the account of those who were present, it was no ordinary
fire, but burned the richest quarter of the city, and the convent of
St. Dominic (which was the largest here), and the royal hospital for
the Spaniards. It all happened in so singularly short a time that no
goods or property could be gotten out of the houses; accordingly, much
of the merchandise which arrived in the ships was consumed. This was
especially disastrous as this poor Spanish people, who were expecting
some alleviation of their misfortunes through the returns from their
property sent to Nueva Espana this year, lost even that consolation;
for the ships from Mexico for these islands this year were despatched
thence very late, and arrived here at the time when those from here
were departing. These are already very late, and are in great danger
that what has happened in years past will occur again--that is, to
return to port, or be lost in these seas. This is not the only evil,
for very little of the money which has come belongs to the citizens
of this country, whereas there is much belonging to Mexicans and
Peruvians. It is said that not more than a hundred and fifty thousand
pesos has come of the citizens' money, for all the islands, out of
all the amount graciously allowed by your Majesty for this country,
which amounts to five hundred thousand pesos; and that all the rest
belongs to Peruvians or Mexicans. The calamity is so great that for
some of the residents of these islands their agents in Mexico bought
licenses at a high price, so that they might send them their own
money. It is very certain that the viceroy of Mexico is not to blame
for these things, as he is well known to be an excellent Christian;
but some one or other is deceiving him, to the ruin of this community.

To all these troubles of ours is added another, which causes anxiety
enough. One of the Chinese who came here, a chair-maker and carpenter,
returned to China. He must be a man of courage and ambitious designs;
for he went to the court of the king of China and, with others like
himself, proposed to trouble our peace. They found a man of note, who
by birth inherits from his ancestors, in the succession due the eldest
son, the right to be captain of the guard of the king of China. His
lineage is called Liang, and his office Pacu, while his own name is
Yameng. He must be something of a spendthrift (for he is very poor),
and restless in temperament. He gave ear to the said chair-maker,
named Tienguen, and to his companions. The opportunity seemed to
them favorable: and they decided to petition for the conquest of
this country under the cloak and pretext which the situation afforded
them, saying that there was a mountain here called Keit and that this
mountain is entirely of gold, and other things--which your Majesty
may examine, if you so wish, in the petition and memorial in this
matter which was presented to the king of China, and a copy of which,
translated into Castilian, _de verbo ad verbum,_ I am sending your
Majesty. This Keit is the port of this city, which we call Cabite, the
Chinese calling it Keit. They imagined and told a thousand lies to one
word of truth, all with the intention and desire of having the king of
China give them permission to get together troops and go out to sea,
and once there, either to come to conquer this country, or to become
pirates and rob, in China itself or wherever they could. The king of
China demanded pledges that what they were seeking was real, and not
a deception by which they were to become robbers and pirates; and as
this Liang Paou is a man of such standing, he furnished three hundred
or more men as surety. All the viceroys of the realms and provinces of
China and their councils (who reside with the viceroys)--to the number
of thirteen great realms and provinces, which they call Pouchenti,
beside the two powerful provinces and courts [or "circuits "] which
they call Kin, one called Lam Kin, which means "the court of the
southern region," and the other Pac Kin, [19] which means "the court
of the northern region"--all the said viceroys and councils wrote to
the king, trying with many arguments and examples to persuade him that
what these deceivers said was false, and that he should beware of them;
all this your Majesty may see, if you are so pleased, by the documents,
which I send translated into Castilian. But the devil, who seeks
his opportunity, furnished these evil men with a king so filled with
greed and so overpowered by it that he is almost mad on the subject;
and his actions indicate this, for he has had men made of gold and
women of silver, and has them at his feasts and gives them drink. He
sent to every one of his realms one of his eunuchs, who, in order to
secure gold and silver for the king, exacted great tributes from the
vassals. The empire of China feels very much oppressed by this, as the
Chinese here tell us, without any secrecy, that they believe that there
will be within two years, more or less, conspiracies and rebellion in
China. As the king is such a man, and the adventurers furnished the
said sureties, he was not willing either to follow the advice of the
viceroys and their councils, or entirely to reject it. He commanded
certain judges and mandarins to come to examine Keit personally,
and see whether what was said of it was true or false. Accordingly,
there came this year, in this month of May, three mandarins in all
their majesty, to this city of Manila. Governor Don Pedro de Acuna
received them and treated them very courteously and very prudently,
although to some persons this seemed unreasonable; and it certainly
was an irregular proceeding to give them permission to go to Cabite to
see whether there was gold or not. They went there, and took with them
the said chair-maker and carpenter Tienguen, whom they brought from
China for this purpose. The mandarins commanded Tienguen, when they
arrived at Cavite, to show them where the gold was and have done with
it. The man answered with good courage, in a word, and said to them,
"If you choose that this be gold, gold it will be; but if you do not,
it will not be gold. I tell you that you should cut off the heads
of the Indians of this country, and you will find their necks all
covered with chains and necklaces of gold; and this is the gold that
I told you of." Finally the governor sent back the said mandarins,
apparently satisfied; and he wrote to the viceroy, the eunuch,
and the inspector of the town and kingdom to which the Chinese
who came here belonged. By one of these men Governor Don Pedro de
Acuna wrote a very discreet letter concerning the matter. Now we are
waiting to see how the greed of the king of China and of his eunuch
will be affected by these things, and what measures the captain of
the guard and the sureties will take to right their falsehood and
save their lives; for, if they are declared impostors, they will
lose their lives. We hope in the Lord, that He will look upon this
Christian community which is being founded here, and will calm the
feelings of the Chinese in this region; and that, if they come, they
will find that the governor has the country so well prepared that
either they will not go back, or will return in such a state that
they will not desire to come here again. This country could be with
little difficulty, if the viceroy of Mexico provides sufficient aid,
put in such a condition that this war need not be greatly feared. I
was the first one who learned of this matter, and who protested. I
informed the governor of the matter, and afterward, on St. Dominic's
day and on St. Francis's day, I likewise explained the whole affair
to the congregation, quite publicly in the pulpit, so that the truth
might be known--as well as the importance in which I held this, being
a man who knows the language of these Chinese, and is acquainted with
many of their affairs and customs in China, having spent many months
there. I also did this that the affair might be taken up prudently and
carefully, as there might be counselors to advise ill in the matter,
not understanding it. With this affair, and its many misfortunes, this
country is much troubled; and there is great need of aid on the part
of your Majesty. Likewise, of late years, there have not been wanting
omens and warnings in this country. A notable warning that they tell
of, is two stars that fought with one another, going backward and
then returning to the encounter--a thing which seems supernatural;
finally, one of them moved toward Manila, and the other one toward
China. I do not count these things for much; but this thing is of
much importance, namely, a sadness and depression on the part of the
Spaniards, which is so great that discreet and Christian people have
remarked it. What makes me fear much, Sire, is not what I have told
of, but what I shall now tell your Majesty--although I know that your
Majesty will say that I am unreasonable, and will feel much aggrieved
that I am so intrusive. The first matter is the continual sodomy
which the Chinese practice in these islands to so great an extent,
and communicate to the Indians--which is the worse, for the Indians
were formerly most clean in this matter, so far as can be learned. God
will consume us all with fire some day, or in some other way destroy
us, since we, a Christian people, are tolerating and supporting in
our own country a people so given to this vice. Each year one of the
auditors takes in charge the expulsion of the Chinese, and this comes
to no purpose except that such auditor gives a living or enrichment to
some friend or relative of his; since for every license that they give
for remaining here they take, besides the tribute for your Majesty,
two reals from each Chinaman; this is a large tribute, as there are
always eight or ten thousand of them. This is without counting the
additional payments which, if the auditor or the person he appoints
wishes to open his hand to receive, will amount to a great deal. While
I am writing this, I am in receipt of a note from the commissary
of the Holy Office, in connection with this matter, which, as it is
so much to the purpose, I will give here in full. It is as follows:
"Jesus be with your Lordship. Several Sangleys tried to persuade me to
procure for them licenses to remain in the country, but I would not
consider the matter. A few days later they came with the licenses,
and told me that each one had cost them twenty reals, amounting
to five tostons. If this goes on in this way, what they tell me of
past years appears probable--namely, that the licenses cost seventy
thousand pesos, since there was more fraud. May our Lord protect
your Lordship." These are the words of the said commissary. [_In the
margin_: "So great an excess seems to be an exaggeration, and it did
not occur at a time when the auditors could attend to this."]

These two reals from each Chinaman for the license, each year, ought
to be expended to pay the salary of the man appointed by the auditor,
and for other matters. These Chinese are never effectually driven out,
nor is their number diminished, and I fear that these Chinese will
not be driven out until God, for the sins against nature which we
permit in this country, has destroyed us; for it is our greed which
maintains them. The Jesuits [20] alone, have on their cultivated lands
about two hundred and fifty Chinese, each of whom is worth and pays
to them each month four reals and a fowl (which is worth four more),
and each Friday a certain number of hen's eggs, and an equal number
of goose eggs. Besides this, the Chinese give either fruit or garden
truck, and are made to plant fruit-trees. This is in a single small
settlement, called Quiapo, situated near this city. The Jesuits have
other fields also in this neighborhood. The Augustinians have many
other fields in the village of Tondo, which lies directly across
the river from this city; I am told that they have in these two
hundred and fifty more Chinese. The master-of-camp, Pedro de Chaves,
and other persons, also have farms, all full of this sodomy. With the
protection of these and many other persons, these men are maintained,
and this vice is kept alive in this your Majesty's land. Lord, have
mercy; Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy! I beg of your Majesty to
have compassion upon us, and, since your Majesty has conferred upon
me the gift of this archbishopric, to favor and aid me; for greed
is most puissant, and, if there be no fear of punishment, it will
support the sodomites and heretics. The governors and the auditors
all are glad to have the religious write favorably of them to your
Majesty and to the auditors of the royal Council of the Indias; they
will therefore, tolerate much, for they are unwilling to displease
the religious orders. I must speak the naked and evident truth, Sire;
and, for the love of God, those who are guilty of this vice should
be sent out of the realms of your Majesty, and this black Parian be
taken from them. They should all go forth and return to their own
country; and those who come here for commerce should remain in their
ships, at least at night. There are already enough married Christian
Chinamen here who can and will care for the fields, and they will
engage in other employments. If it be impossible to maintain all
the buildings with the promptness and abundance of laborers and
craftsmen that they have at present, yet this is a small matter,
and such as occurs in Hespana and Ytalia. For if your Majesty gives
permission for a hundred to remain here, ten thousand will remain; for
the governors, auditors, religious, and confessors who are interested,
and the captains likewise, will take advantage of the opportunity that
your Majesty leaves open, with a thousand evasions, and arguments
that since your Majesty gives permission for a hundred, it should
also be given for other hundreds and other thousands. Accordingly,
for the love of God, let there come a decree and with it a reiterated
injunction from your Majesty similar to the most Catholic and potent
decision of the Catholic monarchs, Don Fernando and Dona Ysabel,
your Majesty's progenitors, putting an end at once to these evils
and driving these people from the lands of your Majesty, as did the
said sovereign monarchs. Not even considering their royal tributes,
at one stroke they drove all the Moors and Jews from Hespana, and
that deed they considered as their glory. Your Majesty must not think
that these people are only in or about Manila, for they are through
the whole country and scattered all about; and they are spreading
this diabolical crime and other vices throughout the whole land,
and even their evil doctrines. In spite of this even the religious,
as well as the others, tolerate them for the temporal advantages in
building and other affairs, which they find in the Chinese. If we be
not very pure toward God and justice and reason, a thousand will lead
us to love and take pleasure in temporal affairs and interests.

The second cause for these heavy punishments is the excessive
wickedness which exists among the Spaniards and Indians in the sin of
carnality. The third cause is the disregard of your royal decrees and
mandates. This has brought ruin upon the country; and as, in truth,
just laws are the strong walls of kingdoms, so on the contrary
the violations of such laws are the breaches through which enters
ruin. Besides this, into this country has come a doctrine of evil
theologians and jurists and confessors, who, weakening the force of
the laws of the kings in their relation to the conscience, open a
very broad field for the violation of what your Majesty so justly
and prudently orders. [_In the margin_: "I say this in regard to
the decrees which concern commerce between these islands and Mexico,
as well as several others."]

The fourth cause is a neglect of punishment against the alcaldes-mayor;
nor is any investigation of importance carried on against them,
nor are they in any way punished. This is a great pity, and as
those who are going to be their successors take their residencias,
they accommodate one another, and the Indians dare not speak. Other
persons, more shrewd, even say that they will make any claims during
the residencias, since that is of no use except to point out the
way to robbery which the predecessor trod, so that the successor may
follow him. These things have always caused me grief; but now that
I have these souls in charge it weighs upon me much to see these
evils and the little redress which comes, Sire, from your Majesty's
powerful hand. I seek from your Majesty no more show of authority for
the correction of these evils than belongs to me by right of office,
in order to make no display of ambition; for even in matters which
belong properly to my office I feel that my powers are very limited
and not at all adequate to its demands. But I hope in the Lord that He
will inspire in the heart of your Majesty a desire to introduce some
effective remedy sufficient for these evils, since their character
is self-evident. Manila, July 5, 1603.

_Fray Miguel_, archbishop elect of Manila.





Sire:

I have written another more detailed letter to your Majesty, and in
this I shall give a brief account of several matters that should be
set right. I express the desire for this under a greater sense of
obligation, and the more confidently, because your Majesty has so
considered this minister, vassal, and servant of yours in appointing
me archbishop of this city--which appointment I have received, and
have delivered to the chapter of the church your Majesty's letter to
that effect and announcing that I had been given the government of it,
and its occupancy.

This city and these islands are most poverty-stricken, and harassed by
a thousand troubles from heaven--what with the fires, and the enemies,
and (worst of all) our own friends and brothers, the vassals of your
Majesty. The people from Mexico have borne down on this unfortunate
country this year, in a very inundation. To repair the ruin which the
Mexicans and Peruvians are bringing upon us, and in order to discover
and rid ourselves of those here who are in partnership with them, the
cabildo of this city, through their procurator, presented me with a
petition asking me for this purpose to excommunicate such persons. I,
who hold the name of excommunication in great awe, when it is placed
generally upon this land (where there is not so much fear of God as in
Espana), did not grant the excommunication; but I drew up a petition,
and presented it to the royal Audiencia. To this they issued the reply
which I beg your Majesty to have examined together with my petition;
I am sending your Majesty a copy of the aforesaid petition and of their
action thereon. If the members of this royal Audiencia were auditors,
and not court alcaldes, I would not have recourse over there, but here,
as to alcaldes of court, giving information and denouncing a crime
amounting to public robbery, and opposed to the general welfare of
all this community--for the loss and thievery falls on all alike,
and is greatly against this realm--which can be so easily proved;
and since the proof is so easy, I do not dare enter with the power
and sword of the church. This response, saying that they will inquire
about it, is not a thing of today only. I am surprised at such a
response in a criminal case, (for in this matter I have proceeded
not only _ad petitionem partis_, [_i.e.,_ "as a private-suitor"] but
also _ex oficio_), on acount of both the publicity of the wrongdoing,
and the authority of the denunciation. I see here no evidence of the
functions of the court alcaldes, although it is a country where this
authority and this office is very necessary. If I speak in these
matters, they can tell me that I am a theologian; and, in short,
they will act as they please. Accordingly I present this to your
Majesty, so that, if what I say has any weight, redress for this
evil may be obtained. It is certain that even if it were only to
keep anyone from imagining that this concerns any of the Audiencia,
or any of their friends or kinsmen, it would be well to investigate
this matter. Indeed, I do not know who could singly bring an action
against the individual members of this company, but this should be done
against all, for they all cause the loss to all. In short, the matter
will remain without investigation, and the partnerships undisturbed,
while our ruin will increase. Although I see this, I know not if
I shall dare in spite of all this to impose an excommunication;
for I have little faith in the consciences of some persons here,
especially in matters touching their profits.

It is very necessary that your Majesty should order by royal decree
and reiterated injunction [_sobrecarta_] in the immediate future,
what you have already so justly ordered--namely, that the offices and
profitable positions in the country be not given to the servants and
kinsmen of the governors and auditors, who certainly obtain them from
time to time. Such people alienate the residents here. Although I may
appear impertinent in saying it, it is true that I fear it is of more
advantage to be a servant, or married to a servant, of an auditor,
than to be bishop. I say this not alone regarding those who are here,
but also on account of the connection of the viceroy of Mexico with
affairs pertaining to this country. On this subject I am sending,
together with this, a clause of a letter written to me a few days ago
by the fiscal of your Majesty, the licentiate Geronimo de Salazar
y Salcedo, who went to inspect the ships which have just come from
Mexico. It is very important for the royal exchequer of your Majesty,
and to everyone, that neither the viceroy of Nueva [Espana] nor the
governor here should have any authority in such affairs, nor in any
in which they have an interest, or which concern the auditors; and
all matters in this state should be removed from their power.

I am informed that the cabildo of the church and that of the city
have written, and are now writing, in regard to the seating of the
wives and daughters of the auditors, and what should be conceded
to the city officials. It certainly appears unfitting that in the
main chapel of the cathedral, which is not very large, the priest,
the ministers, and the archbishop or bishop, when they are in the
most exalted part of the ministration at the altar, should encounter
immediately under their eyes, handsomely dressed women and girls. I
do not think that this is in accordance with the sacred canons, or
with the lofty contemplations which alone are fitting at the altar,
and the devil greatly prizes all that he may gain there. This has
come to such a pass that even the alcaldes-mayor desire that, in
their own districts, their wives should enter into the main chapels,
even though the bishop be present. One of them had a fierce quarrel
with me over the matter, but both he and his wife paid for it to
God, a short time after, and are still suffering for it; and we know
not when their punishment will end, for they pay with their honor
and peace of mind. Further, it is not right that the wives of the
auditors should be placed ahead of the city officials. They tell
me that even the children and brothers-in-law of the auditors are
sometimes seated on the bench of the city, and in the best seats. I
am told that in the days of the former Audiencia neither the wives of
the auditors nor that of the governor entered the chapel. Certainly
it seems that to have them enter (particularly in Holy Week) when the
offices are celebrated below the steps of the great altar, cannot be
endured. Moreover, in this time of _sede vacante_ [21] a concession
has been obtained from the clergy that is not customary, as I am told,
in the chancillerias of Valladolid and of Mexico. I beseech your
Majesty to have me advised of your will in all respects, and to be
pleased to have much consideration given to the fact that the altar
and its ministers are in much confusion, and that things should not
be introduced which are vanity, but only such as are fitting to the
grandeur due to the office of ministers of your Majesty. As for the
cities, they too are representatives of your Majesty, and it is just
that, as such, they should be honored. What I mention as allowed here
_sede vacante_, which is not customary in Valladolid or in Mexico,
is the giving, as is reported, of the pax [22] to the auditors.

The religious orders are generally defective in a matter pertaining
to the instruction; it is a most serious defect, and demands your
Majesty's interference. I fear that at times it occurs through
ignorance or want of reflection; and I am not sure if there be not
mixed with it, now and then, a lack of affection for the Indians. They
are wont to maintain certain mission villages, where they have
baptized several, or even a goodly number; and then they leave them,
and the bishop has no one to station there; thus souls are lost, and
those baptized return to their idolatries and old ways of life--as is
the case even now. It is possible that if they abandoned missions of
some value, some secular clergyman might be found to go to them. But
they only abandon those that no one desires--unless it be the devil,
to take them away with him to hell. We are not taught to do this by
the theologians and the jurists in matters of distributive justice,
wherein they say that in certain times of need the less valuable
benefices are to be given in turn to the most worthy of the priests,
on account of the greater need of faithful ministration among the
souls in the poorer benefices.

Some of the religious, too, who are good missionaries and good
linguists, leave here--their superiors giving them permission,
as they find that they are restless, and cannot be quieted by kind
methods. But this is a great pity: in the first place, on account
of the religious, who thus go astray in soul; and, again, for the
poor Indians, so needy as they here are. Neither is it right that
your Majesty should go to such expense to bring religious here, and
then have them depart one after another--perhaps because they are not
chosen as superiors in their respective orders, and for other trivial
reasons--or that the superiors of the religious orders should have
power to give them permission to go away. On the other hand, it would
be of great advantage to make arrangements with the governor that he
should not give them passage; if your Majesty would give the governor
notice of this, it would be well.

The Orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis here maintain very
strict discipline among themselves, for which many thanks should
be rendered to God. In the matter of instruction they are doing
wonders in teaching, by word and deed, and in every way are very
exemplary. They are, too, no great burden on the Indians, which is
a serious consideration; but in the matter I mention, of leaving
some missions, and abandoning them to perdition, those fathers are
the most lacking, which is a very serious evil. There is no lack of
friars to go to other realms, yet to relieve the royal conscience
of your Majesty (for which purpose they came to these islands) and
the consciences of the encomenderos, and aid these poor Indians to be
saved, to take in charge mission-houses, and sustain the children that
they have baptized--for these are their children indeed, to whom they
are under greater obligation in spiritual matters than if they were
their fathers in the flesh--these things they do not attend to. This
gives me great sorrow, and particularly as I find that my friars are
not very faithful in these matters, and the devil has disturbed them
of late years with a spirit of unrest. There is not, and has not been
discovered, a people better disposed to conversion than the Indians
of these islands--I mean, as God has now disposed affairs.

It is very necessary that your Majesty should send a visitor for the
religious of St. Augustine. He should be a friar from over there in
Hespana, a man of great ability, very observant, fond of poverty,
etc. He should not come alone, but with a considerable number of
similar religious. He must not come as visitor and vicar-general for
a limited time--for the affairs of this Order here are not such that
they can be set right in two, three, or four years--but as some friar
named de Montoia went to Portugal. If things are as reported--and
they must be so, in large part at least--affairs are in a ruinous
condition. The one thing that most needs remedy in these islands,
Sire, is this matter of the Order of St. Augustine.

At present one of these fathers, [23] named Fray Juan Gutierrez,
is being sent by their superiors to the feet of your Majesty. He has
been definitor, and has had three offices in his Order, and it has
been proposed to make him provincial. I consider him a very modest
and religious friar, who will earnestly plead with your Majesty in
this matter of the inspection and improvement of his Order. I beseech
your Majesty to favor and aid him in all ways.

The religious of the Society live here in an exemplary manner,
which is necessary here, and carry out well the Indian missions in
their charge. They are reputed excellent in some of their methods
of instruction, but it is very necessary that your Majesty should
curb them in some matters. Your Majesty should command that what I
here relate be investigated. Near this city there is a small Indian
village, called Quiapo, which is assigned, it must be by the governors,
for the service of the great church of this city. It is pitiful
indeed to see how bare it is of every advantage. These Indians feel
much aggrieved at the Society's religious, saying that the latter
have taken from them their lands and inheritances, to their very
houses. The poor Indians are in a most poverty-stricken condition,
and certainly one must shut his ears, in order not to listen to what
he hears in this matter. It is a great pity that some poor Indians are
complaining against the religious having taken from them their paltry
property. The said Indians are writing to your Majesty in the matter;
I beseech your Majesty to command that it be noted that these are
the children, grandchildren, and relatives of the former king of this
city, who was here when the Spaniards captured it. He was called Raja
Soliman. They only ask your Majesty to protect them from the Jesuits,
[24] and to cause their lands and inheritances to be returned to
them. They consider all laymen as prejudiced judges; for certainly the
governors as well as the auditors usually are not willing to incur the
displeasure of the religious, as they do not write anything against
them either to your Majesty or to any of your Council. If this matter
could be entrusted to some religious of St. Dominic or St. Francis,
who have no income or property in this country, as the Augustinians
have, or in the lands and property of the Indian villages; the former
know the Indian language, and have no need of interpreters--and it is
these last who often defeat justice. It would be a great thing if your
Majesty could entrust to some of these fathers the affair of these
Indians against the fathers of the Society. They tell me even that
one of the Jesuit fathers, who went from here as their procurator,
is about to claim on their behalf, the donation of the benefice and
doctrina of the said village of Quiapo. The name of this procurator
is Father Chirinos. They do not make this claim for the sake of the
mission or benefice, for it is a very small hamlet; but only because,
if they hold the said village as a mission, the Indians will not dare
to make any claim against them, or to speak. For the love of God,
your Majesty should right this, for the affair itself demands an
effective remedy; and at least we, as ecclesiastics and religious,
should not scandalize or oppress the poor Indians, or take their
property from them. The worst of the matter is that the fathers of
the Society maintain with infidel Chinese the lands of these Indians,
on which there is only a Sodom. I believe that this infection has
been communicated, to some extent at least, to the houses of the
Indians; for their proximity, and the teaching that the Indians are
receiving, are quite evident. But I have already written at length to
your Majesty of this in my other letter, and all that I have written
there is little in comparison with the gravity of the matter.

A proceeding that may cause much annoyance is, that the governors
assign houses and hospitals to some of the religious without
consulting and asking the opinion of the ordinary, and agreeing with
the latter in the matter. For the governors, either to find someone to
confess them and overlook these things, or to write to your Majesty
and your councils in their favor, or not write to their prejudice,
wish to satisfy the religious, and at times in a very unreasonable
manner. Your Majesty is already informed of what Don Francisco Tello
did here, giving the Augustinian fathers the chapel [25] of Nuestra
[Senora] de Guia, where a secular priest was teaching, and some place
or other at the port of Cavite, which came near resulting in great
troubles. For the love of God, your Majesty should not leave our
peace in the power of the ambition or the personal interests of a
governor, but command that this be done immediately, as I understand
your Majesty has already disposed and ordered.

It is very necessary that your Majesty should order that if any
secular priest commit some transgression, your royal Audiencia should
not immediately summon him, but should give notice to the prelate
and ordinary to remedy it. This should apply to complaints sent
by the alcalde-mayor against the clergyman; the alcades-mayor are
not so abject that they would not have even then their share of the
fault. In short, they are ecclesiastics; and it seems just that in the
meantime the prelates should not be behind in punishing them, and in
righting matters. The secular clergy should not go, on information
that may often be false, before audiencias and tribunals that are
not ecclesiastical; for thus the ecclesiastical state is much injured.

The liberty of the cabildo of the city, and due secrecy for matters
discussed there are very necessary; and if any secretary or regidor has
failed in this matter, it would be highly desirable that your Majesty
command that he be punished. If this be not done, your Majesty cannot
be informed, or right matters. For the love of God, will your Majesty
favor in all matters the city and cabildo, and not leave this matter
of favoring them to the governors and auditors; for it is clear that
these persons will not be pleased that there should be anyone who
can have power to advise your Majesty, or oppose them. I beg your
Majesty to be pleased to issue your royal decree so that the city may
rent out the privileges of the commission exchange, which they hold
by your Majesty's favor; and that provision be made for them to rent
it to the Chinese. Further, this concerns the trade of the Chinese,
as there is no other trade here, and nothing else for which the said
exchange could serve. These men, too, are in great need of aid, both
for the marriages of their daughters and for the payment of their
debts to the Chinese. Your Majesty should command that permission
be given them to have all their money brought from Mexico, as it
has remained there these two or three years--which is a great pity,
in the condition in which this city is, and with the impaired credit
of the Spaniards in their relations with the Chinese. The Chinese
merchants, too, are being ruined, because the Spaniards are not
prompt with their payments. They weep, and say: "If we owe anything
to the Spaniards, we are straightway thrown into prison until we pay;
and if the Spaniards owe us anything, we cannot collect it."

By my other letter and accompanying documents, as well as the
letters of others, your Majesty will see how necessary it is that
this country should always be in a state of defense. For not only
do we fear the Japanese, but the Chinese also seek to disturb our
peace. Don Pedro de Acuna is a good soldier, and God will aid him;
may your Majesty be pleased to command the viceroy of Nueva Espana
to aid with troops, powder, munitions, etc. In case of the removal
of Don Pedro, and always, it is necessary that a good soldier should
come here as governor; and if he were that, and supported, not by many
powerful persons in Hespana, but by his own valor and virtue alone,
it would be a great advantage.

The great church of this city is without ornaments, and greatly needs
to be repaired, lest it fall to the ground. The services of worship
there may cease, for there are only four salaried prebends who are
obliged to come to the services of the said church, for the offices
of the canonical hours, and to be vested at the altar, and to say
the high masses and those for your Majesty. Even these four possess
very little; and, if one of them should become sick, services could
not be properly carried on. Your Majesty has already been advised
of all this by way of the cabildo, and, I believe, through the royal
Audiencia. I beseech your Majesty to have it remedied.

At the first founding of this city, a site was set apart for the
episcopal residence. The place was very convenient, as it is close
to the church; but it is very cramped, not containing in all more
than about thirty-seven paces in width, and about seventy-four in
length, which is not sufficient for an ordinary citizen's house,
which should have a small court. With greater reason there is not
room for a prelate, who cannot go out on the plazas for his health
and recreation, to take a little air, but who must find some relief
within his own house (especially in so hot a climate as this); and
who must have apartments for servants, a prison, audience-chamber,
and other rooms. I beg your Majesty to send an order that at any rate
the archbishop should be assigned a site on which to build a suitable
house. As for the building, your Majesty knows well that I have not
enough for it unless I be aided; nor have I, either, sufficient to
pay six hundred pesos for the hire of a house.

The fathers of the Society claim that your Majesty should give
them a university for these islands. This your Majesty should not
do, unless you grant the same to all the orders and the secular
clergy as well. This is especially true now, among these intrusive
machinations. If your Majesty were pleased to entrust to me the
regulating of these matters I should endeavor to do so. Still less
should the claim of the said fathers of the Society be granted, nor can
it, in conscience, be allowed, that they appropriate for themselves,
on the plea of using them for these chairs [of instruction], certain
revenues from the funds left here by some of the old soldiers as
restitutions to the Indians. With these moneys great good has been
done for the poor Indians--now redeeming captives from those who carry
them away to sell them among the Moros and other infidels, where they
lose the faith; again, aiding them in their sickness, and famines,
and the like. Indeed, I am unable to comprehend the consciences
of men who would attempt to take this money from the poor Indians,
and put an end to so good works. May God grant His light to us all.

It has been reported here that your Majesty, or your royal person,
is being consulted in regard to the religious going to Japon by
way of India. For the relief of my conscience, knowing so much as I
do of this, I must say that those who propose such a thing either
know nothing of affairs here; or else they know a great deal, and
are talking very artfully in the matter, and for the sake of this
country intend that the religious should not enter Japon; at any
rate, saying that the religious must go through India to preach in
Japon is the same as saying that they shall not go to Japon. Sire,
the clear and evident truth is that by way of India there is little or
no thought of preaching or conversion. Let none deceive your Majesty,
our king and lord; for they are gravely in the wrong who would deceive
you and not tell you the truth sincerely. Manila, July 6, 1603.

_Fray Miguel_,
bishop and archbishop elect of Manila.



LETTERS TO FELIPE III


Letter from the Audiencia of Manila

Sire:

With the letter which your Majesty graciously sent to this Audiencia
informing it of the fortunate birth of the most serene infanta [26]
our lady, we have received the great satisfaction which should be
experienced by all the vassals of your Majesty. Since so great a
part of the grace which our Lord has vouchsafed us has fallen to our
share, measures will be taken with great care and diligence for the
arrangement of celebrations and feast-days, in grateful recognition
of so great a good, and of the obligation which your Majesty lays
upon us. [_In the margin:_ "There is no answer."]

On the twenty-third of this month this Audiencia received as its
auditors, in accordance with the commissions which they bear from
your Majesty, the licentiates Andres de Alcaraz and Manuel de Madrid y
Luna. Doctor Antonio de Morga, who was an auditor thereof, and to whom
your Majesty has extended the favor of promoting him to the place of
alcalde of the criminal court of the Audiencia of the city of Mexico,
will leave with these ships to take up the duty which your Majesty
commands and orders him. [_In the margin: "Idem."_]

Last year, the ships called "Jhesus Maria," and "El Espiritu Sancto,"
left the port of Cavite of this city. After having sailed for a long
time and encountered many hardships, the ship named "Jhesus Maria"
arrived at the said port, having lightened much of its cargo, at
sea, and having been at the point of being lost. The ship "Rosario"
(which was the flagship of their commander, Don Lope de Ulloa) arrived,
without masts and dismantled, at a port of Japon called Tosse, where
it entered at great risk. When it had come there, it appeared that
the people of that land were inclined to be friendly with them, and to
give them what was necessary to go on and continue their voyage. The
said general finding this to be so, and being prudent, as he is an
experienced mart, and one who has done his duty in all other voyages
to everyone's satisfaction, held a council with the religious and
the most trustworthy persons in the ship. It was agreed to send a
present of several articles which were in the ship, and which were
most suited to that country, to the emperor of Japon. This was put
into execution, and the present was sent to the said emperor. The
Japanese who had gathered in this port at the news of the coming of
the ship, moved by their great greed, made an attempt to seize the
ship. To accomplish this, and to keep the Spaniards from going away,
they began to close the harbor with timbers and trees. They showed
their evil designs by giving occasion to the ship's people to quarrel
with them. When the said commander learned this, without awaiting the
response, with all diligence he managed to get together the men who
were on land, and sailed from the port, preferring rather to submit
to the risks of the sea than to the grave one which confronted him
in this treachery which accompanied their departure. But when the
Japanese saw that he was going out of this port and that their design
was known, they had recourse to arms, trying to do by force what they
had not been able to do by cunning. But our men defended themselves
so well, inflicting some loss on those of that kingdom, that they
returned to these islands, which was a very fortunate outcome. Those
who were left there, not being able to embark with their commander,
have all returned on the ships which come here to trade, together
with those who took the present to the emperor. The latter say that
they were well received. [_In the margin: "Idem_."]

On the eve of the feast-day of St. Philip and St. James, our Lord saw
fit to visit this city with a conflagration of such magnitude that
before nightfall half the city had burned, including one hundred
and fifty-nine buildings, many of stone and others of wood. Among
them were the Dominican convent and the hospital for the Spaniards
of which your Majesty is patron; and almost nothing that was in them
was saved. According to the investigations which we have been able
to make, the loss will amount to a great sum. It has caused general
consternation. Great care will be taken to procure safety from these
fires, with which we have been much afflicted. [_In the margin_:
"Let this be done."]

Your Majesty commands by decree of February 16, 92, that this Audiencia
should give information concerning the expediency of having more of
the churches in these islands of stone than of wood, as the latter
decays and does not last long. Having investigated and considered
this matter, the conclusion is that, although in some parts it would
be much better to build the churches of stone than of wood, as the
materials are found near at hand, yet in other parts it would be
more expedient to make them of wood and tiles, as these materials are
abundant there and the stone is at a distance. Beside, the cost which
the stone buildings entail would generally be much more than those
of wood; and, as your Majesty's treasury here is so embarrassed, it
could not bear the cost of building expensive edifices. It therefore
seems best that the governor should continue providing for this in
the manner most convenient. [_In the margin_: "No answer to be given."]

We received another decree, of the said month and year, directing
the order to be observed in the renunciations of clerical offices,
which will be executed as your Majesty commands. [_In the margin_:
"Let it be so done."]

We have received another decree of your Majesty, of the fifteenth
of the said month and year, to the effect that cases in which your
viceroys and prelates have by common consent vacated benefices shall
not be heard in the audiencias of the Yndias. In so far as regards
this Audiencia it shall be so done. [_In the margin_: "The same."]

Likewise there were received two other decrees, in which your
Majesty demanded information as to whether it were well to sell the
offices of depositaries of this city and of secretary of the cabildo
thereof. The office of depositary is of so little importance that it
is certain that no considerable price will be paid for it. That of
secretary of the cabildo brings three hundred pesos salary--which,
as they have no other funds worthy of consideration, the cabildo
gives from its own income and property. Besides, deserving persons
are kept in the office who have served in this country, where there
is very little to reward them with. Your Majesty will order according
to his pleasure. [_In the margin_: "Let the governor appoint to these
offices only deserving persons who have served his Majesty and are
very trustworthy, until his Majesty shall have ordered otherwise;
and let him inform us concerning the person whom he shall appoint."]

Your Majesty ordered by another decree of the sixteenth of the said
month and year that this Audiencia inform him whether it would be
expedient to deposit with the royal crown of your Majesty the sum of
about twelve thousand pesos, to pay the salaries of his servants. As
this despatch arrived so close upon the departure of the ships, there
was no time to make definite answer to your Majesty's command. The
number and value of the encomiendas in these islands are not exactly
known. On the first opportunity they will be ascertained, and your
Majesty advised thereof. [_In the margin_: "Let this be done, and
let them send the information if they have not done so."]

The decrees concerning personal services of the Indians, which are
dated November 22, 602, were received in this Audiencia. In all its
district there are no Indians held to personal service except when
there is wood-cutting and the like to be done for the equipment
of ships, or when some expedition is being made for the service of
your Majesty, in which case a few Indians are taken. This cannot be
dispensed with, because transportation in these islands is entirely by
sea, and it is necessary to make levies for rowing the vessels. The
same necessity obliges the encomenderos, the religious, and other
persons who go from one part to another, to do the same thing. They
are always paid justly for their work, and thus far it is not known
that any grievance has been done them in any manner, nor have they
been left unrecompensed. Great care will be taken that affairs shall
be so conducted that they will live content, and the work be secured
without harshness. May our Lord protect your Majesty many years,
according to the needs of Christendom. Manila, July 2, 1603. [_In
the margin_: "Let it be done as they say that they are doing."]

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

The licentiate _Don Antonio de Ribera Maldonado_

The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_

The licentiate _Andres de Alcaraz_

The licentiate _Manuel de Madrid y Luna_

[_Endorsed_: "Philipinas: to his Majesty; the Audiencia, July 2,
1603. Examined June 30, 604; provided within."]



LETTER FROM THE FISCAL


Sire:

The licentiate Geronimo de Salazar y Salcedo, fiscal for his Majesty in
the royal Chancilleria of the Philipinas Islands. The most important
reason why the said royal Audiencia is necessary is to redress the
wrongs which the governor and captain-general may commit. Although he
who is now in the office acts in a prudent manner, he may be succeeded
by another who will not do so, and, if this were the case, nothing
could be so suitable as that he who was governor and captain-general
should not be president; for if he is so, he will be present at the
hearings and meetings, in which case neither the auditors in decreeing,
nor the fiscal in petitioning, use the power which they hold. An easy
remedy for this would be that the archbishop of Manila should be the
president of the Audiencia, his salary being somewhat increased, and
that of the governor and captain-general decreased. He would be glad
to do this and would not neglect the affairs of his archbishopric,
which are not so pressing as to make it impossible for him to take
up the duties of the presidency. I might well cite some things which
I have seen, which appear to me to demonstrate the inconveniences
which might follow from all three offices being joined in one person,
but I prefer to pass them over. It is especially so as we are five
thousand leagues from your Majesty, and those of us who are imprudent
proceed under the impression that what we do here will not be known
there. It is evident that the presidency would be better filled by
the archbishop than by the governor; for when the latter is president
he has means, if he so desire, to keep the auditor from judging and
even the fiscal from petitioning, if they be lacking in courage. Your
Majesty will order this to be examined, and provide in regard to it
as may be most expedient. May God protect your Majesty according to
His power and the needs of Christendom. Manila, July 4, 1603.

The licentiate _Hieronimo de Salazar y Salcedo_

[_Endorsed_: "Manila, to his Majesty; the fiscal, Hieronimo de Salazar,
July 4, 1603. No answer to be given to this letter; June 30, 1604."]



LETTERS FROM VARIOUS OFFICIALS AND ECCLESIASTICS


Sire:

On the fourth of the present month there left this port the ship
"Nuestra Senora de la Antigua," one of the two from Peru that I
brought in the convoy last year, with the reenforcements of troops,
arms, and military supplies which came to these islands. On the
morning of the next day the other ship, called the "San Alifonso,"
left; and in the afternoon arrived the advices and despatches from
General Andres Hurtado de Mendoca, who has in charge the armed fleet
which your Majesty ordered to be sent to Maluco, and from Captain
Juan Xuares Gallinato, who conducted the reenforcements sent by
me. By these I was advised of the result of the encounter there,
as your Majesty will be particularly informed by the copies which
accompany this, to which I refer you for the whole matter, merely
adding that it has caused me much grief and anxiety, owing to the
dangerous and embarrassed condition of affairs there--not only from
the Dutch, whose trade is so well established there, and who are
so prosperous; but from the encouragement which it will give to the
people of Terrenate and Mindanao, and to others, their confederates
and allies, to do all the mischief that they can in those islands. If,
while the said armada was at the Maluco Islands the Mindanaos have
dared to commit the hostilities of which I have written to your
Majesty in other letters, we may fear worse things now that their
friends the Terrenatans are victorious, and more skilful and expert
through what their experience and the Dutch have taught them. May
God in His mercy prevent this danger.

I would again remind your Majesty of this matter of Maluco and the
punishment of the people there, and its importance--as well as of
what I wrote concerning the matter from Mexico, and how much evil
may result from attending to the matter from India; for that ends
in nothing but expenditure of money, waste of men, and the loss of
prestige, and results in giving more strength to the enemy. This
affair urgently demands promptness, and a person who will give it
careful attention. I make offer of myself again, and am right willing
to sacrifice myself in the service of your Majesty on this occasion;
and I believe that my desire to be of use will cause me to succeed
in the fulfilment of my obligations.

With this goes a memorandum of matters which occur to me as necessary,
and which, after due examination and consideration, with much thought
and reflection, it has seemed best to me to send to your Majesty. The
most important thing in these matters is promptness and secrecy, and
the latter is most necessary in Hespana, since there watch can be kept
upon the Dutch, so that seasonable preparations can be made in Spain,
and they be prevented from becoming masters of Maluco, before we can
do so--which would be a very great loss, and one very difficult to
repair. May God grant success as He may, and protect the Catholic
person of your Majesty, according to the needs of Christendom. Port
of Cavite, July 20, 1603.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

[_Endorsed_: "Draw up immediately a succinct relation of what resulted
from this fleet that went from Yndia, to deliver to----." "Examined
June 14, 1604; no answer to be given."]

_Jesus_

Sire:

The universal need of these Philipinas has influenced not only the
governor and captain-general, the royal Audiencia, and the city
government of Manila, but the religious orders as well, to call upon
your Majesty, as rightful lord and king of all, seeking humbly the
remedy which must come to us from the royal hands of your Majesty.

As for the uprising of the Chinese, I will only say that it might have
been averted, if the decrees of your Majesty had been obeyed that
prohibit so excessive a number of infidels, accustomed to treachery
and perverse habits, from remaining here; and if they were plotting
another conspiracy with those that ordinarily come from China, they
have been blinded through the great mercy of the Lord, who by their
downfall leaves us wiser and with fewer enemies.

The damage and robbery inflicted by the people of Mindanao in these
islands could have been prevented if the garrison of Spaniards in that
island, which held the pirates in check, had not been recalled. At
present the need is all the greater, as they are encouraged by their
victories, and our Bisayans are dispirited. In the islands where our
humble Society of Jesus teaches, they caused great loss; and during the
past month they attacked Leyte, and captured two of our religious, and
more than eight hundred natives besides. This was at their first entry,
and gave them courage to continue ravaging other neighboring islands,
where the members of our Society are also in danger. This was written
me from Zebu, by our provincial who is visiting those islands and
missions, where there are many good Christians--and this at great risk
to himself. It is a great pity that so new a Christian people should
be molested by those from Mindanao, who are infected by the doctrine
of Mahoma. It would be easy for your Majesty to give us remedy in
this by ordering troops and aid sent from Nueva Espana, wherewith
Don Pedro de Acuna may show his valor and accomplish his wishes;
for his services are of great Importance here, as your Majesty knows.

Captain and Sargento-mayor Christobal Azuleta [_sic; sc_. Azcueta]
Menchaca, who always has been an excellent soldier, likewise
distinguished himself greatly in this affair of the Chinese Sangleys,
achieving two noteworthy victories, wherein were killed more than
five thousand of the enemy without the loss of a single Spaniard--of
whom he took great care, as they are so few and precious here.

A complete relation of all matters will be given to your Majesty by
Fray Diego Guevara [27] prior of the Augustinians of this city, who,
as a person of so much religion, experience, integrity, and veracity,
is going on this mission on behalf of these islands--where we are all
beseeching God our Lord to protect us, and to prosper your Majesty
for many years, with good measure of his choicest gifts, for the
greater glory of His Divine Majesty, etc. From this college of the
Society of Jesus, Manila, December 10, 1603.

_Gregorio Lopez_

Sire:

During the month of June just past, in this year, we, of this
metropolitan church of Manila, the vassals and chaplains of your
Majesty, advised you by the ships which left these islands for Nueva
Espana of the matters that seemed best for your royal service, and for
the welfare and usefulness of both this church and this commonwealth,
at that time; and to that we at present refer you. As new occasions
have come to light, we inform your Majesty, in accordance with our
bounden duty, that on the eve of St. Francis' day last past the Chinese
Sangleys, who live in the outskirts of this city, rose against it,
to the number of twenty thousand, setting fire to the houses, and
killing several Spaniards and Indians who lived without the wall. They
fought with some of our men, killing one hundred and thirty Spaniards,
including many of the most prominent men. They attacked the city,
stationing themselves in a large stone church building, which was
being completed by the friars of St. Francis, standing three hundred
paces from the wall--a very bad situation for it. The city was in
great danger from their attack, for there were hardly a thousand
Spaniards in it. Our men set fire to the alcayceria of these same
Sangleys, which stood about twenty paces from the wall. Our Lord was
pleased to deliver us from the many and great dangers in which this,
your Majesty's city, found itself; for its loss would have destroyed
the Filipinas, and the Christian community and faith of Jesus Christ
our Lord in them, if He had not miraculously delivered us. The enemy
abandoned the situation that they had seized, on account of the damage
that the artillery did them, and retired to the country inland,
where our men pursued them, cutting off and killing them in a very
short time. Thus did our Lord remove the danger in which this city
and these islands of your Majesty have been so many years, because
the governors preceding the one we now have would not comply with
and observe the royal decrees and mandates of your Majesty, although
they were urged and advised to do so, both in private and from the
pulpit. For the good government of this country it would be well for
your Majesty to be pleased to provide some efficacious means for the
observance and execution of your royal decrees and mandates; since
from the failure to do this has resulted the loss we have mentioned,
and perhaps still greater is yet to come. We also dread a very large
fleet which is expected to come from the kingdom of China against this
city. May our Lord, in His mercy, defend and protect this, His cause,
and not permit this new plant to be killed.

Toward the end of the past month this city took fire; and, as the wind
was strong, half of its houses were burned, including those of the
richest citizens and merchants, and the royal warehouses. Through this
loss and that of the ships this whole community, both ecclesiastical
and secular, is in great straits, hard pressed and very needy. On
this account your Majesty will favor it by your royal power, that
it may not be ruined altogether. We are confident in the Lord, that
if this letter reaches your Majesty's royal hands, with information
in the other matters above mentioned, our Lord will be served, and
this commonwealth and the Filipinas Islands aided and favored by your
Majesty--whom may our Lord protect during many long and happy years,
for the welfare and increase of His dominions. Manila, December
11, 1603.

The chaplains and vassals of your Majesty:
_Don Juan de Bivero_, dean of Manila.
_Sanctiago de Castro_, precentor of Manila.
The canon _Diego de Leon_
The licentiate _Marcos Maldonado_, canon.
The canon _Ranullo de Cartagena_
The canon _Pablo Ruiz de Talavera_
_Francisco de Cavranca_

Sire:

This order has thought best to send to Espana, to negotiate its
affairs, father Fray Diego de Guevara, prior of this house at Manila,
as your Majesty will be informed. This has pleased me much, for,
besides that business, I have communicated to him things which
intimately concern the service of God and your Majesty, which he
will explain to you--particularly the need for reformation in this
province. I beseech your Majesty, if such be your pleasure, to give
him audience, and to remedy without delay the matters concerned. In
my opinion, the most important thing is to have some person come
here from Hespana, who is zealous for both services--a man of great
energy and integrity, and sufficient power so that, with another
of the same qualifications, to be chosen here, as the former there,
they can settle this matter aright, for it is very necessary. I refer
you to the said father procurator, who will make a complete report
concerning this and other matters here. I will say no more than that
I am taking this measure because it touches my obligations, and my
bounden duty to your Majesty's service. If this be done, I am certain
that all will be in fitting order. May our Lord protect the Catholic
person of your Majesty, according to the needs of Christendom. From
your Majesty's convent of San Pablo, at Manila, December 17, 1603.

_Fray Pedro Arce_, provincial.

Sire:

The Order of the illustrious St. Augustine which resides in these
islands, has need of austere [28] friars from Castilla to carry on the
conversion which they have wrought in this land, and have commenced
in Japon. Some friars of ability will be necessary to help them,
considering that those who become friars in Mexico are not esteemed
in this country. For this reason the said order is sending father
Fray Diego de Guevara, hitherto prior of the convent in this city,
to bring religious here. He is a thorough religious himself, and
zealous for the good of his order. This convent of your Majesty,
and of the minor friars of our father St. Francis, deprives itself of
him for the greater good. I humbly beg your Majesty to be pleased to
command that the said father be sent back, without delay, so that he
may continue to carry out his earnest desires; for in this he does
great service to God and to your Majesty, whom may our Lord protect
for the welfare and growth of Christendom. Manila, from this convent
of Nuestra Senora de los Angeles; December 19, 1603.

_Fray Joan de Garrovillas_, definitor and guardian.



THE SANGLEY INSURRECTION


Letter from the Audiencia

Sire:

By way of Nueva Espana this Audiencia has informed your Majesty of
occurrences up to that time; and although this letter will be very
uncertain, as it must go by way of Portuguese India, it has seemed
best to write it, giving an account of what has happened since,
as it is so important.

By the last letter of this Audiencia, dated on the fifth of July of
this year, we gave your Majesty an account of three mandarins from
the kingdom of China who had come to this city, and the innovation
which they had instituted, on account of which the governor and
captain-general considered the plan of fortifying this city, and
providing, in case anything should happen, the supplies necessary
and suitable for its defense and safety. This caused some disturbance
among the Chinese, who began to confer among themselves, in secret,
concerning the means of insurrection. Although great care was taken by
this Audiencia and the governor to keep them quiet, and to relieve them
of the fear which they were said to have on account of the aforesaid
precautions, it was not sufficient, and following their resolve,
on the night of the last St. Francis' day, at about eleven o'clock,
they revolted. They chose for their leader a Christian Sangley named
Joan Untae, who, according to the investigations made in regard to him
by this Audiencia, appears to have revolted in the name of one Joan
Baptista, governor of the Chinese. On him and the others exemplary
justice has been rigorously visited. The Chinese gathered on the other
side of the river of this city to the number of ten or twelve thousand,
many other people remaining in their Parian and fortifying themselves
as well as they could. On this night they burned several houses,
and the orchard of a citizen of this city named Captain Estevan de
Marquina, with whom they commenced, killing him and his wife and four
children and several servants. From here they went to a village called
Quiapo, on the other side of the river, which they burned, killing
several Indian children and women. The governor and captain-general
noticing this, and knowing what had happened on the preceding days
when there had been considerable disturbances, notified Don Luis
Dasmarinas, formerly governor of these islands, who lived in a place
called Minondog, sending him some troops so that he might keep watch of
the enemy. On the next morning Don Luis was reenforced by a number of
people picked from the citizens of this city, and with these he went
to meet the enemy in the place where they were located, which was
very near the village of Tondo. The Spaniards went out from there,
and having fought with them, as it was a country where there were
many thickets and heavy woods, and which was mountainous, the enemy
surrounded them with such a number of men that they could not retreat;
and at last Don Luis was killed, with more than a hundred Spaniards.

Later, the next Monday, the enemy met, and after their custom drew
lots, as usual in war; and finding these in their favor and learning
from them, as they say, that they would take this city, they decided
to go on to the Parian, and united with the people who remained
there. With great force and impetuosity they attacked this city, in
several parts of the wall, with many contrivances which they brought
along to assault it. Those inside defended themselves well, killing
many of the Chinese and doing all they could in our defense. The
Spaniards succeeded in setting fire to the Parian, obliging them to
retreat to a stone chapel, the erection of which had been begun,
twenty paces from the wall, named Avocacion de Nuestra Senora de
la Candelaria, where our men made a sortie to meet them and caused
them great loss. When the Chinese saw that they could not maintain
themselves there, they divided into three bands and went inland,
doing much damage. An attempt was made to reach them still, for
which purpose one of the old captains of this city, called Don Luis
de Velasco, was sent with a good force Of soldiers. He attacked them
one morning at dawn and killed more than three hundred. On the same
day, when he returned with the intention of doing them more damage,
he went so far into the enemy's country that they killed him there
with four or five other soldiers and two Franciscan friars. The
enemy placed and fortified themselves in a very strong place called
San Pablo de los Montes, about fifteen leguas from this city, more
or less. They sent to meet him there the captain and sargento-mayor
of this camp, Christoval de Axqueta. He, with a hundred Spaniards,
a number of native Indians, and some Japanese whom he took with him,
having located them and had a few engagements with them, invested and
took their fort, killing many of them. Those who could escape fled,
and all those who had remained were overcome and killed. Thence he went
on to the other army which was situated in a place called Vatangas,
about six leguas from the first. There our men used their utmost
efforts to overcome them. Finally, both on account of the laudable
efforts of the captain, as he is one of the best soldiers of this camp,
being a veteran and a good warrior, and likewise by the good behavior
of the soldiers and the help of the natives, they killed all the enemy
without losing a man, which was a very fortunate ending. This was the
end of this incident, but it has caused much anxiety as to what may
be expected from China. On this account provision is being made and
everything necessary is being put to rights and the fortifications
are being repaired. The governor and captain-general is aiding with
great pains and diligence, and he will give a longer account to your
Majesty of this incident, to which account we refer you.

The citizens of these islands have been very ready on this occasion
in lending aid, as have likewise the natives of this district,
particularly those of the provinces of Panpanga, Laguna, and Bulacan.

Father Fray Diego Guebara, prior of the Augustinian convent of this
city, is going [to Spain] on the affairs of his province, by which he
was chosen and elected for that purpose, as he is a religious of much
virtue, learning, and most Christian life, for which reason he was sent
to establish the order in Xapon. He did so very satisfactorily. From
him your Majesty, if you be so pleased, may order information on the
affairs of this country, of which he will give a full account, as he
is well informed in all things. There is nothing else which we can
report to your Majesty. May our Lord protect your very Catholic person
according to the needs of Christendom. Manila, December 12, 1603.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

The licentiate _Don Antonio de Ribera Maldonado_

The licentiate _Tellez Almacan_

The licentiate _Andres de Alcaraz_

The licentiate _Manuel de Madrid y Luna_

[_Endorsed_: "Manila; to his Majesty; 1603. The governor and Audiencia;
December 12. September 26, 1606. Examined, and to be joined with the
other papers which treat of this matter."]



TWO LETTERS FROM ECCLESIASTICS


Sire:

This country is greatly in need of relief, for it is rapidly going to
destruction. All its injury and loss is due to this, that the decrees
and orders of your Majesty, sent for the good government of these
islands, are not complied with. If these were observed, there would
be no more prosperous city in all your Majesty's dominions. Situated
here in sight of so many heathen, it would seem that the Lord had
set it here to be a new Rome, whence the gospel would go out through
all these kingdoms. The worst of the matter is that there are not
lacking persons here who maintain that the decrees of your Majesty
are not binding on the conscience, which gives opportunity for some
to violate them without any fear. It is nearly seventeen years since
the Order of St. Dominic was founded here; and in all this time they
have always preached the importance of obeying the royal decrees,
and that, if they were disregarded, the country must be ruined. The
truth of this has been seen this year, for our sins; for this country
was on the verge of ruin through the uprising of the Sangleys, who
attempted to make themselves masters of the city. They were emboldened
to this by seeing themselves so numerous, for they were more than
sixteen thousand; and these, added to those in the fleet when it
came from China, amounted to twenty thousand. The city was very hard
pressed, and in danger of being lost, together with the faith here
(which has been established at such a cost to the royal exchequer),
and the hopes for the increase of the church and its extension through
our new worlds. It could be clearly seen that the Lord alone led the
war for the destruction of this enemy--so pernicious for the spread of
the gospel, and averse to natural law, for they were a very Sodom; and
with their intercourse with the natives, this cancer was spreading. It
is certain that if the Sangleys had had a concerted leadership, they
would have been masters of the city with little enough opposition;
for they could have entered as they usually did on their business,
and taken possession of the weapons of the citizens, which were all
left in the houses without being guarded, as the people lived without
fear or apprehension. The Sangleys are clever at all things, but the
Lord blinded them so that this might not come about. If your Majesty
should ask who is to blame in this so serious matter, we should say
that it is they that have not kept the decrees of your Majesty; for
your Majesty commanded years ago that no Sangleys should be left here
except those strictly necessary for the service of the city, [29]
and its cabildo has repeatedly petitioned that only three thousand
be allowed. This has not been complied with; but, on the contrary,
each year more and more have been allowed to stay, until the said
sixteen thousand have gathered here. Finding themselves so numerous,
they plotted the said treason. Your Majesty's decree providing
reformation for the future was the occasion for so many remaining;
for, as licenses in writing were given to those who remained and
paid the said license fees, this vicious profit was the cause for
this evil. In one of the past years I heard that these licenses had
cost sixty thousand pesos, which seemed to me almost incredible. This
year its possibility was demonstrated by an incident that happened to
me. There came to me several Sangleys recently arrived from China, and
besought me to procure licenses for them to remain in the country. I
told them that I would not do so; but within a few days they returned
and showed me the licenses that had been given them, for which five
tostons each had been exacted. When I recounted this occurrence to a
God-fearing person, he told me that there were licenses that cost as
high as seven and eight pesos, and others sold at five or six. For
the punishment of past acts, and in provision for the future, your
Majesty must send a rigorous inspection, in order that those who have
put the country and the faith in such danger may be punished. Your
Majesty should not trust the various papers that come from here,
for it is evident that those who feel themselves in the wrong, will
attempt to clear themselves of the blame. Some person should come to
make the investigation who is zealous for the honor of God and the
service of your Majesty, that he may punish the guilty and provide
better things for the future. We, the servants of your Majesty,
pray to the Lord of light and to your Majesty to send such a person;
but we believe that if he be not an ecclesiastic, all will remain in
darkness; for, as your Majesty is so far away, there is not here due
fear of punishment. One of the auditors of these islands told me years
ago that the judges in Castilla ordinarily performed their duties
well because they were seeking honor, and this they could not gain
except by such behavior; but that in the Yndias it was the reverse,
and that what the judges seek is to enrich themselves. If this be
their aim, they must needs fail in their obligations. Your Majesty,
for the love of God, must have compassion on this land, and send
someone to remedy it. Your Majesty has holy prelates here who could
assist in this. May our Lord protect your Majesty for the good of
His church for many years. Manila, December 15, 1603.

_Fray Bernardo de Santa Catalina_, vicar, and provincial of the Order
of St. Dominic, and commissary of the Holy Office.

Sire: The infidel Chinese, whom your Majesty's ministers have
allowed in these islands, had come to be so numerous that in their
alcaiceria alone, and in the suburbs adjoining Manila, there were
about fifteen thousand of them without counting those in other
parts of the islands. There were among these a certain number of
worthless persons, vicious and criminal, who on that account did
not dare to return to China. As the multitude of Chinese was so
great, and this low and vicious element was among them, they were
emboldened; and, excited by a rumor (which was false, although by no
means absurd to them) that the Spaniards intended to kill them, they
revolted, on the night of the eve of St. Francis' day of this year,
six hundred and three. With clubs for weapons, they killed on that
same day many Spaniards, who were marching against them. These were
of the most noble and valiant men in the islands, and in the prime
of life, under the command of that most Christian and valiant man,
Don Luis Perez Dasmarinas. On the third day, with their clubs only,
and the few weapons secured from our men whom they had killed, they
sallied out and forced us close to this city. God fought with us,
and delivered us, for the good of this Christian community, which is
steadily growing in this region. There is no doubt that if God had
not blinded them, so that they should not succeed in their mode of
warfare, it would not have taken them two hours to kill us all in
Manila, and make themselves masters of all this country without the
least risk to themselves. This did not come about through any neglect
on your Majesty's part to command the Audiencia of these islands
to drive out these infidels, nor through lack of advice from here,
but it was due to the fault of your Majesty's chief officers here,
in not complying with what your Majesty has ordered them; so they
have put this country in the greatest danger, and perchance will
cause its entire and irremediable ruin in the near future.

Even since this, the enemy from Mindanao, who are naked savages,
have come and carried away many hundreds of captive Indians,
many of whom straightway became their servants. Nothing is heard
in these islands but the accounts of misfortunes. These matters,
and the many expenditures that have been made and are still going
on in your Majesty's royal exchequer in these islands, as well as
many other serious affairs, demand, Sire, that your Majesty send a
general inspector here, and choose for this a man who is of great
integrity and with great reputation for purity from all taint of
greed. If this inspection be not made, there is no redress for this
land. All the said Chinese, about fifteen hundred, have been killed,
except it be a few who have been kept as slaves in your Majesty's
service. The Spanish residents of this city greatly aided in the
fighting, and in their conscientious behavior and in prayer the Indians
were very loyal--as also the Christian Chinese, except some seven or
eight of them. It is not known how this affair will be considered in
China. If the alcaiceria of the infidel Chinese is again permitted,
I assure you that a second uprising will surely occur. Let them come,
but remain in their ships and sell their goods. Your Majesty should
not trust the Spaniards, on account of their greed, in anything which
may prove the ruin of this country. I can do no more than advise.

This letter is brought by a father of the Order of St Augustine, named
Fray Diego de Guevara, prior of the convent of San Augustin here. His
order is sending him on its own affairs, which are serious and call
for much amelioration; accordingly they are sending the said father
to your Majesty's presence. I recognize in him a very religious and
learned man. I am sure that it would be for the great service of the
Lord if your Majesty would listen to him, and give your royal favor
and attention to all he may say in regard to reformation, and the
general welfare of his order, and the betterment of this land--as to
a man who was present in this affair of the Chinese, and knows the
misfortunes and captures in these islands due to the naked Indian
wretches of Mindanao, and as to a learned and religious man. Manila,
December 16, 1603.

_Fray Miguel_,
bishop, and archbishop elect of the Philipinas.

[_Endorsed_: "Manila, to his Majesty; 1603. The archbishop; December
16, 1603." "September 26, 1606. Have this placed with the other
letters-credential of Fray Diego de Guevara."]



LETTERS FROM PEDRO DE ACUNA


Sire:

Having written and sealed the folio which will go with this, on
Friday the eve of St. Francis' day of this year, and set thereto the
date of the following day, when some one was to depart and take it,
on that same Friday night there occurred the insurrection of the
Chinese which I shall recount in this.

In the letter of the third of July of this year, which went with the
ship which left here for Nueva Hespana, I wrote to your Majesty that
three mandarins had come to this city from the kingdom of China,
under pretense that they were coming to investigate a lie which a
Sangley who had been here had told to their king--saying that in
Cavite there was a great quantity of gold; and that with that and
the silver which could be obtained from this kingdom every year
his vassals might be relieved from tribute. The care which was
exercised in this matter, and what occurred to me in regard to it,
I have written to your Majesty in the said letter. I told you how I
was preparing, being in uncertainty, what appeared to me necessary,
so that if anything should happen I should not be caught unprepared;
accordingly, as the houses of the Parian were very near to the wall,
I had several of them demolished so that this space might be free. I
wrote to the alcaldes-mayor and magistrates of this district, and
they sent me a memorial concerning the natives in the jurisdiction
of each one, what weapons they possessed, and in how far they might
be trusted. I had them visit the Sangleys, and see what arms and
provisions they had, particularly the stone-workers, lime-burners,
sawyers, fishermen, and gardeners, as they were people who reside
in the country, and for this reason it will be right to exercise
more caution in living with them; and likewise in order to have
them make arrows, bows, pikes, baqueruelos, and other articles for
the royal warehouses, as it is from these that all of the military
supplies are provided. I likewise ordered that they should collect,
bring together, and transport as many provisions as possible. I was
not careless in regard to the walls, but rather with much diligence
repaired what was necessary; and I continued the building of the fort
which I wrote your Majesty was being made on the point, as it was so
necessary a defense, and the supplies and other articles had to be
gathered and guarded there. To this end I had brought a great number
of Sangleys for the works, and had contracted with them to construct a
ditch in the part where their Parian and alcayceria stand, and along
the whole front from the river to the sea; and, as the plan shows,
this may be flooded with water at high tide, which enters through
the river. As all the Sangleys had knowledge of this, and there were
among them restless and vagabond people who had nothing to lose,
and who on account of their crimes, evil life, and debts could not
go back to China without being punished there for these things with
much severity, they took this as a pretext to win over the merchants
and quiet people, persuading them that the precautions and measures
which I was taking were in order to kill them; and, since the Sangleys
were so many and we so few, it would be well to be beforehand with
us and kill us, taking our lands. When this came to my knowledge I
had them assemble several times, and explained to them the mistake
under which they were laboring, and that the Spaniards were not a
people to harm anyone who did not deserve it. I told them to be calm,
and confide in me; and that I would do them no harm if they on their
part gave me no reason to do so. It appeared that they were quieted,
but the gamblers and worthless people--who were very numerous, and
had been the prime instigators--incited and persuaded them in such
manner that they made them believe that I and the friendly Spanish
merchants who were with them and conferred with them were deceiving
them. Accordingly many of those in the Parian withdrew from there,
and went over to the other side of the river, as if fleeing from
the Spaniards because they wished to kill them. Although this was
publicly known eight days before their uprising, and I was aware of
it all the time, it was supposed that they were fleeing out of fear,
and merely to place themselves in safety. They left in the Parian about
2,500 Sangleys who were considered peaceable, and among them five or
six hundred _Avays_ who are merchants and people of better conduct
than the others, for these gave information of what the others were
doing. Although the same effort was made to stir them up, they never
belonged to that party, or attempted to leave the Parian; for they
are a gentle and prosperous people, with a liking for trade. The rest
assembled at a place about a legua from Manila, close to the monastery
of San Francisco del Monte, whereupon followed what is contained in
the relation which will go with this, to which I refer you.

The Audiencia has proceeded against Christian Sangleys who are
implicated in this uprising; and in a few cases justice has been
executed, particularly on Juan Baptista de Vera. They have confiscated
his goods, which are understood to amount to 15,000 pesos, including
that part of them which went this year to Nueva Hespana. From the
investigations which have been made in this connection, and what some
of those implicated have declared, it is understood that this uprising
was instigated from China; and that it was discussed with the mandarins
who were here, or with some one of them. However that may be, at any
rate it is considered quite certain that it was due to the restlessness
of worthless people, with a hankering for innovations, so that they
might enjoy the freedom which they usually have on such occasions,
having no other gods than their own vices. Undecided as to what to
do with the five hundred or more Sangleys who have been kept alive
for the galleys, I have continued the fortifications, with the work
of other natives. Likewise several bastions have been erected which
were still incomplete, and the wall is being made higher in those
parts where it is necessary. They are opening trenches and helping
at other very necessary works; and therefore I already have things
in good condition, and the fort on the point repaired, to put it in
a state of defense; and this work is being continued very diligently.

Likewise it has seemed best to me to send notice to China concerning
the event, lest by chance some ships of Sangleys may have fled thither,
and by gilding their crime and insubordination may have succeeded
in throwing the blame upon the Spaniards; for this, if there were
no advices there of the truth, might at least disturb traffic, and
make the merchants uncertain as to whether to come this year, which
would be an irreparable loss for this whole commonwealth. Thereby the
treasury of your Majesty would lose more than 52,000 pesos, which is
the usual value of the duties collected from merchandise that comes
from China--to say nothing of what is paid and the increase in value
at Acapulco, Mexico, and other parts where the cloth is taken. I have
accordingly despatched a ship with a person of ability and prudence,
carrying letters, some for the viceroys of Canton and Chincheo and
other mandarins, and others from the Sangley Avays who could be found
alive, written to their relatives and kinsmen, and the partners of
the dead men. All these give an account of the event, and tell how
the property of the Avays which they left in the hands of their
Spanish friends is deposited at good interest, to be added to it
for whomsoever is the owner; and that the debts which were owed by
Spaniards to Sangleys who were not implicated in the uprising would
also be paid. The Chinese were also informed that the merchants could
proceed with their commerce for the future, and that they would find
a hearty reception; but that they must go back in their ships the
same year. Although this is so pressing a reason for sending this
information, I was also led to do so in order that we might learn
whether in China they were getting together a fleet directed against
this country, as has been suspected since the coming of the mandarins,
and as we were led to believe by the letter which they wrote to me
before they disembarked, a duplicate copy of which I sent to your
Majesty. The whole city is very apprehensive of this, and chiefly the
archbishop and the orders, particularly the Dominicans. Although,
as I have said, I have left nothing undone in any way which could
provide for the defense and protection of this land, yet it would
be of much importance to obtain definite knowledge beforehand. This
despatch is directed to Malan [_sic; sc._ Macan] which is a settlement
of Portuguese in the land of China itself. I wrote to the commandant of
the place, and to the bishop and the fathers of the Society (which,
I am told, takes considerable part in the affairs of state), and
to the other orders and to private persons, recounting to them this
event. I sent to each of them a copy of the letter which I wrote to the
Chinese viceroy, so that, as they possess more extensive and intimate
knowledge of the Chinese customs, and of the conditions, and methods
of negotiating, they might advise the person who takes the despatch
what he should do in order the better to achieve his object and attain
success in his undertaking--representing to them the service which
they will render to your Majesty, and the obligation to them under
which these islands will be. Since, considering the great amount of
gunpowder and munitions which have been expended on this occasion,
these supplies may fail us, owing to what we fear from China, and
other troubles which every day arise, I wrote likewise to those persons
that they should buy for me and send as much gunpowder and saltpeter
as possible, on your Majesty's account; and that the royal officials
there should send it upon the credit of this treasury, so that it
could be paid for in this city--for only enough money was sent for
anchorage--money for the ships, and the expenses which are necessary
there. The Chinese will listen to no one if they are not paid first,
and it is a custom very strictly observed among them. If we are cut
off from China the many ordinary dangers cannot be overcome; and in
a country so surrounded by enemies and so far from reenforcements,
it is very necessary that these resources should remain, and not fail
us. May God grant that all come out according to our need; for if
the trade with China should fail, in no wise could this country be
maintained, nor could your Majesty sustain the great expenses here
without much difficulty. For the duties which the Chinese pay here,
and what the merchants who carry the cloth pay in Nueva Hespana,
amount to much more than what is expended here, as we are always
waging war with some nation or other, besides the ordinary expenses;
and the Christian religion which is so recently established among
these natives would be in great danger.

As soon as I arrived in this city I went out to inspect the Parian
of the Chinese, which certainly needed inspection. Considering the
many who were there, and those whom I met on all the streets and
everywhere I went, it appeared to me that there were great numbers
there. Accordingly I desired to learn under what regulation they
were living and residing there. Learning that the Audiencia had it in
charge, I spoke with the auditors about it, and told them that it was
my affair--I being the governor and captain-general, in whose charge
was the defense of the country, and not in that of the Audiencia or
any auditor who was caring for it. They answered me that your Majesty
had entrusted it to them and put it in their charge by a royal decree,
and that each year an auditor was chosen for this commission; and
that, if I wished it, it would be assigned to me in turn, but that
they could not give it up without giving an account thereof to your
Majesty, although they saw that I was right. This troubled me much,
and therefore I advised your Majesty of it in my letter of the eleventh
of July in the past year, one thousand six hundred and two.

Before this uprising of the Sangleys, immediately upon the departure of
the mandarins from here, as some disturbance had resulted from their
coming, among other precautions which I took was that of ordering
the establishment of several infantry captaincies for the natives,
particularly in the provinces of Pampanga, Bulasan, La Laguna de Vay,
Tondo, Bombon, and Calilaya. These are more reasonable people, and
more prosperous and civilized than the other Indians, because they are
nearer the city of Manila, and show more affection for the Spaniards,
and likewise because they have more courage and spirit. I wrote to
the alcaldes-mayor and the fathers; they sent me a memorandum of
those who appeared to them most fit, saying that they had told them
that they should immediately get their people ready and well armed,
each one with rations for a month. While this was being agreed upon,
the uprising took place, and this precaution was of the greatest
importance; for they were able to come without delay, and be of so much
use that without them I know not what would have happened. They are
very proud of being soldiers and of serving your Majesty in military
affairs, and therefore they have proved to be excellent troops. I
have made much of them, given them presents, and thanked them for
what they have done, for which they are grateful, and contented with
whatever may come to them. In every way it has been of the greatest
importance that these natives have lost their fear for the Sangleys,
and have declared against them. There are among them a number of
arquebusiers and musketeers. They are all a people fitted for the work,
and if captained by Spaniards they would be of much use. I have been
continuing the permission which they before had from the previous
governors to carry, in some cases, arquebuses and other arms; and as
they have proved to be good and faithful, the object has been attained.

In the said letter of the eleventh of July, 1602, I informed your
Majesty that I had not found a single armed galley, or crew therefor;
and that I had only fitted up a galeota, and that I was arming it
with the few condemned criminals who were here, and with those whom
I brought from Mejico and others whom I had joined with them. This
vessel remains still in service, for although I had resolved to set it
aside in some other business, as it was old and poorly designed and
needed a great deal of repair, on this emergency of the Sangleys it
appeared to me best to maintain it--and likewise a new one of nineteen
benches which I built and had armed, and another small galeota which
I had here, which used to be in Cebu. Although the latter was not
designed for a galeota, I had it so fitted up, and it will serve for
the present. Another galeota, of twenty-two or twenty-three benches,
I am having finished to serve as flagship; it will be launched inside
of twenty days, and will, I believe, be very good, according to the
curves which it has. Accordingly I shall arm four vessels--the new one,
this one which is being finished, the old one which was here, and the
little galeota (which has no more than fifteen benches). I have much
confidence in them in case the Chinaman should come; because great
loss could be inflicted on his ships, before he could disembark and
get ashore; and in any event they will be of use, for, although they
must be manned with Sangleys, this will necessitate greater prudence,
and all will be well arranged.

It has been a great help to me that I brought with me from Cartagena
and Nueva Hespana several skilful men experienced in regard to galleys,
who have been known to me from the time when I sailed with them from
Hespana--especially Captain Francisco Romanico, captain of one of
the armed galleys of the fleet on the Yndia route. As I knew him well
and was certain that he was a man of long service and great activity,
with much experience--for I have seen this on many occasions, as the
adelantado of Castilla would tell you if he were alive, as he set much
store by him--and fearing that I should find affairs here ill-provided
for, I persuaded him to come with me and leave the galleon, as it
was all for the service of your Majesty. I begged General Marcos de
Aramburu to give him permission for this, as he did. Accordingly he
has been setting things to rights, which without his aid could not
have been done, for there are no boatswains, or officers, or persons
who understand the management or working of galleys; and accordingly
they are being built anew, with labor enough on his part and mine,
of which I have wished to give your Majesty an account.

I likewise wrote to your Majesty in the said letter of the third of
July of this year, that as I had had word in the month of April past
that they were taking up arms in Mindanao to go and harry the Pintados
(as they are accustomed to do each year), I had the old galeota
armed. I ordered General Don Juan Ronquillo to go with a company
of infantry to Oton, which is opposite Mindanao; so that with these
troops, and others which are there and in Cebu, he might oppose the
enemy, and do them what damage he could. Having met several caracoas on
the way, they fled from him, and he could not overtake them. He went
on to Oton, where he remained with a few armed caracoas, in readiness
for what might occur. For the time being, the enemy did not make any
attempt to come to the islands, and as I was informed that they were
arming for the monsoons of September (as that time and May are the only
seasons of the year in which they make their raids), I notified the
said Don Juan Ronquillo to be waiting attentively, and ready to help
wherever the enemy might attack. That he might the better do this,
I sent him the new galeota of nineteen benches with more infantry
troops, and with them went the said captain Romanico. Having received
news that the enemy were on the point of setting out from Mindanao,
or had already gone, Don Joan left Oton in search of them; and while
on the way he was informed of the uprising of the Sangleys, and my
order that he should not embark, as the Mindanao enemy were already
in the Pintados. He did not stop to look for them or to oppose them,
but with all the troops on the expedition he came back here, leaving
in Cebu thirty paid men and as many more in Oton, so that with them
the citizens and residents of those places might defend themselves,
which was decided upon in a council of war. Considering that the troops
which Don Juan Ronquillo had in his fleet amounted to two hundred men
and more, and that those named in the relation died on the way, it
appeared that the former might be of great importance here, and that
it was very necessary that they should come to the defense of this
city, even though they should be putting the Pintados in danger; for,
if this city were out of danger, it might repair the other losses. It
was likewise taken into consideration that even if their recall were
not necessary on this occasion of the uprising, it would be so if the
Chinese came with their fleet between now and the month of March, at
which time they are expected, and during this whole season. When this
opportunity is passed, the galeotas cannot come nor can the troops,
seeing that the weather is contrary and navigation is very difficult
and dangerous. In short, the galeotas arrived here, both of them with
the troops, and remained in this fort. I was very glad to see them
here, as affairs turned out.

Among the prisoners who were taken by the Mindanao people last year
was Captain Martin de Mendia, a worthy man and an old encomendero
in this land. The enemy gave him his freedom on account of his good
reputation, and trusted him for his ransom. As he had given his word
to other Spanish prisoners whom they were also taking into captivity
that he would return to negotiate for their freedom--being resolved
upon this, and to ransom native chiefs from these islands who had
been taken captive at that time, and likewise to learn whether the
said Mindanao was arming to come back here--having arrived at the said
island of Mindanao and spoken with the commander Umpi, who was the head
of the army of the year past, the latter was greatly pleased to see
him, and agreed with him in regard to everything which he desired. He
gave to Captain Mendia, without ransom, three or four Spaniards whom
he held captive, and besought him with much importunity to make him
a friend of the Spaniards. He gave him a letter for me, and likewise
sent with it a nephew of his. Another chief, named Silonga, [30] who
holds the most authority of all in affairs of war, did likewise. He
also gave up without ransom two other Spaniards, a few natives, and
a priest, and likewise sent one of his nephews. They are both here;
and within the few days since they have arrived it is understood that
fifty ships from Mindanao have gone against the islands of Leyte and
Camar, which are in the province of Cebu, and have wrought havoc there;
the commander was Buycan, another chief from Mindanao. Between these
three, Umpi, Silonga, and Buycan, and the present king, Rajaniora,
the whole country is divided, and the military power; likewise each
one has his own following and people, set apart and acknowledged. They
have usually dissensions and controversies among themselves, for he
who has the most people and wealth seeks to be more esteemed than
the others. But against the Spaniards and their other enemies they
confederate and unite, and ordinarily Silonga has the most power. His
nephew and others claim that he is not to blame for the expedition
of Buycan--saying that although he knew of it, and desired that he
should not go out upon the raid, and even asked him not to, and to
that end gave him a bonus of gold, he could not prevail upon him; nor
was this a matter for him to forcibly interfere in, because there is
no subjection of the one to the other. It is thus that matters stand,
and we needs must tolerate it for the present, since nothing else can
be done, considering the news which we are expecting from China. If
this had not intervened, we had resolved to seek them with the galeotas
and other oared vessels in their own country in this month of January,
and to harry and lay waste their coasts, obstructing their harbors
and rivers and burning their vessels. This, by not allowing them to
depart from their own coasts, would inflict great damage upon them;
but it is necessary, as I said, to employ some other means which
is now being examined into. I shall advise your Majesty as to what
resolution is taken, by way of Nueva Espana.

I likewise informed your Majesty of the straits in which your
royal treasury was because of the little money which had come from
Mejico this year--not only for the treasury, but for the citizens as
well; and because of the expenses which have been incurred in this
affair with the Sangleys, and others which are presenting themselves
every day. The treasury is so poor and needy that I find myself in a
thousand difficulties, having no place whence to draw money; and it is
necessary that it should not fail when occasion demands, or we shall
lose everything. Although all the people are encouraged to do all in
their power, and the natives help, yet as they are poor--because their
property is in the power of the Mejicans, who will not send it back,
saying they have not permission therefor, as I explained to you in
the last letter--it is little they can do in this matter. Indeed,
in order to send advices to China it was necessary for the citizens
to lend here a plate and there a pitcher, and other pieces of silver,
for money there is none; and the little silver which remained to me,
after the loan which I had made to the fund for aiding the soldiers,
I also gave on this occasion and with all ... this infantry, to pay
two instalments of their pay; and as they were not given rations
they endured much suffering, so that I was greatly troubled by the
difficulties and weakness that resulted--and at the time when it
was most reasonable to keep them content and paid. I beseech your
Majesty to be pleased to order that the viceroy of Nueva Espana be
notified to provide immediately a considerable quantity of money,
so that this embarrassment may at once cease; as it is a very great
difficulty that when anything is brought for the treasury we can make
no use of it except to pay past debts, and it is not even sufficient
for that. May our Lord preserve your Majesty in that prosperity which
is needful for Christendom. Manila, December 18, 1603.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

[_Endorsed_ "Manila; to his Majesty; 1603. Don Pedro de Acuna;
December 18. Duplicate."]

Sire:

In a clause of a letter which I have just written to your Majesty, I
give a particular account of the uprising of the Sangleys who rebelled
against this city. I set forth the measures which I immediately took
upon my arrival here to have the Audiencia refer to me the licenses for
the Sangleys who were allowed to remain here, since I was charged with
the defense of the country against them and other nations who come
here to trade. I also desired this in order to remove and prevent
certain difficulties which arose by reason of this, in connection
with my proceedings, from those who have that matter in charge,
and from your ministers, whom I have informed on various occasions
to be careful in what they did. The whole city blames them, as it
appears that, although it was agreed that there should not be more
than four thousand Sangleys, yet there were found in the uprising
more than eighteen thousand. This is a matter which has much to do
with the condition of affairs here, and it requires an investigation,
because the people keenly feel their losses, and are complaining. I
give an account hereof to your Majesty, so that the matter may be
understood. May our Lord protect the Catholic person of your Majesty,
according to the needs of Christendom. Manila, December 23, 1603.

_Don Pedro de Acuna_

[_In the margin_: "This matter is already provided for as appeared
expedient; (_between the lines_: "In a letter of December 18,
603"); and as to the matter of the licenses, the inconveniences
mentioned should be well considered, as they result from giving so
many licenses."]

[_Endorsed:_ "July 21, 1606; examined and provided for within."]



RELACION DE LAS ISLAS FILIPINAS


By Father Pedro Chirino, S.J. Roma: printed by Estevan Paulino,
in the year MDCIV.

_Source_: This is translated from the original printed work, for which
purpose have been used the copies belonging to Harvard University
and to Edward E. Ayer, of Chicago.

_Translation_: This is made by Frederic W. Morrison, of Harvard
University, and Emma Helen Blair.




                               RELATION
                        OF THE FILIPINAS ISLANDS
                AND OF WHAT HAS THERE BEEN ACCOMPLISHED


               By the Fathers of the Society of _Jesus_.


   _By Father Pedro Chirino_ of the same Society Procurator for those
                                Islands.

  _At Roma_, By Estevan Paulino, in the year MDCIV. _By permission of
                            the Superiors_.



This relation of the Philippines, composed by Father Pietro Cirino,
having been examined by three theologians of our Society, may be
printed if it shall seem advisable to the most reverend Monsignor
Vicegerent and to the most reverend Father Master of the Sacred Palace.

_Claudio_ [_Aquaviva_], general of the Society.

Let it be printed, at the pleasure of the most reverend Father,
master of the Sacred Palace.

_B. Gypsius_, vicegerent.

This account of the affairs of the Philippine Islands, by the
reverend Administrator Father Petrus Chirinus, of the Society of
Jesus, is published with permission. Nothing in it, in my opinion,
is repugnant to the orthodox faith or the decrees of the Church,
or morality; on the contrary, I praise the diligence, learning,
and piety which I find in no small measure in the author and his book.

_Fray Thomas Malvenda_, of the Order of Preachers.

Let it be printed.

_Fray Joseph Maria_, master of the Sacred Apostolic Palace.



RELATION OF THE FILIPINAS ISLANDS
AND OF WHAT HAS THERE BEEN ACCOMPLISHED BY THE FATHERS OF THE SOCIETY
OF JESUS


_Sent to our very reverend Father Claudio Aquaviva, general of that
Society, by Father Pedro Chirino, procurator for those islands_.

I am about to relate to your Paternity the state and condition of
our insignificant Society in the Filipinas, in accordance with the
obligation of my office as procurator sent here from those regions
in the month of July, six hundred and two, and as one who has spent
there fourteen years of the best of his life. [31] I shall follow the
thread of incidents which have befallen the Society in that region, and
the hardships that it has undergone while preaching our holy faith. I
shall also consider how that Society has grown in connection with its
services toward the holy Church. That I may do so more conveniently,
my narrative will begin at the time when our religion was first
established in those islands, treating of the islands themselves,
their characteristics, and those of the nations and peoples who
inhabit them. I shall touch somewhat upon their history and upon
events that have occurred there, noting only what concerns my purpose,
and that briefly; for a complete and copious history of those islands
has been written, [32] with exceeding care, truth, and eloquence, by
Doctor Antonio de Morga of the Council of his Catholic Majesty, and
his auditor in the royal Chancilleria of Manila. Moreover, apart from
the consideration of the above book, it is neither my obligation nor
my profession to write a history; although there certainly are in that
land magnificent, singular, and wonderful things, both profitable and
pleasing to know. I feel confident, however, that the matter contained
in this short narrative will not fail to please your Paternity, in
proportion as you are informed of the fidelity and truth with which
our Lord (may He guard your Paternity) is served in those most distant
parts of the world by your sons who are there.



Of the name of the Filipinas, their discovery, and location. Chapter I.

The Filipinas are a part of the many islands which recent cosmographers
consider adjacent to Asia--as the Canarias and the Terceras [_i.e._,
Azores] are to Africa; and Inglaterra [England], Escocia [Scotland],
Hibernia, Irlanda, Olanda [Holland], Gelanda [Iceland], and the
Oreadas [Orkney] Islands, to Europe. Some of the islands of this
great archipelago cross the equinoctial line, or the torrid zone,
and following the coast-line of Great China and India, terminate on
the north side with the islands of Japon, which extend beyond the
fortieth degree; in the south the archipelago has as yet no known
termination. The Filipinas are between the Malucas and the islands
of Japon; and it is a thing to be wondered at that the exertions and
diligence of the Portuguese, who discovered, explored, and settled
Maluco, China, and Japon, the outermost and peripheral islands,
should not have discovered the middle part, or center, namely, the
Filipinas. It is true, they were informed concerning the island of
Burney, which is the most southern of the archipelago; they did
not, however, stop there, being bound for the islands of Maluco,
in eager quest of spices and drugs, which are to be found there in
such abundance. It was this very desire to secure drugs that caused
the Spaniards, or Castilians, to discover and settle the Filipinas,
as is well known. For when Hernando Magallanes was in quest of
the aforesaid drugs for the crown of Castilla, in the days of the
emperor Charles Fifth, he came upon the island of Sebu, where,
at the expense of his life, [33] he proved that the entire voyage
from Nueva Espana could be made, avoiding the tedious route through
the Strait and the necessity of sailing thither from Spain. [34]
Villalobos did the same soon after, but our Lord destroyed his fleet,
leaving the captain and his crew shipwrecked on the island of Maluco,
where necessity compelled them to fraternize and remain with the
Portuguese. [35] Father Cosme de Torres, our illustrious apostle
of Japon, took part in this expedition, and was found in Maluco by
the Blessed Father Francisco, who received him as his companion,
and as a member of our Society. [36] The Castilians persisted in
making a third attempt to send a fleet from Nueva Espana for the same
purpose. With the warning and experience of the two former expeditions,
they well knew the locality of Sebu, and cast their anchors there. God,
who destined them not for Maluco but for the Filipinas, caused them
to abandon the thought of Maluco and to settle the latter islands,
thus bringing them to the bosom of the Church and to the crown of
Castilla; they gave these the name of Filipinas, out of respect to,
and to perpetuate the memory of, King Filipo Second. [37] It was
during his reign that this third expedition took place, as well as the
discovery and conversion of the islands--which was accomplished by only
five hundred Spaniards with six Augustinian religious, holy men and
learned. Among them was the reverend Father Martin de Herrada, [38]
a great cosmographer and mathematician, but still more distinguished
as a holy and truly apostolic man. He was the first who made converts
to Christianity in the Filipinas, preaching to them of Jesus Christ
in their own tongue--of which he made the first vocabulary, which I
have seen and have also studied.



The discovery of an image of the child Jesus, which gave its name to
the city of Sebu; the holy patrons of the same and of Manila. Chapter
II.

The city of the natives in the port of Sebu was at that time
so large and populous that it extended a space of more than a
legua along the beach, on the spot where now stands the city and
fortress of the Spaniards. As the Indians had already in the past
experienced the valor of the latter, and were fearful at thought of
their treachery in killing Magallanes years before, they greatly
feared our men on this occasion. Upon sighting our vessels, they
began to offer all possible resistance with their bows and arrows,
lances and shields--such being their arms--to prevent our men from
landing. When our people saw the islanders disposed to hostility,
they discharged some cannon into the air, frightening them to such
an extent that they abandoned their houses and fled inland. Thereupon
our men leaped ashore unimpeded and began to seek food in the houses
(as is the custom among those who have just disembarked after a
long voyage). At this juncture it happened that a Biscayan who was
rummaging among the movables and ornaments of one of the houses,
found in a basket, among other things, a carved image of the
holy child Jesus, presumably left as a trophy of the devotion of
some good soldier of the first expedition of Magallanes. [39] The
Indians, partly on account of the novelty of the image, which they
understood to be the God of the Christians, and partly on account of
the respect and reverence with which our Lord himself inspired them,
held the object in great veneration, as was afterwards learned, and
had recourse to it in all their necessities--making sacrifices to it
after their custom, and anointing it with their oils, as they were
accustomed to anoint their idols. And our Lord exercising, moreover,
His wonted mercy toward those who honored Him without knowing Him,
did not act otherwise toward those who, in their ignorance of Him,
were at the same time offending Him; He succored them most liberally
in their needs, as a token and pledge of the greater favors which He
had marked out for them when they should come to a knowledge of Him,
and preserved for these times which they are now enjoying. For which
reason they had recourse frequently to this image in their necessities,
calling it "the Divata of the Castilians;" for among them "Divata"
is God, whom the inhabitants of Manila call Bathala or Anito, [40]
as we shall see later. The good Biscayan upon seeing the holy Child,
was filled with a strange joy and happiness, and desiring to share
it with the rest of the expedition, began to cry aloud in his own
absurd language, "Bear witness to God, thou hast found His Son." The
religious at once took possession of the image, regarding it as
a good omen; and out of respect and devotion to it named the city
that they founded Santissimo Nombre de Jesus, and placed the image
in a church of their order erected in the city. There it remains
in highest veneration, and has wrought many miracles, particularly
in childbirths, whence it is both facetiously and piously called El
Partero ["man-midwife"]. Each year it is borne in solemn procession
from the church of St. Augustine to the spot in which it was found,
where a chapel has since been erected. The procession takes place upon
the same day when the discovery was made--namely, on the twenty-ninth
of April, the feast of the glorious martyr St. Vital, who is patron
of the city, and as such that day is kept as a solemn feast in his
honor. One of the regidors, appointed each year for this purpose,
brings out the banner of the city; he is on that day clad in livery,
and invites the public to the festivals. [41] There are bull-fights and
other public festivities and rejoicings, with many novel fireworks,
such as wheels and sky-rockets, which the Sangleys make the night
before; on this occasion they construct things well worth seeing, and
which appear well-nigh supernatural. The city of Manila holds similar
festivities on the feast-day of the glorious apostle St. Andrew,
who was chosen as its patron because, on his feast-day, the city was
delivered from the blockade of the pirate Limahon. At that time the
city had no fortress or walls, or any stone buildings; and in all
the islands there were no more than five hundred Spaniards, as I
learned from one of them. These few men alone compelled the enemy,
who numbered more than a thousand fighting men, to withdraw from the
city; and they even pursued and harried the pirates in such wise, by
blocking the mouth of the river Pangasinan (where they had retired
with their ships), that to escape the fury of our men they were
obliged to construct some light craft within their fort. They are
said to have calked these, for want of pitch, with their own blood;
and to have carried them on their shoulders for several leguas over
land, until they succeeded in launching them into the sea, and fled
under full sail. They left their ships in the river and dismantled
the forts and camps, where our men found some spoils, of which I saw
a part. But satisfaction over the booty was outweighed by chagrin at
losing the enemy whom they had practically in their hands. The enemy,
however, had received such a lesson that they never returned.

Some years afterwards they planned to elect another patron against
hurricanes, which are called in those parts _vagios_, and by the
Portuguese _tufones_. [42] They are furious winds which, springing
up ordinarily in the north, veer toward the west and south, and move
around the compass in the space of twenty hours or more.

One of these days of tempest is a very Judgment day; especially
if it overtake one in the night-time, and in a wooden house. It
rends some houses, and turns others over on one side; still others
(and most frequently) it destroys and hurls to the ground. With the
assistance of the bishop of Yucatan, [43] who was at that time dean
of the church, the cathedral of Manila had been temporarily erected,
with pillars of the very strongest trees, so large that two men could
not reach around them; and all the timber above and below was on the
same scale; yet in half an hour one of these typhoons destroyed the
newly-built cathedral, and left only the tabernacle of the most Holy
Sacrament between four pillars. In this accident some people were
killed: for, fleeing from their houses, which were falling to pieces
over their heads, they betook themselves for greater safety to the
church. The vessels in the bay were hurled ashore the distance of a
stone's throw, and those who were caught in the tempest were carried
away like straw. To remedy so great an evil, lots were cast with great
solemnity at a concourse of all classes; from these came forth the
[name of the] most glorious virgin St. Potenciana--not without much
mystery; for, on the day when the event took place (the 19th of May),
one of the earliest settlers, hearing her name called, arose and said:
"Hers is the day when we first entered Manila, by which it is meant
that our Lord chose to inform us of the obligation that we owe to
this glorious Saint." What followed confirmed his statement; for
from that time forward there has been a notable improvement in this
respect, the storms and the fury of the winds recognizing the favor
and protection of this blessed virgin.



How the Spaniards spread over all the Filipinas to Manila. Chapter III.

The people of Sebu did not remain a long time in retirement. Assured
of the good friendship of the Spaniards for them, and that through it
they should have many commodities which they needed, together with
defense and help against their enemies, and peace in the islands
(of which they were so desirous, being weary of the continual and
grievous wars and evils with which they had harassed one another),
they all repaired to the Spaniards to be baptized, and to offer
them their services. They entered, moreover, into such fraternal and
confidential relations with the Spaniards that they soon came to long
for the honor which might be theirs from association with them, and
from serving them with their industry and lands--not only providing
them with what was needful for their sustenance, but acting as guides
in the exploration and conquest of the other islands as far as Manila,
which is the principal and foremost island among them all.

For this reason the Sebuans are privileged and exempt from taxation,
as a reward for their friendly services and loyalty. In the beginning
the pacification of the Islands was strongly resisted, and some
deaths among our men ensued; yet, in spite of this, those few reduced
and subjugated everything and began to establish our holy faith,
gently bringing the villages, with their chiefs, into obedience
to the Church and to the crown of Castilla. The method which they
pursued was consistent with the practice of those nations in forming
a friendship--a method not altogether their own, as it was a custom
among the most ancient heathen peoples, mention of which we find in
serious authors. Those who made peace in the name of the rest, and
established the pacts of perpetual friendship, pricked and wounded
their own arms; the Indian sucking the blood of the Spaniard, and the
Spaniard that of the Indian. In this wise they became as if of the
same blood, and were closer than brothers. These are called _sandugo_,
which means "consanguineous," or "of the same blood."



Of the entry of the fathers of the Society into the Filipinas. Chapter
IV.

These islands offer good inducements to the Spaniards, as well
as for ecclesiastics and religious, to make settlements: to the
former, because the islands are numerous and thickly inhabited by a
people who, though not rich, were accustomed to wear cotton and silk
garments, and gold pieces (not merely of thin plate) and brooches to
fasten them; and rich necklaces, pendants, ear-rings, finger-rings,
ankle-rings, on the neck, ears, hands, and feet--the men, as well as
the women. They even used to, and do yet, insert gold between their
teeth as an ornament. Although among the other ornaments which they
used were to be found articles of considerable interest and curiosity
which could be described, there is one practice which seems more worthy
of attention than the others--namely, that of wearing rings upon the
instep of the foot. This seems to be precisely the same custom that
the ancients wrote about when they mentioned nations who used gold
for fetters and chains, especially among the nobles. Their ornamenting
the teeth is also worth notice, although it is a barbarous practice to
deprive them of their natural whiteness, which God conferred upon the
teeth for the beauty of man. On the other hand, they showed themselves
to be both skilful and prudent in trying to maintain them as necessary
instruments for the preservation of health and life. They are thus
very diligent in rinsing out their mouths and cleansing their teeth
after eating, and upon arising in the morning. For the same purpose
they treat and adorn their teeth in the following way: From early
childhood they file and sharpen them, [44] either leaving them uniform
or fashioning them all to a point, like a saw--although this latter
is not practiced by the more elegant. They all cover their teeth with
a varnish, either lustrous black or bright red--with the result that
the teeth remain as black as jet, or red as vermilion or ruby. From
the edge to the middle of the tooth they neatly bore a hole, which
they afterward fill with gold, so that this drop or point of gold
remains as a shining spot in the middle of the black tooth. This
seems to them most beautiful, and to us does not appear ugly.

These people were and still are very sagacious, and keen in traffic and
bargaining, and in buying and selling; and they applied themselves to
all gainful pursuits--and not least to agriculture and to the breeding
of animals, regularly carried on for the profits thus made. They
have not only great harvests of rice (which is their ordinary bread),
but also crops of cotton, with which they clothe themselves, and from
which they manufacture quantities of cloths, which were, and are yet,
much esteemed in Nueva Espana. For this reason, the Spaniards regarded
them as a people from whom large profits might be gained, and they
were not mistaken, for, from the gains on cotton fabrics alone (which
there they call _lompotes_), one encomendero left an estate of more
than one hundred and fifty thousand pesos in a few years. The soil
is not only good and favorable with a sunny climate, but fertile
and rich. Besides possessing many gold mines and placers--of which
they make but small account, because of the China silks which bring
them more profit--they raise fowls in great abundance. Besides the
domestic fowls, which are most numerous and very cheap, the fields
are full of wild ones. There is an infinite number of domestic swine,
not to mention numberless mountain-bred hogs, which are very fat,
and as good for lard as the domestic breed. There are also many goats
which breed rapidly, bearing two kids at a time and twice yearly;
there are entire islands abounding with them. As to the buffaloes,
there called carabaos, there are beside the tame and domestic breed,
many mountain buffaloes, which are used [as food] the same as those in
Europe--although somewhat less ugly in appearance, and with singularly
large horns, three times the size of those of our breed. They have
remarkable skill in striking with these horns; lowering the beard to
the breast, with the point of the horn they lift up the most minute
object. In spite of these formidable qualities both Indians and
Spaniards hunt and slay them. Their flesh, whether fresh or dried,
is as good as the most excellent beef. Deer are so abundant that the
Japanese import cargoes of their hides from these islands. The sea
abounds in all kinds of delicate fish; trees, fruits, vegetables,
and garden-stuff are abundant--especially bananas, of which there
are as many different kinds as in Europe there are varieties of
apples and other fruits. There are six or eight species of orange,
the most famous of which is an orange as big as a large-sized melon
or gourd. Some of these are white inside, like limes; others are as
red as our oranges are yellow; and all kinds are as well-flavored as
bunches of delicate grapes. In general, the fruits of those regions,
although different from ours in species and form, have much the same
flavor as the European fruits. The palms, of which there are many
and varied species, are the vineyards and olive-orchards of that
country. For beside the many other uses and advantages of this tree,
it yields wine, vinegar, and oil in sufficient quantities not only
to supply that region abundantly, but likewise to ship and send away
to other neighboring regions--especially furnishing wine to Japon,
Maluco, and Nueva Espana. The rigging of vessels is also manufactured
from this tree. In fact, there is such an abundance of the materials
necessary for the construction of ships that a vessel which is built
in Nueva Espana or Peru in several years' time for fifty or sixty
thousand pesos, is constructed in the Filipinas in less than one year,
and at a cost of less than eight thousand pesos. The cane is in itself
another miracle, especially the kind called _cauayan_, the size and
thickness of which are incredible. I shall not say what I have seen
of that species during fourteen years; but one of our Society lately
told me in Lisboa, while discussing this subject, that in the river
of London he had seen a vessel which had one of these canes for a
pump. In addition to Pliny, [45] the most ancient writer who makes
much mention of these canes, there are many moderns who testify to
their size--especially one who, from information received by those of
his nation who have coursed these seas (to our detriment and their
own danger), has written an account of these canes and of other
plants and fruits of that New World. Although this cane is so large,
it is so easily worked that it is employed in whatever is needed for
any of the uses of life; from vessels and houses (which can be made
from it in all their parts), its use extends to the pot and wood for
cooking. It seems to me that its uses could go no farther; and in
these it corresponds, too, with what Pliny [46] writes of the reed
and the papyrus--particularly as within the hollow of the cane, there
are membranes somewhat similar to beaten and glazed paper, on which
I have at times written. In some of the canes there is also found a
juice or liquor which is drunk as a luxury. There is nothing especially
remarkable in the fact that so much abundance should be deposited in
the hollow of these canes; for, just as in other regions trees need
water, in the Filipinas some are found which furnish it--acting as a
perpetual fountain for a whole community, even though it may be on the
apparently dry uplands. In all that locality there are no other springs
than these trees. The method which they employ for obtaining the liquid
from the tree is to make some cuts or incisions in the trunk and the
thicker branches; and out of these is distilled and flows a clear,
sweet water, in ample quantities. But, to return to the subject
of the canes, it should be known that in our church of Manila were
erected two ladders, each of which had only two canes somewhat more
than eight brazas in length: the steps consisted of strips and slips
cut from the said cane. They were used in decorating the church and
each one would sustain at its top two or three men; they were erected
without any prop being needed to sustain them. Each cane was at the
lowest part about three palmos in circumference, which crosswise or
in diameter would be about one palmo. [47] These ladders are well
adapted to such needs, for being, as they are, strong and yet hollow,
they are not very heavy, or hard to move. From these canes they make
in China the whips which with three or four blows kill a man.

To this abundance and fertility was added the proximity of China,
India, Japon, Malaca, and Maluco. From China they not only began to
ship their riches in silks and glazed earthenware, as soon as they
learned of our wealth of four and eight real pieces; but they also
stocked the islands with cattle (which have since multiplied there
exceedingly) and with horses and mares, and great stock-farms have
been established. The Chinese have also supplied provisions, metals,
fruits, preserves and various luxuries, and even ink and paper;
and (what is of much more value) there have come tradesmen of every
calling--all clever, skilful, and cheap, from physicians and barbers
to carriers and porters. The Chinese are the tailors, the shoemakers,
the blacksmiths, the silversmiths, sculptors, locksmiths, painters,
masons and weavers; in short, they represent all the trades of
the community. Their labor is so cheap that a pair of shoes costs
no more than two reals, and so many are made that they have been
shipped even to Nueva Espana. From India, Malaca, and Maluco come to
Manila male and female slaves, white and black, children and adults;
the men are industrious and obliging, and many are good musicians;
the women excellent seamstresses, cooks, and preparers of conserves,
and are neat and clean in service. The islands also import drugs,
spices, and precious stones; marble, pearls, seed-pearls, carpets,
and other riches. From Japon are imported much wheat, and flour, also
silver, metals, saltpeter, weapons, and many curiosities. All of these
things make life in that region pleasant and an object of desire to
men; and indeed it seems a copy of that Tyre so extolled by Ezekiel.

In the second place, as concerns the religious, there was from the
very beginning the very tractable disposition displayed by so many
natives of the islands in embracing the faith. But as the many and
excellent ministers whom the holy Order of St. Augustin promptly sent
thither were not sufficient for the task of converting the natives,
nor were those who were sent by the Order of the seraphic father
St. Francis, [48] which in the year 1580 already had in the islands
some establishments, and had made many conversions--the fathers of the
Society of Jesus were also needed. They were introduced, in that year,
by the first bishop of these islands, Don Fray Domingo de Salazar,
[49] a priest of the Order of St. Dominic--who afterward died in
the city of Toledo, as archbishop of Manila. This great prelate had
left his province of Mexico to consult with the Catholic king, Don
Felipe Second, concerning matters of grave importance; and, being by
his Majesty appointed bishop of the Filipinas, he soon sought from
the king permission to take with him to the islands members of the
Society--as appears from the same royal provision made for them
in Nueva Espana. Accordingly he took with him from that country
the first members of the Society to enter those islands--namely,
Father Antonio Sedeno and Father Alonso Sanchez. These, our fathers,
entered the city of Manila without cloaks, as I have heard Father
Antonio Sedeno himself relate, in commending their poverty; for those
which they brought with them from Mexico had worn out and rotted
in the voyage. They went to rest at [the convent of] San Francisco,
where those blessed fathers received them with much charity until they
found an abode--which they chose in a suburb of Manila, called Laguio,
very wretched and closely packed, and so poorly furnished that the
very chest in which they kept their books was the table upon which
they ate. Their only food for many days was rice boiled in water
without salt, oil, meat, fish, or even an egg, or any other thing;
sometimes as a dainty, they secured some salted sardines.

But the good bishop who had brought them did not leave them long in
such straits; for not only did he offer us his library, and show us
other acts of kindness and charity as a true father, but he tried
to improve the site of our habitation, as soon as he saw that those
first fathers had no wish to change it for another. Thus, with two
ground-plots given them by Andres Cauchela, accountant for the Catholic
king in those regions (who owned some lands in Laguio); with property
of the Catholic king, obtained at the instance of the aforesaid bishop
and at the order of the governor, Don Gonzalo Ronquillo [50]; and with
the addition of private offerings of charity--a fine wooden house was
constructed (which I myself saw), wherein was fitted up their church,
in which our fathers exercised their ministry, with a large attendance,
and to the great advantage of the Spaniards.

Three years later their number was increased. The Catholic king
sent his royal Audiencia to the islands in the year 1583; and as its
president, the governor of the islands and the representative of his
Majesty, Doctor Santiago de Vera, who was a member of his council, and
judge in the royal Chancilleria of Mexico. [51] He, at the time of his
departure from Mexico, requested of the Father Doctor Juan de la Placa,
who was then provincial in Nueva Espana, permission to take with him
to the islands some of the fathers. Not only did he himself urge this,
but also other personages, even the king's ministers, who all insisted
that he should in no case go without them. Under this influence the
father provincial was constrained to draw from the few members then
in his province four individuals: these were Father Ramon de Prado,
a Catalan; Father Francisco Almerique, an Italian; Padre Hernan Suarez,
a Castilian; and, as coadjutor, the brother Gaspar Gomez--all of whom,
as we shall later see, were of great benefit to those regions. So
great was the satisfaction of this most Christian man, upon receiving
the message of our provincial (who had given him two of Ours, and
those other four on his own responsibility), that he immediately
fell on his knees before them, and gave thanks to our Lord that he
had obtained the ministers whom His Divine Majesty employs for the
conversion of peoples, as he has so said. They reached the Filipinas
in May or June of the year 1584, and afforded great companionship,
comfort, and aid to those who were in the islands. Father Hernan
Suarez was especially useful, for God had endowed him with special
grace in winning hearts and bringing them to His service--and this, in
familiar conversation and ordinary discourse, as well as in the pulpit
and the confessional. In this way the whole community was dependent
on him; he settled all matters that might give rise to discord, and
no one took any step without his opinion and counsel. He ministered
to his flock jointly and severally in public and in private, with much
charity on his part and satisfaction on theirs. But this very thing was
the cause, in a short time, of his death. Exhausted by so much toil,
but especially by the fierce heat of the sun--to which he was exposed
at every hour, in journeying on foot from Laguio to Manila and back
again--and wearied and often perspiring from the sermons which he so
frequently preached, he died a holy death within two or three years,
to the universal sorrow of his entire congregation which celebrated
his obsequies as those of a true father.

For this reason and at the order of Father Antonio de Mendoca,
provincial of Nueva Espana, who did not wish that our members should
dwell so far from Manila, they were obliged to change their abode
and come within the city. Many devout persons and friends of our
Society helped them greatly to this end with offerings, some giving
them pieces of land, on which was a wooden house of moderate size;
others offerings of money, with which they bought more land. Here
we dwelt until Captain Juan Pacheco Maldonado, a regidor of Manila,
and Dona Faustina de Palacios y Villa Gomez, his wife, our excellent
benefactress, erected for us a beautiful stone edifice. This work
was begun, with great piety and devotion, on the same day when this
Christian captain received the news that the English had robbed a
vessel in which he had a great quantity of goods. The mariscal Gabriel
de Ribera, another notable benefactor of ours, erected temporarily
a very neat wooden church, which was used until the stone church,
which we now have, was finished. The greater part of this was done at
the expense of this captain, Juan Pacheco. The rest was accomplished
with the aid of large gifts contributed by the devout people. In
short, this post at Manila began to assume permanent form; our very
reverend Father-general Claudio Aquaviva, accepted it as a college,
and appointed, as its first rector, in the year one thousand five
hundred and eighty-nine, Father Antonio Sedeno.



Of the employments of the fathers of the Society in the
Filipinas. Chapter V.

In the residence at Manila (which was the only one that our Society
then had in the Filipinas), of the five priests who had gone thither
only three remained. For, as we have said, Father Hernan Suarez urged
himself on to work until he died of sheer exhaustion--but certainly
with most abundant harvest, and having brought great consolation
to that commonwealth, where his loss was deeply felt, and his
memory was held for many years in great tenderness and affection by
all. Father Alonso Sanchez, although inclined by nature to retirement
and solitude, could not hide his light, since he was a man of great
courage and ability. His retirement was perpetually beset by bishop,
governor, royal ministers, prelates of the church, and regidors of
the commonwealth. Both within and without Manila, he was forever
busied in important affairs--whether concerning the welfare of souls,
the peace of men's consciences, the tranquillity and prosperity of
the commonwealth, or the service of his Majesty the Catholic king,
our sovereign. On this account not only did they send him on several
journeys to China and Malaca, but finally despatched him to Europe
upon like undertakings, where he was well known at the court of Espana
and afterwards at that of Roma. The three who were left behind did
not remain idle. Father Antonio Sedeno, in addition to his ordinary
occupation of preaching--in which he was so effective that he could
move stones by his eloquence--in his capacity as superior attended
to the temporal affairs of the residence and to the construction of
buildings. He was all the more busy in this latter occupation, from
the scarcity, at that time, of architects and builders in Manila;
for there were none at all. First he taught this art to the Indians,
and then to the Chinese; and he inspired the bishop to build the first
stone house ever erected in Manila. Encouraged by this example, they
continued to build others, until finally the city reached its present
greatness. At this time it is one of the most beautiful and delightful
cities in the Indias. Formerly the houses, though large and roomy,
were all constructed of wood or cane. In short the good father was
the architect of the city, and the people caused him no little labor
in inspecting, planning, and arranging its edifices; he aided them
out of pure charity and zeal for the advancement of the holy Church,
which he hoped would be very great in those regions. The first fort
constructed in Manila for the defense of the city was erected under
his direction, and with his plans, supervision, and aid, which cost
him no little effort. This is the fortress that they call Guia,
because it is situated at the principal gate of the city which leads
out to the chapel of Nuestra Senora de Guia that stands in front of our
house. I once accompanied him when he went to furnish the plans for a
stairway in one of the principal houses; and he showed so much patience
and indulgence toward the errors which the Indians had committed in
his absence that he did not lose his temper in either word or look,
but merely had what was wrong taken apart and done over again.

Father Raimundo de Prado also preached with much enthusiasm and
devotion; but his principal employment was in the confessional,
where he exercised his calling to such advantage that there was
scarcely a man or woman who confessed to another priest. He also, at
the instance of the bishop, read in our house for the benefit of the
clergy, the _Materia de sacramentis_, which lasted, several months;
but after that was finished he read no longer, as he could not attend
to so many things.

Father Francisco Almerique began the study of the Chinese language,
in his zeal to aid in the conversion of the many Chinese who came to
Manila and whom we in the Filipinas call Sangleys. He effected several
conversions, in particular, that of a young man of much talent who had
studied their learning, and made more than ordinary progress, and was
about to be graduated in his own country. This young man, abandoning
his studies and ambitions for our holy faith, was solemnly baptized
in our church at Manila by the hand of the bishop, and took the name
of Paul, in devotion to that most glorious apostle, the teacher of
the Gentiles. I met him afterward and came to know him well, and
saw in him a Christian of the primitive church. Since it enters most
opportunely into this matter, let me relate how, having once seen an
honorable Spaniard commit some act by no means Christianlike, he said
to me: "Father, are not these Christians? and, if so, how can they do
this?" I was obliged to satisfy him by making a distinction between the
living and the dead faith, and the appreciation and estimation of the
things of God in contrast to the inclination and affection for earthly
things, which is so common among our Christians of long standing--to
the great scandal of the new converts, as this incident shows.

The Japanese who came to Manila also repaired to our church; and I
once saw them perform a very decorous and devout dance in a feast of
the most holy sacrament. Their mode of dress is decorous, and they
sing, to a slow and solemn music, marking the pauses by strokes with a
small fan grasped in the palm of the left hand; they move in time with
this, only stamping their feet, inclining their bodies somewhat. The
effect is most striking, and invites devotion, especially in those
who understand what they sing, which are all things pertaining to
the divine. In the year one thousand five hundred and eighty-seven,
one of them named Gabriel, a native of Miaco, reared in the Society,
brought with him to Manila as converts four other companions--who,
as soon as they arrived, were baptized with great solemnity in our
church and confirmed by the bishop, who treated us with the same love
and confidence as if he were of our religious order. On the feast of
St. Michael, the twenty-ninth of September of this same year, there
was a jubilee in our church, and the bishop desired to celebrate the
mass; on that occasion, six hundred persons received communion; for a
country and a Christian community so new as that one, this was a very
large number, and gave all the more consolation and edification to all.

In this same year occurred a miraculous conversion of an infidel. This
latter was crossing the river of Manila in one of those small boats
so numerous in the islands, which do not extend more than two dedos
[52] out of the water. As there are many caimans in this river
(which in that respect is another Nile), one of them happened to
cross his course, and, seizing him, dragged him to the bottom with
a rapidity which is their mode, by a natural instinct, of killing
and securing their prey. The infidel, like another Jonas, beneath
the water called with all his heart upon the God of the Christians;
and instantly beheld two persons clad in white, who snatched him from
the claws of the caiman, and drew him to the bank, safe and sound;
and as a result of this miracle he was baptized, with his two sons,
and became a Christian. The very opposite befell another Christian,
who, forgetful of God, passed every night to the other side of that
river to commit evil deeds. God, wearied of waiting for him, sent his
"alguazil of the water"--which is the name that we give there to
the cayman--who, seizing him, executed upon his person the divine
chastisement for his wickedness. All this took place in Manila,
in which place Ours were not long confined; they went forth, and
dispersed through the islands, the number and variety of which we
shall now describe in greater detail.



Of the number and size of the Filipinas Islands. Chapter VI.

The islands properly called the Filipinas begin at the large island
of Burnei, not far from Malaca, which serves as a roadstead for the
Portuguese who sail for Maluco. This island extends from the first
or second degree on the south of the equinoctial line to about
the eighth degree on the north side. The Mahometan king of this
island, although he retained his own religion, rendered obedience
as a vassal of the crown of Castilla when Doctor Francisco de Sande
[53] was governor of the Filipinas. The island of Siao [54] is east
of Burnei and about six or eight degrees latitude toward the north;
its king and his subjects are Christians, converted by the fathers
of our Society who live in Maluco. To render homage to the crown of
Castilla, he came to the court of Manila at the time when Gomez Perez
de las Marinas, knight of the habit of Santiago, was governor of the
islands. On this journey he was accompanied by Father Antonio Marta,
an Italian, the superior of the Society in the islands of Maluco,
and by his companion, Father Antonio Pereira, [55] a Portuguese. I
had them all as guests in a house at Tigbauan, in the island of Panai,
where for two years I was instructing those peoples, to their profit
and my own satisfaction, as I shall later relate. I do not mean Cian,
but Siao, for that is the name of the island. Cian is not an island,
but the mainland between Malaca and Camboxa, contiguous with Great
China and Cochin China. By journeying northward from the two islands
of Siao and Burnei, one may traverse in his course from island to
island the whole extent of the Filipinas; and, by going east and west,
their entire width. Passing through Sarrangan, Iolo, and Taguima, which
are three distinct islands, one reaches the great island of Mindanao,
whence one comes to the island of Manila, the metropolitan see; as well
as to Babuyanes, Hermosa Island, and the greater and lesser Lequios,
which include many islands. Of the more northern islands, besides those
already named, those which are known and are most populous are: Manila,
Mindoro, Luban, Marinduque, Cabras, Tablas, Masbate, Capul, Ibabao,
Leite, Bohol, Fuegos, Negros, Imares, Panai, Cagayan, Cuyo, Calamianes,
Paravan--besides many others which are less known, although populated,
all of which will reach forty or more in number. This is excluding
other small uninhabited islands and some of fair size. Among those
islands that I have mentioned there are some much larger than Espana,
as, for example, Manila and Burnei; and others which are certainly
no smaller, as Mindanao and Calamianes. Some are somewhat smaller,
as Mindoro, Ibabao, and that of Negros; others very much smaller,
as Leite, Sebu, and Panai, but all of them are well peopled, fertile,
and rich, and not far distant from one another, and not one so small
that it is not in reality large.

The island of Sebu, one of the smallest, would have, if we were to
credit the statement of a certain author, a circumference of twelve
leguas; but I myself have sailed along the coast of two-thirds of the
island (it is triangular in shape), and assert that its circumference
is more than fifty Spanish leguas.



Of the division and distribution of bishoprics and provinces in the
Filipinas. Chapter VII.

At the instance of the first bishop, Don Fray Domingo de Salazar,
and with the information which he gave to the Catholic king Don
Felipe Second, of glorious memory, his Majesty divided those islands
into four dioceses, beseeching the Holiness of our most Holy Father,
Clement Eighth, to establish the aforesaid bishop as the metropolitan
archbishop of the city of Manila, with three suffragan bishops. [56]
Two of these were in that same island, one in the eastern part,
and one in the western; one, the bishop of Nueva Segovia (which by
sea is but sixty leguas distant from Great China); his bishopric
extends as far as the Ilocos, more than a hundred leguas distant,
being conterminous with the archbishopric of Manila. The other is the
bishop of Camarines whose bishopric is but little smaller, reaching
from the lagoon of Manila to the channel-mouth through which we enter
the islands on the way thither from Espana. The third bishopric is
even larger, for it embraces almost all the islands of the Pintados
(the proper name for which is Bisayas)--beginning with the islands
of Panay, Bantayan, Leite, Ibabao, and Capul, and extending to the
great island of Mindanao and the more southern islands. Its cathedral
and see are in the city of Santissimo Nombre de Jesus, so named from
the discovery of [an image of] the Child Jesus which was found there,
as we have related.

The people of the Bisayas are called the Pintados, because they are
actually adorned with pictures [Span. _pintados--i.e._, painted, or
tattooed]--not because this is natural to them, although they are
well built, of pleasing countenance, and white; but because they
adorn their bodies with figures from head to foot, when they are
young and have sufficient strength and energy to suffer the torment
of the tattooing; and formerly they tattooed themselves when they had
performed some act of valor. They tattoo themselves by pricking the
skin until the blood comes, with sharp, delicate points, according
to designs and lines which are first drawn by those who practice this
art; and upon this freshly-bleeding surface they apply a black powder,
which is never effaced. They do not tattoo the body all at the same
time, but by degrees, so that the process often lasts a long time;
in ancient times, for each part which was to be tattooed the person
must perform some new act of bravery or valiant deed. The tattooed
designs are very ingenious, and are well adapted to those members
or parts whereon they are placed. During my stay in the Filipinas,
I was wont to say, in my satisfaction and admiration for the fine
appearance of those natives, that if one of them were brought to Europe
much money could be made by exhibiting him. Children are not tattooed,
and the women tattoo all of one hand and part of the other. They do
not, however, on this account go naked; they wear well-made collarless
robes, which reach the ankle and are of cotton bordered with colors:
when they are in mourning, these robes are white. They take off these
robes in their houses, and in places where garments are unnecessary;
but everywhere and always they are very attentive and watchful to
cover their persons, with great care and modesty, wherein they are
superior to other nations, especially to the Chinese.

The Catholic king also decreed, for the sake of peace, and to
facilitate the preaching of the gospel, that the provinces of the
religious orders should remain distinct, and that there should be no
interference or confusion between the religious and the clergy. He
left the orders of St. Francis and St. Augustine from that time in
those districts of Indians which they previously occupied, which are
numerous and very good. He bestowed upon the Order of St. Dominic,
which had gone thither five or six years later than our Society,
the remaining territory in the bishopric of Nueva Segovia. To us he
granted the islands of Ibabao, Capul, Leite, Samar, Bohol, and others
in that vicinity, as well as authority to found a college in the city
of Santissimo Nombre de Jesus.



How the Society extended its labors to the villages of the Indians
outside of Manila. Chapter VIII.

At this time we had again brought our number in Manila to five. In
the place of Father Alonso Sanchez, who was absent in Espana,
and of the late Father Hernan Suarez, two others of us had gone to
the islands and had learned the language; and one of us, in holy
obedience to orders given him, and at the instance of a prebendary
of Manila, began to use it in his benefice, fourteen leguas from the
city. The principal village of this district is called Balayan; in
it and in numerous other villages of the same region there are many
good Christians, converted by the discalced friars of the Order of
the seraphic Father St. Francis--especially in Balayan, among whose
inhabitants there are many persons of note, who are very intelligent
and well disposed. During several years an apostolic man of that
order preached there, named Father Juan de Oliver, whose holy teaching
shone forth in the piety and devotion of that people. I dwelt in that
district for more than two months, and during my stay they kept me well
occupied in the baptism of children and adults, and in confessions and
communions, which were so numerous that all that time seemed to me a
Holy Week. All these peoples hold our holy law in the highest esteem,
and therefore have the deepest respect for its priests. I shall relate
in this connection an incident that befell me at this time with some of
the chiefs of Balayan. There was an epidemic of small-pox (called by
them Bolotong), which was killing off children and old men, although
more fatal to adults than to the young. I was in the habit of walking
through the principal streets twice a day, morning and night, when I
would send boys on both sides of the street to discover and indicate
to me those who desired confession and baptism. Whenever they sent for
me (which was not seldom), I entered the house; all the living-rooms
are in the upper part, the lower floor being used only for household
duties. And it was no small labor to ascend and descend so often,
especially by ladders of cane; which are used everywhere. One day, when
busied in this my occupation, I passed by a group of their chiefs, who,
upon perceiving me, formed a row on one side of the street and saluted
me all together, uncovering their heads, and making a low bow. I,
inclining my head, removed my cap and passed on. They appreciated my
politeness, and considered themselves so favored and honored by it
that, upon my return, they displayed the same courtesy, standing in
line, and then they all fell upon their knees, as if they desired to
excel me in politeness; for that which I had shown them when I first
approached seemed to them all too much. My greatest aid to them was
at Lian, three leguas from Balayan, in which place--as well as in
another near by, called Manisua--I converted many to Christianity
and heard many confessions. I was here on Ash Wednesday; not only did
the adults receive the ashes with incredible reverence and devotion,
but all the mothers brought all their children to receive the emblem,
and were not willing to depart until they and all the others had
received. For this journey I thank and am deeply grateful to the
bishop who was most earnestly desirous that Ours should aid in so
important a ministry. As it was clearly evident that the villages
of Taitai, Antipolo, and others of that encomienda--which was six
leguas from Manila, up the river, and in which there were already
some Christians--contained many infidels who should be converted,
he entrusted it to the Society. Through the grace of Jesus Christ our
Lord, such fruitful results were accomplished as shall be seen in the
course of this narrative. I shall simply state for the present that,
at the end of ten years, I was in the habit of saying (in imitation of
St. Gregory Thaumaturgus) that I was most thankful to our Lord, for,
when I entered the place, I found hardly forty Christians, and at the
end of that time there were not four infidels. If I am not mistaken,
we baptized with our own hands more than seven thousand souls; and
today it is one of the most flourishing of Christian communities that
Holy Church possesses, and none in those regions is superior to it.



How the village of Taitai improved its site. Chapter IX.

At that time the village of Taitai lay along the water, on the
banks of a marsh or stream formed by waterfalls from the mountains
of Antipolo, which emptied into the river near the same mouth by
which it flows out of the lagoon. It was situated in a most beautiful
and extensive valley, formed between the lagoon and the mountains;
and so low that each year, when the waters of the lagoon rise on
account of the floods from the many rivers which enter it, the valley
is flooded and submerged as is Egypt by the Nile, and remains thus
inundated from August until October or November. At this period the
valley itself becomes a lagoon of more than an estado in depth, and
can be traversed only by means of boats. This inundation abundantly
fertilizes the rice fields and seeded lands with which the valley is
covered, and, as a result, rich and abundant harvests are gathered. The
water enters at the proper season when the rice stalks are hardening
and are beginning to ear; consequently the copious irrigation helps
it to form seed without hindering the grain from hardening, or the
harvest from being gathered. On the contrary it is a convenience,
as I myself have often seen, to go in boats for the reaping, and in
those boats to bring the bundles of grain to the houses, where they
are exposed to the sun to dry. When it is thoroughly dry they thresh
and clean it, and store it in their granaries. This inundation not
only flooded the village--to such an extent that the streets could
be traversed only in boats, in which I went often enough--but also,
although the floor of the church had been raised and repairs made
to guard against the water, it flowed in over the steps, even to
the main altar. On account of this inundation they had selected,
not far from the church and farther back from the water, a hill,
where those who died during this season were interred. For mass they
repaired to Antipolo, which lies a scant three miles inland among
the mountains. The first time when I saw my church flooded, and
realized that I could not say mass in it, I was obliged to believe
what I had never been able to credit, although I had been often told
of it. It is customary for these villages, for greater convenience
of government, to be divided into districts on the plan of parishes,
which they call _barangais_. Each one of these is under the command
of a chief, who governs it and appoints those who are to provide for
all contingencies; the latter are called _datos_. At that time this
village had four hundred families and was divided into four barangais;
consequently there were four datos, each one of whom had charge of
a hundred inhabitants who are called collectively _catongohan_. I
summoned my four datos and from the choir I showed them the altar;
they saw (and they had known it beforehand) that mass could not be
celebrated. "Without celebrating mass each day," I said to them,
"although I may be unworthy of it, I cannot live, for that is my
sustenance which gives me strength to serve you for Christ's sake. Now
I must go where I can say it--that is, to Antipolo. If you wish to
see me again, you will build for me, on the hill where the dead are
now buried, a little church in which I can say mass, with some little
room to which I can retire; until this be done, I remain with God;"
and I went away. Desiring my return, they soon began the work and
finished it in such wise that I could stay and celebrate mass, and,
too, serve as an attraction to any one who might pass that way. At
first they did very little, and that slowly; but as it was necessary
to dismantle the church and carry to the hill its materials, and with
these the cross belonging to the cemetery, they soon began to show
such haste in migrating to the new village that ten or twelve of them
crowded into one house, until each one could build his own. Surprised
at such haste, I inquired its cause, and they told me that at night
they suffered from fear of the demons in the old village, because it
had now no church or cross; and so no one dared to sleep there. With
this change the village greatly improved its site. That they might not
lack water near by for bathing (to which all those nations are much
addicted), they carefully opened a ditch at the base of the hill,
along the edge of the village, by which water could come in from
the stream which they formerly had. Along the streets and around
the village they planted their groves and palm-trees, which enrich
and beautify it. They afterward constructed on the new site a very
beautiful temple with the help of the king our lord, who paid a third
of its cost, as his Majesty does for all the churches. Since I have
mentioned the baths it is fitting to relate what I can tell about them.



Of baths in the Philippines. Chapter X.

From the time when they are born, these islanders are brought up in
the water. Consequently both men and women swim like fishes, even from
childhood, and have no need of bridges to pass over rivers. They bathe
themselves at all hours, for cleanliness and recreation; and even the
women after childbirth do not refrain from the bath, and children just
born are bathed in the rivers and springs of cold water. When leaving
the bath, they anoint the head with ajonjoli [_i.e._, oil of sesame]
mixed with civet--of which, as we shall later show, there is great
abundance in those regions. Even when not bathing, they are accustomed
to anoint their heads for comfort and adornment, especially the women
and children. Through modesty, they bathe with their bodies drawn up
and almost in a sitting posture, with the water to the neck, taking
the greatest care not to be seen, although no one may be near to see
them. The most general hour for bathing is at the setting of the sun,
because at that time they have finished their labors, and bathe in the
river to rest and refresh themselves; on the way, they usually carry
some vessel for bearing water to use in their domestic duties. In the
island of Panay I saw all the people, at the conclusion of a burial,
hasten to the river upon leaving the church and bathe there, as was
the custom among the Jews--although these Indias have no knowledge
of that dead law. They keep a vessel full of water before the door
of every house; every person, whether belonging to the house or not,
who enters it takes water from the jar with which to wash his feet
before entering, especially during the season of much mud. They wash
their feet with great facility, rubbing one foot with the other:
the water flows down through the floor of the house, which is all of
cane and fashioned like a window-grating: with bars close together.

They also employ the baths as a medicine, and God our Lord has given
them for this purpose springs of hot water. In the last few years the
hot springs of Bai, on the banks of the lagoon of Bai, have been most
healthful and famous, and many Spaniards of both sexes as well as
ecclesiastics and religious, have had recourse to them in various
maladies and recovered their health. And, indeed, the ease and
delightfulness of the trip almost compel one to undertake it, even
though he may not need it. The [Pasig] River extends inland as much
as six leguas; and from its source in the lagoon until it reaches the
bay of Manila, it is dotted with houses, gardens, and stock-farms, in
most delightful variety. As the trees in that climate bear leaves the
whole year through, their verdure and coolness increase the charm. I
noticed but two trees which shed their leaves; both of them are wild,
and do not bear fruit, but both are highly useful and valued for that
reason. One is the balete, [57] which grows very tall, has a round,
cup-shaped head, like a moderately large walnut tree, and is of a
most delightful green. Its leaves are somewhat narrow, like those
of the almond tree; and are hard, compact, and glossy to the touch,
like those of the orange tree. The Filipinos prize them for their use
in cooking, as we do the laurel and the rosemary. This tree is very
hardy, and most often flourishes in rocky places; it has a natural
tendency to produce roots over almost the whole surface of its trunk
so that it appears to be covered with a beard. The Chinese, who are
really ingenious, are wont to plant one of these trees on a stone
(so small that both the tree and stone can be held in the hand),
just as if it were in a flower-pot, and then it can be carried from
one place to another; and the tree, like a dwarfed orange tree,
grows in proportion to its roots, hardly reaching five palmos in
height. As this method of planting these trees on a stone may seem
as difficult as it is curious, I shall describe how I have seen it
done. They take a sprout of the tree when it is already covered with
roots, and a stone which must not be too hard, or smooth, but not
very solid, and somewhat porous or hollow. These stones are found
there in abundance among the reefs and shoals of the sea. They tie
the little tree or sprout to this stone, covering the latter so far as
possible on all sides with the fibres and roots; and to make it grow,
they cover the stone with water. With the water the tree clings much
more readily to the stone, entwines about it, and becomes grafted
into all its pores and cavities, embracing it with remarkable amity
and union. A large balete stands in the patio [_i.e._, inner court]
of our house in Manila, near the regular entrance. In the year 1602,
in the month of April or May, I saw it all withered, with its leaves
falling. Thinking that it was dying I was greatly grieved, for I did
not wish to lose so fine a tree. My sorrow was increased when I saw
it next day almost without a leaf; and I showed it to our procurator,
who chanced to be with me while I was inspecting the tree. But on the
third day I beheld it covered with new leaves, tender and beautiful,
at which I was as rejoiced as I had previously been saddened; for
it is in truth a beautiful tree. In this I saw represented, as in a
picture, the truth of the resurrection.

There is another tree which they call _dabdab_. [58] Its leaves also
have an agreeable taste and serve as a lining for the inside of the
kettle in which they cook their rice, preventing the latter from
adhering to the sides. This tree is very similar to the almond-tree,
although its trunk and leaves are much larger. These leaves are nearly
as large as the palm of the hand and shaped like a heart. It apparently
dies in September and revives in January, when the flower appears,
before the leaf; it is different from the balete, being larger and
of a different shape, and red like a ruby.

Among other plants brought from Nueva Espana to the Filipinas is the
anona, [59] which has grown larger and is more successfully raised
in these islands; it yields a most delicious and delicate fruit. It
also loses its leaves, but soon renews them, almost as quickly as
does the balete.

But, to return to the river of Manila--over which the passage to
the baths is made in boats, large or small according to the number
of passengers--by going up the stream the lagoon is reached; this,
with its forty leagues of circumference, is one of the most remarkable
objects in the world. All that region is full of rivers, villages,
and groves. The lagoon itself is of fresh water, and has many islets
which render it beautiful. It abounds in fish, and in herons, ducks,
and other water-fowl. Above all, it contains many crocodiles or caimans
(which there are called _buaya_), which cause great havoc among the
poor fishermen and traders who navigate the river--especially in
stormy weather, when the waters become tumultuous, as often happens,
and swamp their vessels.



Of the mission at Tigbauan, and what the fathers of the Society
accomplished there. Chapter XI.

In January of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-two, one of us two
who were employed at Taitai had to depart for the island of Panai to
give instruction and continue the work of conversion in the encomienda
of Tigbauan. The island of Panai, as I have already said, is in the
province of the Pintados, in the diocese of Sebu. It is a little
more than a hundred leguas in circumference, and, in all its extent,
most temperate and fertile. Its inhabitants are the Bissayas, a white
people, who have among them some blacks--the ancient inhabitants of the
island, who occupied it before the Bissayas did. They are not so dark
or ugly as are the natives of Guinea, but are very diminutive and weak;
but in their hair and beard they closely resemble the Guineans. They
are much more barbarous and untamed than are the Bissayas and most of
the Filipinos, for they have not, like those peoples, houses or fixed
sites for their villages. They do not sow seed, or gather harvests;
but with their women and children wander, half naked, over the
mountains like beasts. They capture on foot the deer and the javali,
[60] and on the spot where they capture an animal they stop, and feed
upon it as long as it lasts. Their only natural property is the bow
and arrow. The Bissayas through natural compassion have not destroyed
these blacks, who are not hostile to them, although they have little
dealing with the Bissayas. While I was in Tigbauan, however, a petty
war occurred between them which is worth relating for what it shows
of such wars among these nations, and their triumphs and trophies. A
Bissayan chief, who lived in his solitary house among the mountains,
distant from the villages, had a friendship--or, for all I know,
a relationship--with a leading Negrillo, who was also headman among
his people. Under the cover of this friendship, the Negrillo took his
opportunity, as I shall relate, to do a treacherous act. He came one
day, as he had often done before, to pay a visit to his friend, who
received him as such and gave him food and drink--an act which should
soften the most bloodthirsty heart, even if he had been offended. But
the Negrillo, without heeding the obligation imposed by kind deeds
or by the good-will with which they had been conferred upon him,
seized his host unawares, and took his life, also slaying all the
other members of his family--men, women, and children. His crime,
however, did not go unpunished. A spirited young man, son of the
dead man--not daring alone to avenge himself upon the black, who had
been reenforced by others of his own color--assembled his kinsmen and
friends; besides these [so many joined him that] all the villages of
the island were depopulated, in order to fall upon the Negrillos--all
eager to enslave the women and children, this being a great source of
wealth among those people; they accomplished their purpose, killing
many men. This lasted until the matter became known to the royal
officials in that region, who pacified them. At the entrance of some
of the villages, I saw the trophies of this victory and some of the
slaves. The trophies were thus made: one of the large canes, already
described, very tall, was driven into the ground. At its point were
two, or three, or more pendent bannerets like streamers or pennants,
and on them the hair of the dead foes. These blacks have had very
little to do with the Spaniards, not so much through hate as from
fear and mistrust of them. It has already happened that Spaniards,
unaccompanied and straying from the road, have fallen into their
hands; but with a few presents and fair words they have been allowed
to go free. They also fear the priests as being Spaniards, making
no distinction between them. For this reason we could not undertake
their conversion, although they were near to the villages of Tigbauan;
on this account all our energy was directed towards the Bissayas alone.

They call the reed-grass _tigbao_, and, by derivation, the lands
which bear this grass are called Tigbauan; and because the site of
this village is close to a great expanse of reedy land on the bank
of a beautiful stream, it bears the above name. The village itself
was on the same shore, at the mouth of the river--which, as well as
the sea, yields various kinds of fish, excellent and plentiful, which
I myself have enjoyed in abundance. As they were continually fishing
on the beach, usually with three or four nets, they never made a haul
without devoutly regaling us with a part of it. Tigbauan has a very
beautiful district, with many villages extending more than six leguas
along the coast of the sea; the entire district is well supplied with
game, fruits, and vegetables, and fish from the sea. The people are
very industrious; consequently I always saw them occupied--the men,
with their fisheries and farming; the women, with their spinning
and weaving. What we accomplished in the two years spent among a
people so good and well-disposed towards the Gospel could be told in
less time than what we left undone; for, since we of the Society of
Jesus were then so few, and had little hope of increasing our number,
we did not dare to undertake more than we thought could probably be
maintained; and in this we were not mistaken, for at the present day,
when at least a dozen ministers are needed, there is actually but
one secular priest. For that reason we did not dare to baptize adults
or children, except in cases of extreme danger, outside of the chief
village (which is Tigbauan) and two or three other outlying hamlets,
distant two miles or less.

Nevertheless we preached the faith throughout that vicinity in the
Haraya language, and even translated into the same tongue and taught
the Christian doctrine and the catechism, which formerly they knew only
in the Bissaya, a language different from the one they speak. [61] Many
churches were erected, and some who had been baptized were confirmed
in the faith. Some improper relations were dissolved and converted into
Christian matrimony. In Tigbauan and its villages, besides the baptism
of many children and adults, there were introduced the holy sacraments
of confession, communion, and extreme unction, the last of which they
neither knew nor had ever heard of. Church-feasts were celebrated with
vespers and solemn masses, particularly at Easter and in Holy Week. A
large school was formed, containing the children of all that region,
where they learned to read, write, play musical instruments, and sing;
two children from this school were sent every week to each one of
the churches in the district, to take care of it and to assemble each
afternoon the people of the village to repeat the doctrine in front of
the church, as was done in Tigbauan. Here occurred an event regarding
a boy, which gave me great satisfaction. An infidel chief living in
a village called Taroc, a legua from Tigbauan, had a little son who
was a Christian, a child of five or six years--of whom I knew nothing,
as they had concealed him and others from me, being reluctant, through
their natural barbarity and wildness, to hold intercourse with us and
deliver up the objects of their affection. This child fell ill, and,
realizing his condition, urged his infidel parents to summon me. They
made me repair to him in great haste, for as I was told that the sick
boy had called for me, I was convinced that he was not so young that
he could not at least confess. In short, I went; I merely read the
gospel to him, and in a few days he was cured of his sickness. As
a result of the visit, which was greatly appreciated by the people,
that village was won--especially his own parents, who were afterward
pleased to have their son go to Tigbauan to join the school with the
rest. The town of Arevalo is three leagues distant from Tigbauan;
we also assisted there in the pulpit and the confessional, at the
instance of the Spaniards who resided there, and of the bishop's
vicar, in whose charge they were. This vicar was then the licentiate
Don Francisco Gomez Arellano, archdeacon of Manila, through whose
earnestness and devotion divine worship was greatly augmented in
that church, and its service increased. This vicar embellished it
with new ornaments, very rich and curious, such as lamps and silver
candlesticks, thereby augmenting the reputation and esteem of our
holy religion among those new nations.



Of our departure from Tigbauan and our entrance into Sebu, Leite,
and other islands. Chapter XII.

At this time died Father Martin Henriquez, who had remained in
Taitai; he gave way under the laborious task of ministering alone
to so many souls, which he did with such perfection and fervor that
it was impossible to maintain strength for so much. This father was
so fervent and energetic that in three months he had learned the
language; and, in six, composed in it a catechism and a treatise
on confession. He also prepared a collection of sermons for all the
Sundays and feasts, and on the four last things, [62] as well as other
matters profitable to those peoples, who greatly respected his purity
of life and the vigor of his preaching. I have seen him leave his food,
to go to administer baptism or extreme unction to a sick man. He
was most devoted to our Lady, and, whenever he sat down to study,
he took out a little image of her which he always carried with him,
and placed it on the table that he might have it before him. Every
day I saw him, among other holy exercises, recite his rosary, and
devote one half-hour to prayer in the afternoons (besides the entire
hour in the morning); and every night he would scourge himself. He
was an indefatigable worker, and consequently slept little, which
was more than he could endure. He died a holy death, the same year
when he came to the Filipinas, before twelve months had elapsed;
and, when his work is considered, we wonder that he lived so long. On
account of his death, Father Francisco Almerique was obliged to leave
Manila--where his duties were by no means light among the Indians of
that city and district, who all sought his aid. As he had abandoned
these heavy labors only to undertake others as great, he soon fell
ill. To lighten his burden, the two who had remained in Manila took
up the double task; these two were the father rector, Antonio Sedeno,
and Father Raymundo de Prado. They took turns in doing this work, one
remaining a week in Manila while the other went to Taitai. This sort
of life could not last long; and so our Lord, who aids the greatest
necessities, inspired the good father to inform me of the difficulties
in which they were, and order me to return to Manila. There we could
plan our course of life in accordance with the advices which might
come to us in the ships, which were expected soon--either uniting
the four of us who remained, to do what we could in the city; or, if
a reenforcement should come to us, extending our labors in securing
conversions, according to the number of our men.

I reached Manila in May of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-five,
leaving in Tigbauan and its vicinity, and in the town of Arevalo,
not a few persons sorrowing at my departure. The general, Doctor
Antonio de Morga, arrived in the following June, having come to
serve as lieutenant of the governor and captain-general of the
islands. He brought with him two fine vessels, and eight priests
[63] of our Society. The joy of the communities of Manila and Sebu,
and of Ours, was beyond belief upon learning that these fathers had
arrived. From both places, requests came in to us for priests: from
Manila, for instruction and schools, of which its sons were in great
want; from Sebu, for a college which they desired in their city. On
the other hand, the lieutenant governor of his Catholic Majesty urged
that the Society should take charge of a province of Indians as did
the other religious orders; and the Indians themselves, with several
encomenderos, supported this request. Finally an effort was made to
satisfy everyone, in the way which I shall relate. Four of us priests
went to the island of Leite which we reached on the day of the Triumph
of the Holy Cross, the sixteenth of July of the same year. Two of us
remained at Carigara in the house of Christoval de Trujillo, the owner
of that encomienda, a man of eminent piety, and our benefactor. He
straightway built for us there the first house that we possessed in
that island. The other two of us went along the coast of that island
and those of Ibabao and Samar, observing what peoples and posts were
best adapted at that time for our settlement. We returned to Carigara
at the end of July, where, thanks to the incredible haste and large
number of the Indians, we found our house finished and the two fathers
established in it. Early in August, I had information from the father
vice-provincial, Antonio Sedeno, that he had arrived at Sebu with
two other priests, and summoned me thither. Father Juan del Campo and
Father Cosme de Flores remained in Carigara, and undertook the study of
the Bissaya language with great fervor. Father Antonio Pereira and I,
with another brother, went on to Sebu in conformity with the order
of the father vice-provincial. Father Antonio Pereira had remained
with Ours in these islands from the time of his arrival, as I said,
with the king of Siao, waiting for the conclusion of business which the
king and. Father Antonio Marta could not wait for--the latter, because
he could not longer absent himself from his province and subordinates:
the former, because he could not remain longer away from his kingdom
and his vassals. This good father was so eager and zealous for the
welfare of souls that, although a guest, he did not permit himself
one moment of idleness, but always busied himself in the pulpit and
confessional and in other ministries for the welfare of souls. We
reached Sebu in the middle of August, where we found our good father
and superior sick, in the house of a regidor of the city; and with
him were Father Alonso Humanes, who had gone as superior during the
journey from Nueva Espana, and Father Mateo Sanchez. He presently sent
these two fathers to Leite, with orders to divide it into two stations,
two fathers in each--one pair taking Carigara (where the two fathers
had remained whom I have already mentioned); the other, Dulac, which
is about sixty miles further on. These are both maritime villages with
a situation and territory well adapted for undertaking the conversion
of that new people, until then untaught. The aforementioned Father
Alonso Humanes was appointed superior of both stations. In Sebu Ours
had already fixed upon the site which we now possess, partly purchased
with offerings from the citizens, and partly bestowed by the city and
private persons. Accompanying the land was a goodly house of wood,
which with little work could be made to accommodate the church and
our dwelling. Father Ramon de Prado had remained in Manila as rector,
with the other four fathers, two of whom were sent to Taitai to
aid Father Francisco Almerique: of the two who remained in Manila,
Father Tomas de Montoya [64] began to teach Latin, and Father Juan
de Ribera attended to matters of conscience.



The death of Father Antonio Sedeno, first rector of the college of
Manila, and first vice-provincial of the Society of Jesus in the
Filipinas. Chapter XIII.

The first thing which the father vice-provincial, Antonio Sedeno,
enjoined upon me on his arrival at Sebu was that I should at all
events hasten the completion of the house, and carry him to it,
for it was his wish to die in the house of the Society. This I did,
having him conveyed on men's shoulders in a covered bed, for he was
so ill that he could not go in any other way. I was greatly rejoiced
at this, and he was extremely relieved at finding himself in his new
home. His illness was increased by the hardships of the toilsome
journey from Manila, one hundred and fifty leagues away, in the
season of the vendavals and the rains, which in the bay of Manila,
and as far as the entrance into the province of Pintados, is the most
difficult and dangerous of the whole year. In this case, the burden
of these hardships and torments fell upon a person so feeble, infirm,
old, and exhausted that, although he arrived at Sebu in fair health,
their effect was greatly aggravated by his immediately commencing work
with two sermons, which were highly regarded in that community. But
his efforts so prostrated him that he took to his bed with a fever,
which so exhausted him that his holy life came to an end on the first
of September of the same year, fifteen hundred and ninety-five. In
life, and no less in his death, this holy man was a rare example
of virtue; and so, in both, he was highly esteemed by all classes
and ranks of people--especially by ecclesiastics and religious,
who recognized in him an admirable virtue. When but a youth he left
Espana in the service of the Duke of Feria. He was received into the
Society at Loreto, studied in Padua, and had charge of the Germanic
College in Rome. From this place blessed Father Francisco de Borja
[65] sent him to Japon. Upon reaching Sevilla, however, he learned
that the ships bound for the Indias had already left Lisboa. Waiting
at this latter place for further instructions he was given the choice
of embarking, at his pleasure, for either Piru or Florida. He chose
Florida as a place which, in its poverty, offered greater opportunities
of suffering there many hardships for the sake of Christ. In this he
was not deceived; for in Florida, and later in Habana, he suffered
greatly on sea and land, from hunger, cold, exhaustion, storms,
hardships, exposure, and mortal perils. It often happened that he
fell to the ground, while walking on the shore--sick, powerless to
move, and among Indians most cruel in war, who had killed others of
the Society; and yet he escaped, how, he knew not. Many a time did
he eat no more than a handful of maize, planted and gathered by his
own hands; for whatever else he might have must be given to poor
soldiers. During a pestilence which had spread among those savages
he became a physician, for he could baptize them if they should die;
in this way he sent many of them to heaven. From Florida he was sent
to Nueva Espana, and was the first of the Society to enter the City
of Mexico, where by his virtuous life and teachings, he inspired the
viceroy, the auditors of the Audiencia, and the citizens with such
affection that they sought to bring over from Espana members of the
Society, in order to found a college in Mexico. This was done and
Father Antonio Sedeno was made rector: he laid the foundations and
erected a building, which stands to this day. He went over to the
Filipinas, as we have said, where his occupations were such as we
have already related. While on the sea, he and his companions lived
in their cabin in such modest retirement, and were so dignified in
their bearing, that they spread tranquillity throughout the vessel,
and accordingly their teaching was highly valued. He lived forty years
in the Society, to its great edification, and preached for fifteen
years in the Filipinas with admirable results. He suffered greatly
from asthma, and consequently slept almost always in a chair. But he
did not, on this account, allow himself any recreation, or cease to
eat fish alone during Lent and fast days. It might be more accurately
said that he but seldom ate at all, so great was his abstinence--which
he, moreover, sought to conceal, feigning, with much dissimulation,
that he ate of everything, when in reality it was a mere pretense of
eating. He was very contrite; severe toward himself, but gentle to
others; most exact in obedience, but very reserved and cautious in
command; courteous and honorable in his dealings; liberal, generous,
and devout. He gave or obtained aid for many needy persons, and all
esteemed him for his labors. He was most zealous for the welfare
of souls, and for the prosperity and preservation of the Filipinas,
and for their settlement and aggrandizement. We have already related
what he accomplished in building. He was the first to discover lime
there, and made the first roof-tile, and erected the first building. He
sought out Chinese artists, whom he kept in his house to paint images,
not only for our churches but for others, both within and without
Manila. He encouraged the encomenderos and the parish priests to
provide their churches with these images, and made it most easy to
procure them. Thus almost all the churches in the islands were adorned
with images, nearly all of which were of the Mother of God. He took
great interest in planting groves and in laying out gardens, and was
anxious that silk should be produced in the islands, hoping thus to
retain there for their benefit the money which was going to China,
and thus to secure their prosperity. To this end he planted mulberry
trees, and was active in other ways, even constructing a loom,
and teaching the Indians to weave in the European fashion. He was
accustomed to say that the highest form of prayer was that which most
inclines one to self-mortification; and he so practiced this that his
own life was a perpetual mortification. He taught this in the house
and elsewhere; and in his own exercises he could not use any other
method than mortification. His sermons were all on fear, judgment,
and condemnation. He said that this was what the world needed; and he
was not mistaken, for in truth he accomplished great results through
this teaching. One of his hearers, who was once praising to me his
instruction, repeated an expression which the father often used,
and which had deeply impressed him: "There [_i.e.,_ "in the other
world?"] you will understand it," he would say with wonderful truth and
force. In our household intercourse with him, he would assert that he
who aspires to perfection must be convinced that the pleasures of food,
drink, the couch, idleness, and the like, are not for him. All this,
however, he did not urge by force, but rather taught it in a kindly
manner, and gently guiding each one according to the strength which
God had given him--although he said that God gave strength to all in
proportion to their courage in working and suffering for His love. He
also said that one should die rather than commit the slightest venial
sin; and in his own case he was so rigid in this respect that at
times it seemed excess of scruple. His life was certainly most pure,
and his death like unto his life. During his illness we all admired
his great patience and resignation in the hands of God.

Father Antonio Pereira used to say that he often visited him in order
that he might profit and be edified by so admirable an example. The
day when he died, we had already noticed in the morning that extreme
unction should not be any longer withheld from him; and so I prepared
him to receive it, telling him that it seemed to be time. He raised
his eyes and hands toward heaven with great devotion, exclaiming:
"To pass to eternity!" With this he became lost in thought, spoke not
another word, and, receiving with much devotion that holy sacrament,
died in peace. He did not become rigid or discolored in death, but
preserved his bright color, and his limbs remained soft and flexible,
until he was buried. All the ecclesiastics and religious of the city
of Santissimo Nombre de Jesus, all the regidors, and the honorable and
prominent people, attended his funeral rites, which were celebrated
with great solemnity, devotion and tenderness. [66] In Manila also, on
account of the devotion of all classes for him, solemn funeral honors
were held, and were attended not only with the tears and sorrow of all
classes, but by the authority and concourse of all ranks and religious
orders. This holy man was lost to us at a time when we were in great
straits over the founding of that vice-province of the Society, which
we had hoped would be successfully established through his energy and
prudence. But there remained with us a great confidence that he would
aid us no less in death than in life; and thus his influence was seen
in the prosperous increase after his holy death of our ministries and
other affairs, especially in the college of Sebu, which is indebted
to his holy body as the foundation-stone of all its growth.



Of other and new members of the Society who went to the islands in
the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six. Chapter XIV.

In the fleet of this year fifteen hundred and ninety-five, our very
reverend father-general, Claudio Aquaviva, sent to the Filipinas
Father Francisco de Vera, with twenty-four of the Society, at the
request and expense of his Majesty the Catholic king, Don Felipe
Second. With all these, he reached Nueva Espana in the same year;
and, in the following, he embarked at the port of Acapulco for the
Filipinas with fourteen members of the Society, with the governor,
Don Francisco Tello. [67] In order that this voyage from Nueva Espana
to the Filipinas may be successfully made, it should be undertaken
by the middle of March, at the latest, so as to reach the Filipinas
before the vendavals or southwest winds of June set in, which are
very tempestuous--like the north winds in Nueva Espana which begin
in September. As these vessels left the port of Acapulco so late,
upon reaching the Filipinas they encountered vendavals which exposed
them to great peril and hardship. It has happened that vessels, leaving
late as did these, upon striking these vendavals in the Filipinas, have
been obliged to turn back with these winds to the Ladrones Islands, and
to return thence with the brisas from those islands to the Filipinas;
then, reaching the latter, to encounter the vendavals, and again be
driven by their force to the Ladrones. The hindrance and privation thus
experienced can be imagined; nor can the ship land at either islands
until the months of October and November when the vendavals cease.

Almost the same thing befell Ours that year. The vendavals and
currents long drove them back, and, in consequence, their voyage was
lengthened, and provisions ran short; the ship's stores gave out, and,
that they might not lack water, they were allotted small rations, each
being given but half a quartillo a day--a privation which at sea is
keenly felt. Finally, relieved from all these hardships and torments,
through the mercy of God they arrived safely at the college in Manila
on the first day of August of the same year. This voyage is usually
made in seventy days, but they, to their own greater merit, did not
reach the islands before one hundred and thirty days; and afterward
they journeyed more than one hundred leguas besides, by both sea and
land, coasting the shore in large boats. They crossed by land the
province of Camarines, all of which is occupied by the convents of
the glorious father St. Francis, where they were received and cared
for according to their dire necessities; even the father commissary
of those provinces, heedless of entreaties or excuses, washed with
his own hands the feet of six of Ours, who chanced to pass by his
abode. The first words with which one of those servants of the Lord
received them were the following, which he uttered with loving tears:
"Would they were a thousand fathers, for they would all have a harvest
in the Filipinas." The Indians, too, who had never seen Ours in this
province, were greatly rejoiced at their arrival--not only those
already baptized, but even the infidels; and they gave proof of their
good will in the hospitality which they showed towards our fathers,
in imitation of their own fathers and ministers.

This was indeed a valuable reenforcement; for, combined with that of
the year before, they made a sufficient force to begin the extension
of the Society throughout the islands which were assigned to it as
a province, and to care for the humble souls who begged for bread
and had no one to give it to them. Father Ramon de Prado, who had
succeeded to the office of vice-provincial, thus obtained people to
employ in this work, conformably to his great zeal for the salvation of
souls. How he did this we shall see later, each subject in its proper
place. First, I will say that the facility with which many ministers
of the Lord in the four religious orders learned the languages used in
their respective missions, even so as to preach and hear confessions
in them, seems a gift from heaven. The most tardy student of them,
if he apply himself moderately, spends no more than six months;
and one of Ours, Father Cosme de Flores, learned and mastered this
language, so that he could preach and hear confessions, in seventy-four
days--to the astonishment of our people, as well as of the Indians
themselves. The latter, seeing this facility, say that God, without
doubt, bestows it upon us, recognizing their needs. In truth these
languages are not very difficult, either to learn or to pronounce--and
more especially now, since there is a grammar, a vocabulary, and many
writings therein. The most difficult is the language of Manila (which
they call Tagal)--which, I have already said, Father Martin Henriquez
learned in three months; and in three more, he used it fluently. This
was the first of the native languages that I learned, to which and
to the others I shall profitably devote another chapter. [68]



Of the Languages of the Filipinas. Chapter XV.

There is no single or general language of the Filipinas extending
throughout the islands; but all of them, though there are many and
different tongues, are so much alike that they may be learned and
spoken in a short time. Consequently if one is learned, all are
almost known. They are to each other like the Tuscan, Lombard,
and Sicilian dialects of Italia, or the Castilian, Portuguese,
and Galician in Espana. Only the language of the Negrillos is very
different from the rest, as, in Espana, is the Vizcayan [_i.e._,
Basque]. There is not a different language for each of the islands,
because some of them--as, for example, Manila, and even Panai, which
is more than four hundred leguas smaller--contain several languages;
and there are languages each of which prevails in several islands. In
the island of Manila alone, there are six different tongues; in Panai,
two; in some others, but one. The languages most used, and most widely
spread, are the Tagal and the Bisayan; and in some regions of the
Pintados another tongue is also prevalent, called Harayan. The Tagal
embraces the greater part of the coast and interior of the islands
of Manila, Mindoro, Luban, and some others. Bisaya is in use through
all the islands of the Pintados, although in some of the villages
therein the Harayan is spoken. Of all these languages, it was the
Tagal which most pleased me and which I most admired. As I told the
first bishop, and, afterwards, other persons of dignity in the islands
and in Europe, I found in this language four qualities of the four
greatest languages of the world, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Spanish:
it has the abstruseness and obscurity of the Hebrew; the articles
and distinctions in proper as well as in common nouns, of the Greek;
the fulness and elegance of the Latin; and the refinement, polish,
and courtesy of the Spanish. Examples of all these characteristics may
be seen in the "Ave Maria" done into Tagal; and, as that is a short
prayer, and more easily understood than the others, I will place it
here with its explanation in our vernacular, and with word-for-word
equivalents. In this way may be seen the idioms and characteristic
expressions of this language which will please some readers, and
furnish information, both useful and curious.

_The "Ave-Maria" in the Tagal language_


    Aba Guinoo Maria matoa ca na.
    Hail Lady Mary, joyful thou now,

    Napono ca nan gracia,
    full thou of grace;

    An Panguinoon Dios na saio.
    the Lord God is with thee

    Bucor can pinagpala sa babain lahat.
    especially, thou blessed among women all.

    Pinagpala naman ang iong anac si Jesus.
    Blessed also be thy son Jesus.

    Santa Maria ina nang Dios
    Holy Mary, mother of God,

    Ipana languin mo cami macasalanan
    Let us be interceded for by thee, us sinners

    ngayon at cum mamatai cami. Amen, Jesus.
    now and when shall die we.



The first word of this prayer _Aba_, is obscure, but apparently has the
force of "salute," like the Latin _Ave. Bucor_ expresses diversity,
distinction, and singularity. The article is _Si_ (Jesus), as _Ton_
in Greek. The richness of the language lies in its many synonyms
and phrases; consequently this prayer, which, as it stands, is very
elegant, could be formed with equal elegance in various other ways,
without losing its original sense and meaning. The polish and courtesy
consist in not saying, as in Latin, _Ave Maria_ (which would seem in
this language abrupt and barbaric), without adding that polite word,
_Guinoo_.

There is none or very little of this courtesy in the other two
languages of the Bissayas, which are more rude and unpolished. I
thought it good to present the same prayer in these languages, not
only as a curiosity, but to give an idea of their similarity and
differences--giving notice, however, that it is not my intention
to offer an interpretation (which is unnecessary, since we all
know the "Ave Maria"), but, as I said, to show the idioms of these
languages. These idioms, moreover, ought not to displease or appear
ignoble, for every tongue has its own beauty and elegance for those
who are born in it, which the eyes of foreigners cannot discern. This
point has been discussed by Jesus Sidrac in the prologue to his
_Ecclesiasticus_, a holy and Catholic work; and it was proved
at length, and with great erudition, by the most glorious doctor
St. Jerome, in the hundred and first Epistle to Pamaquio.

_The "Ave Maria" in the Harayan tongue_


    Maliag  cao  Maria  nabota cao  can gracia
    Rejoice thou Mary,  full   thou of  grace.

    An  atun guinoon Dios dian canimo.
    He  our  Lord     God  is   with thee,

    Capin     icao  sa    manga babai nga tanan,
    fortunate thou  among women        all;

    ig  capin     naman ang imon bata nga si Jesus
    _and fortunate also  he  thy  son     Jesus_.

    Santa Maria  inang  can Dios
    [Holy Mary], mother of  God,

    igampo        mo       cami nga   macasasala
    let us be favored by thee, us    the   sinners,

    caraon, ig   cum  mamatai    cami.
    now  and  when shall die  we.

    Amen, Jesus.


_The "Ave Maria" in the Bissayan tongue_


    Maghimaya ca   Maria  napono ca   sa gracia
    Rejoice,  thou Mary,  full   thou of grace;

    An   guinoon Dios anaa canimo.
    the  Lord    God  is    with thee.

    Guirayeg ca    uyamot  sa    babaihun tanan
    Exalted  thou   much    among women    all,

    ug  guirayeg man   an  imon anac Jesus.
    and exalted  also  he   thy  son  Jesus.

    Santa Maria inahan sa Dios,
    Holy  Mary, mother of God,

    iguiampo            mo    cami macasasala onia
    let us be interceded for by thee, us    sinners,   now

    ug  sa  amun camatai. Amen, Jesus.
    and in  our  death.


It has been my object in giving this slight illustration of the
difference between these three languages--aside from its singularity
and novelty, which may furnish some pleasure--to make evident the ease
and clearness of the languages and their words and pronunciations,
which render them very easy, or at least not difficult to learn. Some
of their idioms and transpositions, which are different from our
own, must be accepted as they stand, as Father Joseph de Acosta says
very well when writing on this matter, (_De procur. sal_. lib. 4,
cap. 9.); but if they are once acquired, and one is accustomed to the
sound of them, they do not render the language difficult, but rather
make it easy and graceful. But since I have mentioned the courtesy
and politeness of the Tagalos, and of their tongue, it will be well,
before proceeding further, to speak more at length concerning it,
for it is so noble and pleasing a moral virtue.



Of the civilities, terms of courtesy, and good breeding among the
Filipinos. Chapter XVI.

The Filipinos are not so ceremonious in their actions as are
the Chinese and Japonese; yet they have their politeness and good
breeding, especially the Tagalos, who are very civil and courteous in
word and action. Upon meeting one another, they practice our custom
of uncovering the head--not that they used hats, caps, or bonnets;
but they wore a piece of cloth like a towel, some three or four
palmos long, which they wound around the head in becoming fashion,
like the ancient crowns or diadems. This they removed, as they now
do the hat [_sombrero_]--which they have adopted, in imitation of us,
abandoning the _potong_, as they called the towel or diadem which they
formerly wore. As among them it is not courtesy to remain standing
before a person whom they respect, they seat themselves upon the
ground, or rather on their heel-bones. Seated in this way, with head
uncovered and the potong thrown like a towel over the left shoulder,
they talk with their superiors. The mode of salutation upon entering
or meeting anyone is as follows: They draw the body together and make
a low reverence, raising one or both hands to the face, and placing
them upon the cheeks; they next sit down waiting for the question
that may be put to them, for it is considered bad manners to speak
before one is spoken to. Their greatest courtesy is in their form
of address; for they never speak to one as "thou," or in the second
person, whether singular or plural, but always use the third person,
saying for example--"Does the lord, or the chief, wish for this or
that?" There are many examples of this to be found in Holy Scripture
or sacred language, and particularly in the Psalms. In the relations
of man with woman, woman with man, or woman with woman, they are very
careful--even when they are quite equals, and, too, among the middle
class--to use, after every important word, nothing but "my Lord," or
"my Lady;" as, "My Lord, as I was coming up the river, I saw, my Lord,"
etc. This term and pronoun are used as agreeable and even affectionate,
even in the languages of much greater importance, as Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, which are the three most venerable tongues. In polite
and affectionate intercourse they are very extravagant, addressing
letters to each other in terms of elaborate and delicate expressions
of affection, and neat turns of thought. As a result of this, they are
much given to musical practice; and although the guitar that they use,
called _cutyapi_, is not very ingenious or rich in tone, it is by no
means disagreeable, and to them is most pleasing. They play it with
such vivacity and skill that they seem to make human voices issue
from its four metallic cords. We also have it on good authority that
by merely playing these instruments they can, without opening their
lips, communicate with one another, and make themselves perfectly
understood--a thing unknown of any other nation. The Bissayans are
more rustic and less civil in manners, just as their language is
harsher and less polished. They have not so many terms of courtesy,
as formerly they had no letters until, a very few years ago, they
borrowed theirs from the Tagalos. As we have already treated of their
languages, it would be advisable to make some mention of their letters.



Of the Letters of the Filipinos. Chapter XVII.

All these islanders are much given to reading and writing, and there
is hardly a man, and much less a woman, who does not read and write
in the letters used in the island of Manila--which are entirely
different from those of China, Japon, and India. This will be seen
from its alphabet, which is as follows:

The three vowels serve as five, and are:

                A            I           O
                a           e i         o u

The consonants are only twelve, and in writing are used with the
vowels in the following form.

The letter alone with no point above or below it, is pronounced with
the vowel-sound A:


            BA KA DA GA HA LA MA NA PA SA TA YA
            Ba ca da ga ha la ma na pa sa ta ya


By placing the point above, each is pronounced with the vowel-sound
E or I:


            BI KI DI GI HI LI MI NI PI SI TI YI
            Bi qui di gui hi li mi ni pi si ti yi
            Be que de gue he le me ne pe se te ye


By placing the point below, they are pronounced with the vowel-sound
O or U:


            BO KO DO GO HO LO MO NO PO SO TO YO
            Bo co do go ho lo mo no po so to yo
            Bu cu du gu hu lu mu nu pu su tu yu


Consequently, to pronounce _cama_, two letters without points are
sufficient: KAMA _ca ma_.

If a point is placed above the KA we have KIMA or _que-ma._

If a point is placed below each character KOMO the word is _co-mo_.

Final consonants are suppressed in all forms of expression: accordingly
_cantar_ is written KATA _ca ta_; _barba_, BABA _ba ba_.

By means of these characters they easily make themselves understood
and convey their ideas marvelously, he who reads supplying, with much
skill and facility, the consonants which are lacking. From us they have
adopted the habit of writing from left to right. Formerly they wrote
from the top to the bottom, placing the first line on the left (if I
remember aright), and continuing the rest at the right, contrary to
the custom of the Chinese and Japanese--who, although they write from
top to bottom, begin from the right and continue the page to the left.

They used to write on reeds and palm-leaves, using as a pen an
iron point; now they write their own letters, as well as ours, with
a sharpened quill, and, as we do, on paper. They have learned our
language and its pronunciation, and write it even better than we do,
for they are so clever that they learn anything with the greatest
ease. I have had letters written by themselves in very handsome and
fluent style. In Tigbauan I had in my school a very young boy, who,
using as a model letters written to me in a very good handwriting,
learned in three months to write even better than I; and he copied for
me important documents faithfully, exactly, and without errors. Let
this, however, suffice for the matter of languages and letters,
and let us return to our employment for souls.



Occurrences in Manila in the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six and
fifteen hundred and ninety-seven. Chapter XVIII.

In the college we had begun, as I have said, to study the Latin
grammar and moral theology. Each of these branches was begun
in the usual way, with public academic exercises and learned
discourses. [69] As it was the first event of that kind to take
place in the islands, the exercises were received with great favor,
and were attended and enjoyed by all the dignitaries, and prelates,
and by a great concourse of other people. Divine worship, moreover,
was notably increased upon the completion of the church--which, in
its construction and unusual design, proved to be very beautiful. It
was constructed on the model of the church of Jesus in our house of
the professed at Rome, although considerably inferior to that. This
church was dedicated to the glorious St. Anne, the ceremony taking
place on her feast-day in the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six,
when an image of her was piously set up, and the most holy sacrament
brought from the old church with great solemnity and devotion. The
chapel of our Lady was placed, as in the church at Rome, on the
gospel side; and in it her image was set up with an elegant reredos,
in the devout presence of many Spaniards and Indians. In the other
chapel, on the epistle side which is on the side next the house,
and joined to the sacristy, were placed the holy relics, which at
the instance of the Catholic king our lord, and the urgent request
of Father Alonso Sanchez, were donated by the Apostolic See and had
arrived in the previous year. The tabernacle in which these relics
now repose had already been constructed and finished; it embraces
the whole width of the chapel. It is of an incorruptible wood which
they call in those parts molave. [70] It is adorned by eight columns,
four on a side, grouped in a square, with base and pedestals which
sustain, higher up, its architrave, frieze, and cornice, with finials
and handsome architectural designs. Between the columns there are five
distinctly-marked compartments, two small ones on each side and a large
one in the center--all of them of like design and exquisite proportion,
with finely carved doors and inlaid work, with cavities in which the
holy relics are preserved with great propriety and honor. The color of
the whole work externally is black--partly natural, on account of the
quantities of ebony that it contains, which is very abundant in those
regions, and partly derived from the varnish which is used to imitate
that wood. The mouldings, outlines, pinas, [71] and floriations are
gilded, and there are other ornaments of gold and ivory. The altar is
below, with its two steps at the height of the pedestals which support
the columns. In the spaces between the columns, on both sides of the
altar, were placed two images or statues of the glorious apostles,
St. Peter and St. Paul; these are fastened in place by strong and
curious locks and are covered with two pairs of curtains--one pair
of gauze striped with silk and gold, the other of finest damask with
embroidery and gold lace. Whenever these holy relics are exposed at
their respective feast-days, the ceremony is conducted with great
solemnity; and numbers of white candles are placed not only on the
altar and steps, but all over the tabernacle from top to bottom,
giving it dignity and distinction. On the twelfth of January of the
year one thousand five hundred and ninety-seven, the holy relics
were deposited there, with such rejoicings and festive show as had
never been known before in the islands. In all this was seen how it
was God who solicited hearts, and moved them to honor the glorious
soldiers whom he had brought again for the defense and protection of
the earth. They were borne in procession through the principal streets
of the city, which, although handsome in themselves, were decorated
so elegantly that their very elegance expressed the devotion of the
people. They had erected at intervals arches (a dozen in all)--the
greater number lofty, and with sculptured images; the others of
silk and thin stuffs, so ingeniously knotted together and adorned
with various compositions and characters that they presented a very
pleasing sight. They constructed with great skill several fountains,
some of which gave forth water and others wine; two, in particular,
issuing from a window, gave forth milk and Castilian wine, which were
highly prized at that time in the islands. The relics were borne on
six platforms, no less splendid than costly, since they carried nearly
all the gold, precious stones, and jewelry of the city, which had been
offered with much readiness and good will. Our Lord rewarded them for
this, for there was not one accident, or a single piece lacking, of
which there had previously been some fear, on account of the great
gathering of all classes of people. As for the decoration of the
church, the edifice itself, recently completed, was so beautiful and
pleasing that it sufficed for adornment, although not so elaborate
as the tabernacle. Its beauty was increased by elegant hangings
of tapestry, and by many inscriptions--written by Ours in Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, Castilian, and Tagalo--extending in three rows along
the great nave, besides others, corresponding to these, in various
places. As I have said, the holy relics were borne on six platforms,
resting on the shoulders of men, most of whom were religious, and
in fourteen reliquaries, which were carried by as many religious;
and dignitaries of the cathedral, clothed in their official robes,
accompanied these. Add to this the salutes from the forts, and
the standards of the confraternities carried in the van, and the
effect was highly imposing. The festivities lasted nine days, each
order celebrating its special feast, preaching and saying mass with
the greatest possible solemnity. The Augustinian fathers began the
festivities, considering the occasion especially theirs on account of
their long residence there. They assisted us by their good will and
deeds, thereby showing themselves no less devoted to the holy relics
than friendly to the Society. They conducted many kinds of music and
dances, and besides these were many furnished by our Indians, and
the Chinese and Japanese; all this variety produced most pleasing
effects and greatly adorned and enlivened the festival. In this
fashion the other religious orders celebrated their own days until
the eighth, in succession, with great devotion, joy and edification
on the part of the people. On the afternoon of the last day, as a
conclusion to the fiesta, valuable prizes were distributed on the
occasion of a literary contest, the announcement of which had been
published some days before with much show and solemnity. In this
contest many excellent and ingenious compositions of various kinds
were delivered, to which prizes were awarded, after two exceedingly
pleasing, dignified and impressive declamations had been recited in
praise of the holy relics. Divine worship was also improved in the new
church by the addition of some silver lamps, candlesticks, chalices,
patines, wine-cruets, monstrances, and thuribles; many altar hangings
and chasubles, made not only from the silk and embroideries of that
country, but from damask, velvet, and brocade brought from Espana and
Italia, with printed borders; hangings heavily embroidered with seed
pearls and thin silver plates; and various draperies, some of velvet
and damask, others of colored taffeta. Besides all these things,
there was the chapel of the singers, who with voices and music of
flutes and clarions, serve in the masses, vespers, and _Salves_,
at least on the principal feast-days.

There was also begun at this time, through the devotion of Canon
Diego de Leon (who was then attending the lectures in our schools),
the practice of assembling in our church many men of all ranks to take
the discipline, [72] three days in the week, especially during Lent--a
practice which lasts to this very day. This same canon stimulated
their piety on these occasions by a half hour's reading from some
devout book. At the conclusion of the reading, the penance began,
during which they repeated devoutly the _Miserere_. This holy exercise
was a source of great edification to the Indians; and, in imitation
of it, a great number of them took the discipline on those nights,
in turn with the Spaniards.



Further proceedings at this time in Manila by the Indians and
Spaniards. Chapter XIX.

At this time the Indians were very numerous, both within the city of
Manila (where there are more than six thousand, scattered through
the houses of the Spanish inhabitants) and in all the outlying
districts. These people repair to our church for confession not only
in Lent but on all other days of the year; consequently, there were
not fathers enough acquainted with their language to care for them
spiritually from morning to evening. I know of some who had waited for
more than ten or even twelve days, without being able, for the press
of people, to reach the feet of the confessor. Others remained a whole
day in the church, waiting for their turn. This gives evidence of the
ardor and perseverance with which they attended to the welfare of their
souls. On Sundays and the afternoons of feast-days, when the sermons
were preached in their own language, the church was crowded--above,
below, in the choir and galleries, all which, although very spacious,
were filled; and, besides, there were many of those people outside
the doors (which are five in number).

In two ways they were equally enthusiastic in celebrating the deposit
of the holy relics: first, in the great devotion that they displayed
during the whole eight days while the festival lasted and the relics
were exposed--men, women, and children attending it in such numbers,
both morning and afternoon, that they could not enter the church. The
Spaniards, astonished at this, said that those holy relics must have
come to Manila for the Indians, judging from the way in which the
latter attended and venerated them. To show appreciation of their
great devotion, and to inspire them with more, a short discourse, in
their own language, was delivered to them every afternoon, preceding
the _Salve_ sung by the choir, and accompanied by the music of the
wind-instruments. The second thing they did in the service of the holy
relics was to institute a confraternity or congregation dedicated
to those relics with the title and vocation of "all saints." Their
object was, each beginning with himself and his own spiritual profit,
to strive with all their might for the welfare of their neighbors,
by performing works of mercy, in both temporal and spiritual affairs,
as their opportunities permit--in which effort they exert themselves,
by the grace of our Lord, with the advantages which we shall see later.

One of the best results is the modesty and virtue of the women,
which we esteem in those regions, because it is but little practiced
or valued among their heathen peoples. In many--I even believe, in
all--of those islands there existed a doctrine, sowed by the devil,
that a woman, whether married or single, could not be saved, who did
not have some lover. They said that this man, in the other world,
hastened to offer the woman his hand at the passage of a very perilous
stream which had no other bridge than a very narrow beam, which must
be traversed to reach the repose that they call _Calualhatian._ [73]

Consequently virginity was not recognized or esteemed among them;
rather they considered it as a misfortune and humiliation. Married
women, moreover, were not constrained by honor to remain faithful
to their husbands, although the latter would resent the adultery,
and hold it as a just cause for repudiating the wife. To illustrate
this: Upon my arrival in the Filipinas, in the latter part of May in
the year fifteen hundred and ninety, I had landed at the island of
Marinduque (which is about twenty-eight or thirty leguas from Manila),
at the time when an ensign with a squad of soldiers was going, through
curiosity, to visit the interior of the island. Night overtaking
him in this place, he was obliged to seek hospitality among the
natives; there, one of the hospitalities which they bestowed on him
and his companions was to offer him two women. These the good ensign
ordered to be sent back, and he pointed out the offense that they
were committing against God, the almighty Creator of heaven and earth,
whom all men should know and serve. He told them that for this purpose
alone the Spaniards had come from so great a distance; and that they
must not offend God by their evil example. It was thus that the good
ensign conducted himself on that occasion. There have been others,
who, recklessly following their own evil inclination, not only do not
resist such solicitations, but, to the great scandal of this nation,
seek and encourage sin. But God, who from evil produces good, has
brought some of those women to fear Him; and they, esteeming purity
as a heavenly thing and vice as a vile and repulsive abomination,
have conquered some most fiery temptations, as will be seen from two
or three incidents that occur to me. There was a Spaniard who held a
mother and daughter so under his control that he was on the way to
seducing the latter (who was a mere girl) by his blandishments and
supplications, combined with harshness and threats. The mother, who
was an infernal old hag, he gained by offerings and bribes. But the
good daughter after seven whole months of such infamous and continuous
attack, would not yield; and finally that wretch, wearied by so long
a siege and vanquished by the constancy of a weak girl, withdrew and
left her in peace. Which is indeed a good deal when we consider the
following: One woman for twelve long years resisted the tempter,
fortified by holy confession and communion. Another, although she
resisted for a shorter time, showed even greater constancy; for the
base and cruel seducer went so far as to aim a dagger against her
breast twice; the third time he went beyond threats, and fear did not
restrain him, but he actually stabbed her. The wounded girl, who had
first been stricken by the arrow of divine love, retained sufficient
strength to leap down out of the house (as I have already said the
dwelling is in the upper part), and thus her soul escaped injury.

For this very reason is the seminary for girls held in so high
esteem which was founded in the islands by Governor Gomez Perez de
las Marinas, at the order of the Catholic king, at the instance of
the first bishop, and through the zeal of Father Alonso Sanchez. It
was established in the year fifteen hundred and ninety, when Captain
Luis de Bivanco, factor of the royal exchequer, gave for this his
houses. Later the seminary was transferred to the site which it
now occupies, and a church was erected in honor of the virgin Saint
Potenciana, patroness of Manila and of this holy seminary.

The good which has resulted to that colony from this institution is
beyond exaggeration. Nearly a hundred young girls have retired to
the protection of its walls, the greater part of them daughters of
Spaniards--who, if they should go outside the seminary, would risk,
and even achieve, setting the world on fire. The fathers of our
college sometimes go to preach to them; and for my own part I can
say that, whenever this duty fell to me, I did not fail to render
praise to God at seeing there so many young women retired from the
world, occupied in divine service and knowledge, and removed from
the dangers and temptations without. Those among them who become
established in matrimony give manifest token in their manners of
the excellent education that they have received there, and the holy
instruction upon which their superior has taught and reared them. This
seminary for girls owes a great deal to the archdeacon of Manila,
Don Francisco Gomez de Arellano--who, not content with expending his
wealth in other works of great service to God, occupies himself and
spends a large share of his means in the protection and maintenance of
this institution. At his own expense he constructed some of the inner
apartments in the seminary's house, which were greatly needed, and in
the church a large and beautiful reredos, of elaborate architecture;
but, even more important, he has with his ministrations and instruction
carefully cultivated those souls.

But to return to the Indians: two of them were rescued at that
time, for which they had reason to be thankful; for, as they were
Christians, the greater would be their loss and peril. One of them,
who was twenty years old, had learned with great thoroughness a
certain device of witchcraft; and yet during all this time, through
some special providence of our Lord, had practiced it to no profit. It
is certain, too, that if he had been successful he would have ruined
himself and harmed many others. But I say no more of this, to avoid
prolixity. Another Indian had a book containing certain verses of
poetry, which they call _Golo_ [74]--most pernicious, because they
included an express compact with the devil; this its owner freely gave
up, that it might be burned, which was done. Most of the prisoners
in the jail are Indians, placed there for various crimes which they
committed; and they also have their own separate hospital in the city
(as also the Spaniards have one), where their sick are healed. Both
hospitals are royal foundations, established by order and at the
expense of his Majesty the Catholic king of blessed memory. To both
Spaniards and natives Ours have ministered, in both these hospitals
and in the prison, in order to aid all with the offices which, in such
places, the Society is wont to exercise, for both bodies and souls.

At that time we began the religious exercises which those of our
Society are wont to conduct in the plazas for the benefit of those,
who through hindrances, carelessness, or impiety, fail to attend the
sermons. The discourses were delivered in the Castilian language, in
the principal plaza of Manila, beneath some of the principal buildings,
which were then occupied (while the royal edifices were being finished)
by the governor, Don Francisco Tello, his Majesty's representative. So
much did he enjoy hearing the discourses, and the clever answers of
some Spanish boys who before the preaching were catechized, as usual,
in the Christian doctrine, that he threw down, from the balcony where
he stood listening, to the boys a number of stamped images to reward
them. This encouraged the boys to learn thoroughly, and become adept
in these exercises, and inspired Ours to continue this holy practice,
thus favored with such sincerity and benevolence; and those who
beheld it were edified, and held us in greater esteem. Through these
discourses and exercises the children, and even some adults, obtained
a knowledge and understanding of the Christian doctrine; moreover,
some were induced to lead better lives, flee from temptation, and
examine their own souls, and even some to enter the religious life.



What was accomplished in the villages of the encomienda of Taitai up
to the year fifteen hundred and ninety-seven. Chapter XX.

We have already seen how the village called Taitai, the chief one of
that encomienda, improved its location by removing from the marshes and
overflow of the lagoon shore. This village had formerly dedicated its
church to the glorious St. John the Baptist, and, upon its removal to
the new site, in devotion to him the name San Juan del Monte ["St. John
of the Mountain"] was given to it. It is a general custom, in all the
mission villages in the Filipinas, for all the people to repair on
Sundays and days of obligation to the church for the mass and sermon,
before which the doctrine and catechism are recited. As a result of
this, they not only have a thorough knowledge of the prayers, but even
excel many peoples of Europe in their comprehension of the mysteries of
our holy faith. To lighten the burdens of these people, that they might
not weary of their constant attendance at church, for the doctrine,
catechism, mass, and sermon--not to mention the frequent publication
of the marriage banns, and the fact that mass is solemnly celebrated
with music and the accompaniment of the organ, in which they spend many
hours--we thought it best to reserve the doctrine and the catechism
for Sundays in the afternoon, and even then not all the people were
obliged to be present--part of them attending on one Sunday, part on
another, and thus in rotation until the turn of the first ones came
again. By such an arrangement this exercise is rendered easier, and
is even more profitable to the people, serving them upon such days as
legitimate diversion, to which they all repair with greater inclination
and pleasure. To this end a bell is rung at the hour of vespers, and
the children go forth through the streets of the place, bearing the
cross, and singing the doctrine, and then, followed by their elders,
they return to the church. The adults, in the presence of the father,
recite the prayers and catechism with great devotion and satisfaction,
spending in all about half an hour. This done, they return to their
homes. Mondays and Saturdays are likewise solemnized with masses,
respectively for the deceased and in honor of our Lady, and are always
attended by a certain number of people. The young men are especially
directed to attend these services that they may continue to practice
Christian habits; upon these occasions some short sermon is preached
them in their own language. The children and old men are those who
are under the strictest obligation to come to the church each day,
at a certain hour, to learn the Christian doctrine--the children,
always; the old men, until they have learned the doctrine. To each
old man is assigned a boy, who instructs him and is careful to
report how much the old man is learning; then, if the old man gives
a good account of himself, he is privileged to cease his attendance,
except with the rest of the people on Sundays. The bell tolls the "Ave
Maria" at dawn, at noon, and at night; and, besides this, some one is
careful to go through the streets at night, sounding a little bell,
and in a loud voice admonishing the people to offer prayers for the
souls in purgatory and for those who are in a state of sin. These,
as well as other pious and devout customs, had been introduced into
those villages. Three handsome churches were erected, and adorned with
images, tapestry, and beautiful ornaments. We gained the good-will of
those Indians to such a degree that, their opinion of us extending to
their neighbors, even the savages who were hidden among the mountains
came to us; and consequently those villages received much increase,
as we shall soon see. There was one of these newcomers in particular,
very appropriately named Sayor, which means "robber" (and truly he
was such in his deeds), who was a savage in his mode of life; without
house or dwelling, he lived among the mountains and in caves--even
using as food, when he found no other game, the serpents that he
killed. Although somewhat advanced in years, he possessed incredible
agility in running and leaping, the natural disposition and propensity
of savage wild beasts. The neighboring villages held this man in so
great fear that, whenever he entered one of them, all the people fled
from him as from a wild beast, believing him to be a violent madman;
and by such compulsion he took, without any resistance, all that
he desired from the houses. I saw this man, who unexpectedly came
toward me of his own accord; he was naked, his only covering being a
wretched breech-cloth; he wore in his girdle a dagger, and carried in
his hands his bow and arrows. I caressed him, and tried to soften him
with presents and gentle treatment, and this intercourse we continued
for five or six years, with increasing confidence and satisfaction on
his part. Consequently he maintained with us very intimate relations
until, finally, Father Diego Garcia, who as we shall later see went to
those regions as visitor in the year fifteen hundred and ninety-seven,
decided that it was time to grant him holy baptism. The father visitor
himself bestowed this grace upon him, baptizing him with his own hands
with great solemnity, and with demonstration of the grace and efficacy
of this most divine sacrament. The name of Pablo was given to him,
which from that time on he so highly prized that if at any time he
was inadvertently called by his former nickname, he showed (although
with a gracious and Christian spirit) regret and disdain equal to
his pleasure and pride in the name of Christian. Accordingly he would
answer to those who called him Sayor: "Not Sayor, but Pablo." After
his baptism we married him; and he now dwells in his own home as the
father of a family, with great discretion and tranquillity. He has
become so tamed that we can say that he is one of the gentlest and most
useful of all our Indians, and aids in our affairs with much fidelity
and love. I spoke to him occasionally, with no small satisfaction,
of his former savage life. He told me of the places in which he took
refuge and spent the night, and of his hunting serpents--which,
according to his statement (which was verified there), are of so
great a size that they swallow men, deer, and other animals. [75]
Before his baptism, when our acquaintance was but recent, he more than
once offered to accompany me upon my journeys, carrying his dagger,
bow, and arrows. We two journeyed alone through the mountains, he
with great satisfaction in serving me, I with equal security and
confidence in his good fellowship.

In this way, at the time when Father Francisco Almerique was here,
not one man, as this one, but entire villages came in--the good father
choosing their location, and helping them to erect the houses. In
the village of Antipolo, in one year alone (either ninety-four or
ninety-five), nearly a thousand souls arrived at the mission, more than
five hundred of whom were baptized in that same year. They had come
down from some very rugged mountains, far from there, where they had
their houses and cultivated fields; but they neglected all these, out
of love and esteem for our holy faith. No one remained in the mountains
but a few catolones, for thus the priests of their idols are styled. As
soon as this was ascertained, efforts were made that a person able to
do so should remove them from that place, to suppress this cause of
offense to those who were weak. This was done with much gentleness,
and they were brought to us. Thereupon the good father, with his holy
prudence and with the example of his righteous life, subdued their
leader, whom the rest obeyed, and baptized them all. This leader said
that the father's anito (thus they style their deities) was greater
than those of other men, and for that reason they recognized him as
superior. This pagan priest, while offering his infamous sacrifices,
was possessed by the Devil who caused him to make most ugly grimaces;
and he braided his hair, which for his particular calling he wore
long, like that of a woman. But he, beginning (like the Magdalen) with
his hair, cut it off publicly, and with it the power of the Devil,
who held him captive; and receiving baptism, constrained the others
by his example to do the same, consigning his idols to the fire where
they were consumed.

In this baptism of five hundred people, there were two old women
whose conversion showed the special and admirable providence of our
Lord. One of them, at least, showed an age of more than one hundred
years; and both came down with the rest from the mountains, desiring
holy baptism. Hardly had they received it when, leaving this mortal
life (for they could no longer sustain the burden of so many years),
they were renewed and bettered by the eternal life for which our Lord
in his infinite mercy had preserved them during so many years.

The Tagalos, which is the name of the whitest and most civilized race
of Manila, were not the only ones who descended from the mountains and
from afar to range themselves alongside the sons of the new Jerusalem,
that is, the holy church [76]--which multiplying in numbers, augmenting
the joy at the sight of the vineyard of the Lord, and producing new
plants, extends its shoots until it penetrates the sea and embraces
and incorporates all its islands. After the men came the beasts of
burden (namely, the Negrillos, who are more fierce, and dwell in the
mountains) who came with outstretched hands to place themselves in
those of their swift Angels, sent to succor this abject and ruined
people. By this I mean that the Negrillos, of whom I have already
spoken--who are the ancient inhabitants of some of these islands,
including Manila, in which there are many of that race who live,
as I said, in the mountains, merely like wild beasts--impressed
by the example of the others, began to be peaceable and tame, and
to prepare themselves for holy baptism. This, for those who are
acquainted with their savageness and brutality, is wonderful beyond
exaggeration. But this very brutal and barbarous nature renders them
(a marvelous thing!) less incapable of our holy faith, and less averse
to it--because in their state of pure savagery they have not, as I know
from observation, any idolatries or superstitions, neither are they
greatly averse to the gospel and baptism. The others--who to their own
detriment and misfortune, are more civilized--abandon more regretfully
their idols, ceremonies, priests, sacrifices, and superstitions;
and, although they renounce them in holy baptism and are converted
(vanquished by the light of Catholic truth), the vestiges of the evil
which they have sucked from their mothers' breasts are not so easily
forgotten as to unburden us, their teachers, of many cares. This was
clearly seen that year in that very village of San Juan del Monte,
where, although all the inhabitants had been baptized and included
many good Christians, those same good Christians informed us of a fire
of idolatry which in its great fury was burning up our harvests. In
order that this may be better understood, it will be well first to
give some account of their idolatries and superstitions in a separate
chapter; and then we will relate what happened in Taitai and how it
was remedied.



Concerning the false heathen religion, idolatries, and superstitions
of the Filipinos. Chapter XXI.

Although upon entering into the dark abyss of such blind idolatry I
find a disorderly confusion of the vilest and most abominable things
[77] worthy of its inventor, although in examining the walls within
this infernal cave, I discover an infinitude of loathsome creatures,
foul, obscene, truly damnable, it is my task, aided by the light of
truth, to reduce them to order--so that we who upon opening our eyes
find ourselves within the light of truth may offer praise to Almighty
God, and have compassion for those who, blinded by their ignorance,
love and prize these things of darkness, and cannot open their eyes
to any light beyond. I shall speak first concerning the false belief
that they hold concerning the divinity of their idols; second, of
their priests and priestesses; third, and last, of their sacrifices
and superstitions. Their art of writing was of no service to them
in any one of these three things, or in matters of government and
civilization (of which I shall perhaps later tell the little that I
know); for they never used their writing except to exchange letters,
as we have said. All their government and religion is founded on
tradition, and on custom introduced by the Devil himself, who spoke
to them through their idols and the ministers of these. They preserve
it in songs, which they know by heart and learn when children, by
hearing these sung when they are sailing or tilling their fields,
when they are rejoicing and holding feasts, and especially, when they
are mourning their dead. In these barbarous songs they relate the
fabulous genealogies and vain deeds of their gods--among whom they set
up one as the chief and superior of them all. This deity the Tagalos
call _Bathala Mei capal_, which means "God the creator or maker;" the
Bissayans call him _Laon_, which denotes antiquity. These songs relate
the creation of the world, the origin of the human race, the deluge,
paradise, punishment, and other invisible things, relating a thousand
absurdities, and varying much the form, some telling it in one way,
others in another. To show better what lies and fables these all are,
there is one story that the first man and the first woman came from
the knot of a cane which burst off from its plant. After that, certain
disputes resulted concerning the marriage of these two, on account of
the difficulties arising from the first degree of blood-relationship,
which among them is inviolable, and thought to be allowed only that
first time from the necessity of propagating mankind. [78] In short
they recognized invisible spirits, and another life; also demons, the
enemies of men, of whom they were in abject fear from the evils and
dread which these caused them. Accordingly one of Ours converted many
of them by means of a well-painted picture of hell. Their idolatry is,
in a word (as with many other nations), an adoration and deification
of their ancestors--especially of those who distinguished themselves
through valiant deeds, or cruelties, or obscene and lewd acts. It
was a general practice for anyone who could successfully do so to
attribute divinity to his old father when the latter died. The old men
themselves died with this illusion and deception, imputing to their
illness and death and to all their actions a seriousness and import,
in their estimation, divine. Consequently they chose as a sepulchre
some celebrated spot, like one which I saw on the shore of the sea
between Dulac and Abuyo, in the island of Leite. This man directed
that he should be placed there in his coffin (which was done), in a
solitary house remote from any village, in order to be recognized as
the god of sailors, who would offer worship and commend themselves
to him. There was another, who had caused himself to be buried in a
certain place among the mountains of Antipolo; and out of reverence
to him no one dared to cultivate them, fearing that he who should
go thither might meet his death. This lasted until Father Almerique
relieved them of their fear, and now those lands are cultivated
without harm or dread. In memory of these departed ones, they keep
their little idols--some of stone, wood, bone, ivory, or a cayman's
teeth; others of gold. They call these _Larauan_, which signifies,
"idol," "image," or "statue;" and in their necessities they have
recourse to these, offering to them barbarous sacrifices.

They also worshiped, like the Egyptians, animals and birds; and,
like the Assyrians, the sun and moon; they attributed moreover,
a sort of divinity to the rainbow. The Tagalos adored a blue bird,
as large as a thrush, and called it _Bathala_, which was among them a
term of divinity. [79] They also worshiped the crow (as the ancients
worshiped the god Pan and the goddess Ceres). It bore the name _Mei
lupa_, which signifies "master of the soil." They held the cayman in
the utmost veneration; and, whenever they made any statement about it,
when they descried it in the water, they called it _Nono_, which means
"grandfather." They softly and tenderly besought it not to harm them;
and to this end offered it a part of what they carried in their boats,
casting the offering into the water. There was no old tree to which
they did not attribute divinity; and it was a sacrilege to cut such
a tree for any purpose. What more did they adore? the very stones,
cliffs, and reefs, and the headlands of the shores of the sea or the
rivers; and they made some offering when they passed by these, going to
the stone or rock, and placing the offering upon it. I saw many times
in the river of Manila a rock which for many years was an idol of that
wretched people. This scandal, which occasioned great evils, lasted
until the fathers of St. Augustine (who dwell near by) with holy zeal
broke it to pieces, and erected in its place a cross. While sailing
along the island of Panai I beheld on the promontory called Nasso,
near Potol, plates and other pieces of earthenware, laid upon a rock,
the offering of voyagers. [80] In the island of Mindanao between La
Canela and the river [_i.e._, Rio Grande], a great promontory projects
from a rugged and steep coast; [81] always at these points there is a
heavy sea, making it both difficult and dangerous to double them. When
passing by this headland, the natives, as it was so steep, offered
their arrows, discharging them with such force that they penetrated
the rock itself. This they did as a sacrifice, that a safe passage
might be accorded them. I saw with my own eyes that although the
Spaniards, in hatred of so accursed a superstition, had set a great
many of these arrows on fire and burned them, those still remaining
and those recently planted in the rock numbered, in less than a year,
more than four thousand arrows; they certainly seemed as many as that,
to all of us who passed that point. [82]

Besides these, they had a thousand other superstitions. If they
beheld a serpent or lizard, or heard anyone sneeze, they would always
retrace their steps, and on no account go further at that time,
for such an occurrence would be an evil omen. The ministers of the
Devil also cast lots for them; this was another fraud and deceit
which I must not describe for fear of being too prolix. Nor can one
express the blindness in which they were, ignorant of their Creator:
let what has already been said suffice. In regard to the first point,
they had no places set aside for worship, or public days for general
festivities. Not until we went to Taitai did I learn that in many
of the houses there was another one, but smaller, made of cane, as
it were a little tower, fashioned somewhat curiously, to which they
passed from the main house by a short bridge, also made of cane. In
these were kept their needlework and other sorts of handicraft, by
means of which they concealed the mystery of the little house. From
information that I received from some of the faithful, it was in
reality dedicated to the anito, although they offered no sacrifice
in it, nor did it serve for other use than as it was dedicated to
him--perhaps that he might rest there when on a journey, as Elias
said to the other priests. [83] I had all these houses demolished,
so that not one remained. I also found in some little hamlets of the
Pintados a small house at the entrance of the village with only the
roof and ground floor, which served as a place where sacrifices are
performed. But, after all, it was not the general practice to have
any common place of worship, as did the ancient Pagans, or to come
together to any one place for solemn rites, or to have public and
general sacrifices offered in the name of the community. Individuals,
however, made offerings, each one for his own intention or need, and
in his own house or other private place; but they chose jointly their
own priest, male or female (of whom there were many), according to
their own devotion and taste. In Mindanao I saw many houses furnished
on the outside with small platforms made not unskilfully, of cane,
and on these stood some little wooden idols very poorly carved; and
in front of the idols was an earthen pot containing some hot coals
and a little of some disagreeable aromatic, which must have been a
sacrifice to the idols. But although those people had no temples, they
had, in the second place, priests and priestesses, whom the Tagalos
call _Catolonan_, and the Bissayans _Babailan_. They vied with each
who could best contrive with the Devil (who deceived them) to take
advantage of the blindness of the people, to deceive them by a thousand
frauds and artifices. Father Antonio Sedeno related how, at the time
when he was living in Florida, he undeceived the Indians concerning
one of these impostors of their own nation. This man pretended to
heal diseases by applying a tube to that part where the sick man
felt most pain, and then with his mouth at the other end sucking the
air from within: after this operation, he spat from his mouth three
small pebbles, which he claimed to have extracted from the body of
the patient. [84] The father, by a very efficient means, once made
him spit the pebbles out of his mouth before applying the tube, and
thus his deception was revealed. In like manner these priests practice
many deceptions upon those blinded infidels--especially in cases of
sickness with which the latter are afflicted, which so oppress them
that they seek at once a remedy, and whomsoever gives or promises it
to them they revere and worship, and give him their all. Indeed there
are some of these priests who have a special compact with the Devil,
who lends them signal aid and assistance, Almighty God permitting this
for his own hidden purposes. The Devil communicates with them through
their idols or anitos, playing the role of the dead man whom they are
adoring; and often he enters into the person of the priest himself,
for the short space of the sacrifice, and makes him say and do things
which overwhelm and terrify the onlookers. This divine fervor is also
attained (the duties of the office being taught) through special
friendship, or kinship, or as a legacy. This inheritance is highly
esteemed by them, in their blindness--and through cupidity, for,
besides the renown and honor with which all look up to them, those
infernal ministers obtain rich offerings (that is, the third part),
all of which are for them. For no one will be present at the sacrifice
who does not make an offering--gold, cotton, a fowl, or other things.

These things, added to the principal offering, that made by the
person for whom the sacrifice was offered, which was a rich one--and,
moreover, additional to the sacrifice itself, which most often was a
fine fat hog--amounted to a large quantity of goods, of much value and
profit. Consequently, those ministers usually went about in handsome
garments, and adorned with jewels and valuable ornaments. The house is
the usual place for the sacrifice, and the victim is, as I have said,
a fine hog, or a cock. The mode of sacrifice is to slay the victim
with certain ceremonies, and with dance movements which are performed
by the priest to the accompaniment of a bell or kettle-drum. It is at
this time that the devil takes possession of them, or they pretend
that he does. They now make their strange grimaces, and fall into
a state of ecstasy; after that has passed, they announce what they
have seen and heard. On this day a grand feast is prepared; they eat,
drink, and become intoxicated, the priest or priestess more than the
rest. [85] Consequently, among them all is drunkenness, excess, and
blindness--a pitiful sight for those who see it and can appreciate
it in the light of truth.



Of the idolatries which were secretly practiced in San Juan del Monte
and how they were abolished Chapter XXII.

The devil was gradually introducing into the village of San Juan del
Monte [_i.e._, Taytay] a great plague of idolatry (nourished by some
ancient remains of heathenism which had clung to certain persons in
that village), in the form which I shall relate.

In the town there was a band of worthless women, of the Catolonas
[_i.e._, priestesses] as we have said. These in secret maintained a
tyrannical hold upon the village by various means and plots compelling
many to repair to them upon every occasion, as they formerly did before
they became Christians. Among these women, one who was a leader claimed
that her anito was a very close friend of the anito of the Christians
and had descended to the earth from heaven. This woman most stirred
up the fire on account of the power that she wielded, not only on
account of the sagacity which she certainly possessed, but by her
influence and reputation in the village. Not only was she herself of
high family, but she was very well connected; and had several sons
who were married, and thus related to the most prominent families
of the village. By these means she was, on the one hand, powerful
enough to draw to her the weak, and on the other, to compel the more
influential to dissemble with her, and to refrain from betraying her
for fear of exposing themselves to risk. Nevertheless, this woman and
her following proceeded with great caution and secrecy and rigorously
enjoined those who had relations with them to do the same. If any
of those women died, she appointed an heir, and successor--to whom,
after she had been accepted and received, her idol was brought in
great silence by some chiefs, from the house of the dead person, in
the middle of the night. Then they celebrated a feast during three
continuous days, with banqueting and abundance of wine, which is their
greatest solemnity. The idol of the chief priestess was made of gold,
and she kept it in concealment, through the contrivance of the Devil
(who through it held close communication with her), in a part of her
house where it was most difficult to find it. It is estimated that
for two years this secret pestilence had been going on, tyrannizing
over the inhabitants to such a degree that there was hardly a sick
person whom they did not attend with all diligence--persuading
each one to demand urgently that they should cast lots to ascertain
whether the sick man were to live or die, and, consequently, whether
sacrifice should be offered to the anito for his health. We have
already explained the manner of sacrifices and offerings they made,
and the profit and gain which these infernal furies derived from
them. There was one woman among them who cleared, in the short time
that I have mentioned, almost three hundred escudos; but she did not
enjoy them long, for God would not allow the conflagration to spread
further. His Divine Majesty influenced some of his faithful ones, who,
all aflame with the greater conflagration of His honor and service,
hastened to give account of what they heard and saw and knew of this
matter. With the help of this information, beginning among the weaker
members of the band, in a short time they succeeded in discovering
those of secondary rank--and thus, step by step, they reached the chief
priestess herself. Their second care (which they put into execution)
was to take away from these people the idols, a great number of which
were seized. Some of these were of clay, others of wood; and two,
in particular, were made from two great teeth of the cayman, set in
gold, in which metal the head of the anito was shaped at the point of
the tooth. In neither the residence nor the country house of the head
priestess, however, could her idol be found; nor could it be discovered
by means of her, or by rummaging through her furniture and utensils,
and searching often and most diligently; nor would she reveal it. This
idol had promised her, so she said, that they should never find it,
even if they should tear down and destroy the house; consequently, it
enjoined her not to fear the father who was conducting this search,
or any of his agents or helpers; for it was more powerful than any
of them. But, as God is indeed more powerful, He influenced the
faithful and zealous heart of Father Diego de Santiago--who was then
instructing that village, and made these investigations at the instance
and orders of the vicar-general and provisor of Manila--to decide
that he would not relax or give up the search for this demon until he
should find it. Being quite certain that it was in the house (although
he had already searched there for it several times), he returned for
the last time with the determination to demolish the house, and to
examine every part of it, piece by piece, to see if by chance he might
find the idol hidden in some hole. Before setting about this task,
his glance fell upon a cane prop--old, weather-beaten, and stained
by smoke--which from a joist of the house, supported the ridge-pole
of the roof: this is the mode of construction used for strengthening
the houses. I do not know what he saw in that prop, but he immediately
ordered it to be cut down and its contents to be examined. This time,
"he who was more powerful than all others" was overcome; for, being
found like all the rest, and the gold being removed for the service
of the church, this idol went, with the others, into the fire.

The demon was so insulted and hurt at this trick that, not being able
to wreak any other vengeance, he began (accompanied by many others)
the following night to torment the poor Catolona with visions and
cruel threats. Already undeceived as to the weakness of her idol, she
sought for conversion, and, hating the demon, begged for mercy. With
the help of a cross which was given her as a defense, although the
terror continued, the threats were not put in execution; and finally
the demon abandoned her as she had him. On one of the feast-days, all
their errors were publicly refuted in the church, and the priestesses
remained convinced, repentant and reconciled--by the authority of
the ordinary, as I have stated. They all betook themselves to a
place where, removed from temptations, they could not relapse into
their evil ways [_bolver al bomito_]. They were placed in charge of
devout and Christian persons, in whose company they lead Christian and
exemplary lives. The people were so thoroughly undeceived by this event
that for several days they not only brought in their idols, garments,
vessels, and other belongings of their ancestors, so that not a trace
of that lineage remained; but there was the utmost religious fervor,
and a great number of general confessions, by means of which their
consciences were purified. Into many good souls there entered such
fear and awe, and such distrust and scrupulosity regarding this evil,
that the, hearing of these general and oft-repeated confessions
(made even by those who had no share in it) lasted months, and even
years. I can affirm, as one who has seen it all and touched it with my
very hands, that of this wound which the devil tried to inflict upon
that tender part, the entire body of that mission and encomienda not
only remained sound, through the great mercy of God, but much stronger
than ever before, as will be seen in the rest of this narrative. But
as a conclusion to this incident I must not neglect what befell Don
Francisco Amandao, chief of that village--an aged man, of excellent
judgment, and a devoted friend of ours. Upon the occasion of a certain
illness, he allowed himself to be persuaded to make a similar sacrifice
to the devil, induced by the suggestion that he should at least give
half of his body to the anito to see if he could heal it. That half
of his body at once became paralyzed, so that he could not move it
at all, and thus he lived several years, giving public testimony
of his infidelity. In great repentance for his sin he came to die a
Christian death, at the time when the above events took place.



What the Society accomplished in Sebu until the year 1597. Chapter
XXIII.

As soon as Father Antonio Sedeno passed away in Sebu (as we have
said), Father Antonio Pereira returned to Maluco, his own province,
whence he had come. I was therefore compelled to remain alone in that
college with one brother, not a little disconsolate at the loss of so
valued a companion and brother, with whom I had passed a very pleasant
year in Tigbauan, Leite, and Sebu; and whose help was so efficacious
in our duties that through the gracious and thorough manner in which
he performed them, we were all greatly esteemed and sought for in the
province of Pintados, and especially in the city of Santissimo Nombre
de Jesus. Here this father had previously remained alone during almost
another year, in the convent of San Agustin, where those most godly
fathers received him into their house as if he were one of their
own order. He, in turn, served them and the whole city with such
edifying results as contributed not a little to win their affection;
and greatly influenced them to demand our fathers, and receive us in
their city--which was done, as we have said. Don Rodrigo Ronquillo de
Penalosa, alcalde-mayor of the city--a son of Don Goncalo Ronquillo,
who died while governor and lieutenant in these islands for the
Catholic king, Don Felipe Second--aided us much with his authority,
as also did his cousin Don Goncalo Ronquillo de Vallesteros, who was
leaving the same office. All of those gentlemen have ever professed
great devotion to our humble Society.

Considering that we were alone, our ministrations in our church to
both Spaniards and Indians were sufficiently frequent, and I often
preached in the cathedral. Moreover, ascertaining that in the Chinese
quarter of the city there were more than two hundred souls, and only
one of them a Christian, and that they had no one to minister to them,
although they were well disposed to receive our holy faith if there
were any one to teach it to them, I applied myself to studying and
learning their language--at which they were much rejoiced, and many
came to me every day at an appointed hour to give me instruction. In
this way I acquired sufficient knowledge to begin instructing them--in
which undertaking I received much help from Governor Don Luis de
las Marinas, who sent me from Manila a very bright young Christian
lad of that nation, who helped me to instruct those who were to be
baptized. It was thus that I spent Advent in the year fifteen hundred
and ninety-five. We celebrated Christmas Eve and the feast of the
Nativity with solemnity and joy, preparing in the meantime to celebrate
our first feast of the Circumcision, for which we had decorated the
church and invited father Fray Bartolomeo Garcia--at that time the
preacher in the Sebu convent of the glorious doctor St. Augustine;
and now associate of the right reverend bishop of Sebu, and commissary
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition in that bishopric--to preach for
me. At this time I fell ill, exhausted by my labors, which, although
not excessive, were too much for me, as having little strength. It
was upon this occasion that the fathers of that holy order gave proof
of their great charity and the great affection and fraternal feeling
which they profess toward Ours; for all of them on that day, leaving
their own church (which also is named Santissimo Nombre de Jesus,
out of respect for the holy Child, which is deposited therein), came
with their singers to our church, where they celebrated on the day
before most solemn vespers, and on the day of the feast officiated
and sang solemn high mass and preached a sermon--all of which I could
not attend, on account of being, as I have said, ill. To grant me a
further favor and charity, they chose to be my guests and partake of
our poverty. It pleased God, in His mercy, to give me health, so that
I might acquit myself in part of this obligation and the many others
which we owe to them. Thirteen days later, which was the day on which
they celebrate their feast of the most holy name of Jesus, I visited
them and preached for them, and ate with them. Some days afterward,
there arrived from Manila two discalced religious of the holy Order
of St. Francis, who had come to embark in a vessel which was fitting
out in that port for Nueva Espana. They disembarked near our house,
which stands at the edge of the water; and, in acknowledgment of the
debt that we also owe to that holy order and its blessed fathers--who,
in so great self-abnegation and aversion to worldly things, in all seek
only the things of Jesus Christ--I begged them to accept the use of
our house. During their stay with me they displayed toward me the most
signal charity; and I, on my part, was equally consoled and edified,
until last Pentecost of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six. At
this festival they assisted me, before their departure, in the solemn
baptism of two prominent Chinese, and of I know not how many others; we
baptized them, with their Bissayan wives, celebrating their marriages
and conferring the nuptial veils, with great solemnity and rejoicing,
the whole city assembling to witness the ceremonies. The two chief men
were Don Lorenco Ungac and Don Salvador Tuigam. The Chinese are not
accustomed to cut their hair, which they comb and make ready every
morning, and wear it fastened on the head in pleasing and graceful
fashion; but when we baptize them we are in the habit of cutting it
off, so that in this way we may have more certainty of their faith and
perseverance. These two, before baptism, had entreated and supplicated
me not to cut off their hair; and in this they were not without reason,
for, as one of the suppliants himself explained to me, to wear their
hair was honorable among them, and a custom of their nation, as with
us the wearing of mustaches or beard. But as I did not dare to act
in opposition to what the prelates and other judicious ministers and
religious are accustomed to do in this matter, I announced to them
my decision that, unless their hair was cut, I would not baptize
them. With this they submitted and obeyed, and in token of greater
submission to my intentions, Tuigam came to me on the morning of the
baptism, accompanied by others of his nation, and placing in my hands
some scissors, asked me to cut the first handful of his hair. This
I did, and another finished the task. From that time on none of them
made any objection to the rule; in fact, without our speaking of it,
they came to baptism with their hair cut like ours.

Father Diego de Aragon, of the holy Order of Preachers, had also come
to embark in the vessel. This truly spiritual, virtuous, and exemplary
man had been waiting during an entire year for the departure of the
vessel; and, on account of its inability to leave at that time, was
glad to live and remain with me in our house, for his own order has
none in that city. I received him very gladly, and with gratitude
to God our Lord, for the opportunity thus afforded me of serving
a person and order whom I so highly esteemed, and to which our own
Society is so much indebted, and which it recognizes here, there,
and in every region. He was a source of great edification to me--and
to many others of our Society who had come to me from Manila and who
were afterward my guests--by his great piety, austerity, eloquence,
penitence, and blameless and exemplary life. In this way time passed
until September of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six, when,
the division and allotment of the fourteen fathers who had arrived
in the previous August having been made, I began to have guests
and companions--with whom I could not only maintain our ministries
in better condition, but also go to ascertain the condition of our
affairs in Mindanao, which upon the death of Father Juan del Campo,
were left, as we shall see, without a master. This college was finally
occupied by six of the Society, who were soon busied in ministering to
the Spaniards, Portuguese, Chinese, Bissayans, Tagalos, and many other
nations who resort to that city for trading and other affairs. Two of
us exercised the Chinese language, besides the Bissayan and Tagalo
tongues, which are usually employed for preaching, confessions, and
the other Sacraments. One of the brethren, who was a skilful scribe,
continued the children's school gathered by Father Antonio Pereira,
where reading, writing, and numbers were taught, together with
Christian doctrine and customs.



Of the island of Leite, and those who were baptized there. Chapter
XXIV.

The circuit of the island of Leite is about a hundred leguas--its
length stretching from east to west for forty leguas, and its extent
from north to south being narrow. It is divided almost in the middle by
a large mountain ridge called Carigara, which occasions a remarkable
inequality and variety in its temperature and seasons. For example,
when in its northern part there is winter (which is the period of the
winter months in Espana), in the south there is summer; and in the
other half of the year the contrary occurs. Consequently, when half
of the island's inhabitants are sowing, the other half are gathering
in their harvests; in this way they have two harvests in one year,
both very abundant. This island is surrounded by very many adjacent
islands, inhabited and uninhabited. It abounds in fish from the sea
and its many rivers, in cows from China, in fowl, deer, wild and
domestic hogs, fruits, vegetables, and roots of many species. It is
inhabited by a very numerous people, whose villages therefore are
not far apart; and there is not one of them which does not possess
a large grove of palm-trees and a fine, full-flowing river. Those
palms, as well as other trees which the whole island produces in
abundance, shade the roads to a great extent--providing a comfort
and refreshing coolness indispensable for those of us who must travel
on foot for lack of any other convenience; throughout the island the
roads traverse groves and forests, with foliage so cool and abundant
that even at high noon the sun caused us no annoyance. Many of the
trees have trunks more than twelve brazas in circumference, which are
sawed into excellent planks. The temperature is not so hot as that
of Manila, although the island is two degrees nearer the equinoctial
line--a common condition in that entire province of the Pintados. The
inhabitants are honest, simple, and intelligent, and possess among
other good and laudable customs two in particular, which are common
to all the neighboring islands. The first is, that they have no need,
in journeys upon land or sea, of stores or wallets; to whatever place
they come, they are sure of being welcomed, sheltered, and offered
food. The second is that, whether their harvests be good or bad,
they never raise or lower the price of rice among themselves, which
they always sell to one another at a fixed rate. They practice these
two customs through the friendly relation that exists among them,
such as the apostle sought from his Corinthians. [86] To the two
residences that were in that island (one in Dulac, and the other in
Carigara) there were added, with the new reenforcement of laborers,
three others--in Paloc, Alangalan, and Ogmuc. As each one of these
is still new, we shall not have as much to say about them at present
as later on; for as the number of Christians increased so did the
number of notable facts and events worthy of record. Nevertheless, I
shall not omit to mention here each one of those stations separately;
in general, however, I may say that during the first two years a great
number of Christians were made throughout the island, considering that
Ours were preparing them very gradually, as being so new a people,
for the faith, and for acquaintance and intercourse with us.



What was accomplished in Dulac and its territory. Chapter XXV.

Father Alonso de Humanes and Father Juan del Campo were the first to
instruct the dwellers in and about Dulac. Father Alonso de Humanes was
sent to Sebu, by Father Antonio Sedeno, as superior of our Society in
the island of Leite; and arriving at Carigara (which is the first of
the missions), he left there as superior his companion, Father Mateo
Sanchez, and taking with him Father Juan del Campo, who had been
superior in Carigara, proceeded with him to Dulac. Father Alonso
de Humanes held Father Juan del Campo in the highest estimation
as a spiritual and eloquent man, fervent, learned, and talented,
and very sagacious in practical affairs; for these reasons he laid
hold of him for greater help and companionship. He remained with him,
however, only for a short time; for they soon sent him to Mindanao,
as we shall later see. In the time that they spent together, they
erected the first church in Dulac; established a school for children,
many of whom they baptized; and formed a long list of catechumens,
whom they prepared and baptized, with great solemnity and rejoicing,
to the increase of reverence for this holy sacrament. Besides this,
Father Juan del Campo, traveling throughout that district, gained the
good-will of all those villages and marvelously influenced them to
receive our holy faith. They went forth from his hands such model
Christians that those who before baptism were fierce, rude, and
intractable, you would see today, after baptism, tractable, gentle,
pliant, and loving; they are now wholly freed from error, and feel a
horror of their idols and former vices, and extreme love and affection
for Jesus Christ our Lord, and for His mysteries. Children so small
that they could hardly yet speak, gave such a good account of the
Christian doctrine that they seemed to have been born instructed. Those
who two days before had not known or heard of Him now repeated with
pleasure and gentleness, "May Jesus Christ be praised;" and, indeed,
it all seemed to be His work, and wrought through His instrumentality.



What took place in Carigara in those early days. Chapter XXVI.

As we have already said, the post at Carigara was the first where
the Society began the mission villages of this province; and it was
there that we said the first mass, and celebrated the first feast
with great solemnity in honor of the holy cross. There, too, occurred
the first baptism, when with my own hands (although unworthy); as
a beginning to this new Christian community, I baptized a goodly
number of children already capable of reason. At all the services
of this feast there was a great concourse from the whole district
who solemnized it, beginning the night before, with mirth, rejoicing,
and games. Afterward, Father Juan del Campo and Father Cosme de Flores
began to instruct some of the older persons in the Christian faith. At
that time, and through that exercise, those two fathers learned the
language of the natives in a very short time--especially Father Cosme,
who spoke it with masterly skill. Father Juan del Campo departed from
Dulac, and leaving in his stead, Father Mateo, both pursued their task
of winning souls for Jesus Christ, His Divine Majesty so attracting
the people that soon in Carigara a very flourishing Christian church
began to appear. Although there are many notable things which might
be related about it, I shall refer only to two baptisms which seemed,
to us who were there, worthy of consideration.

The first was that of a child of five years, who filled with the
fervor of heaven came to us from his village for the sole purpose of
asking baptism. His infidel mother and stepfather, upon learning this,
at the instigation of the Devil (who unwillingly relinquished that
booty) came after him with an infernal fury, to carry him back with
them--by force, if necessary. But as they could not do this, out of
respect to the fathers, they tried to impede him through others--their
relatives, friends and acquaintances; and, adding persuasion to threats
(and, for a child so tender in years, but little effort sufficed),
they used all their energies to divert and dissuade him from his
holy purpose. But God our Lord, who gave him a man's strength--and,
in giving it to him, made him all the stronger by adding a gentle
force to his own tender will, caused him to persevere with such
constancy that he finally overcame these influences, saying that
he desired to be a son of God, since those who were not Christians
were slaves of the Devil. He offered other arguments, so ingenious
that they compelled those who were present to defend and aid him; and
earnestly reproving those who unreasonably opposed him, he constrained
them to leave him in peace. Thus he departed with his request granted,
and with holy baptism, with a satisfaction that words cannot express,
and greater than might be expected from a much older person and a more
developed reason. Again, a woman of rank had refused and fled from
baptism against the influences of God and our own persuasions--solely
concerned with the indissolubility of matrimony taught by our holy
law; for she maintained that it was hard that she could not abandon
a husband who displeased her, as was the custom among them. Finally
one of her brothers, who was seeking holy baptism, persuaded her to
accompany him, and so she did; but, when on the point of receiving
the sacrament, she withdrew without it, although her brother was
baptized. This weakness was a source to her of great confusion and
remorse, and consequently of renewed energy and effort (as it was
with the pope St. Marcellinus [87]); for on the following day she
returned to the church pierced with remorse for the wrong that she
had done, confessing herself to be foolish and lacking in sense,
and admitting that her withdrawal had been caused by silly fear. She
told the father that she was deeply grieved at what she had done, and
besought him, that, since now she had returned meek and submissive
to all the mandates of the holy gospel law, she might be granted
holy baptism--which she ardently desired, knowing that without
being a Christian she could not be saved. Finally, after giving
us satisfactory pledges as to her desire and perseverance, she was
accorded holy baptism, which she received with great devotion and joy.



What took place in Paloc and its coast. Chapter XXVII.

Until September or October of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six,
when Father Christoval Ximenez went to reside in Paloc--where he
learned the language well, and gathered much fruit, as we shall later
see--that village possessed not one permanent priest; only Father
Mateo Sanchez, accompanied by a brother, rendered them timely aid in
some journeys which he made from Carigara. This station lies between
Carigara and Dulac, on the banks of a beautiful river, and is distant
from the sea about a half a league inland. It is surrounded by many
villages, having a large population; and all those natives are very
good people. Here I received a most cordial welcome when I visited
those stations, the year before, with Father Antonio Pereira; the
people entertained me by their friendly conversation were delighted
in hearing the things of God, and asked me many intelligent questions
about them. But there must have been some ministers of the Devil among
them, who (as they lose through our holy faith their prestige and
vile gains) had perverted this people, as I believe, in such a way
that the next time Ours visited them they were not only churlishly
received, but there was hardly one person to greet them, to speak
either good or evil. For they found that the people had fled inland,
and the few who remained in their houses looked upon the fathers with
such coldness and aversion that they were compelled to turn their eyes
toward God, and await from His divine hand consolation for being thus
afflicted and deserted. This His divine clemency soon accorded them,
changing the aspect of affairs, and causing us to know that only
His power can conquer hearts; and He so subdued theirs that the very
persons who had fled desired us again, in a few days, and complained
that we visited them but seldom. When our fathers did repair to them,
they would not let them depart at once, maintaining that they did not
tarry long enough.  Some of them sought with great earnestness and
fervor holy baptism, and the Christians adopted the Christian mode
of life with love, ardor, and satisfaction. Accordingly, they could
be seen at prayer, both morning and evening, repeating the sermons,
and chanting the doctrine in their houses and fields and boats (when
they are traveling in these, they carry a little bell to ring for the
Ave Marias). They were very careful in attending church, and devout
in confessing, especially during that first Lent; and showed great
fervor in disciplining themselves, particularly during Holy Week;
in the procession on that occasion there were many who scourged
themselves until the blood came, and still others accompanied them,
bearing four hundred lights, all preserving great silence and order. It
was learned in many individual cases, that God our Lord chose very
opportunely to influence them through various means to receive His
holy faith, and afterward to confirm them in it, by marvelous and
supernatural visions, of things both good and bad, and causing both
joy and terror--miraculously healing, for example, many who lay at
the point of death, and bestowing special inward inspirations. One of
these Christians passed in front of a house where a minister of the
Devil was offering to the demon his abominable sacrifice; and this
very demon told him to prevent that Christian from entering; "for,"
he said, "I am afraid of those Christians." How could those who heard
this refrain from following that powerful God, when they saw that he
whom they considered as such feared not only Him, but also, on account
of their being Christians, those who formerly feared and worshiped
him? A sick woman, in an exhausted condition, offered herself to God,
in her desire for health, and leaving her bed was carried near some
images. God our Lord cooperated with her faith in such a way that
soon she was healed; and she made it public that the holy images
had cured her. In a village near that one, there was a sick woman,
very aged, who was so obstinate in her infidelity that she would
not be softened by the persuasions of the father who visited her. A
child who accompanied him took her hand, and described to her in vivid
language the torments of hell, and so impressed her that she asked him:
"Dost thou know this?" The child responded: "Yes, for God has said it,
and so I believe it." With this he subdued her, and prepared her so
that, after she better understood the catechism, she could receive
after it holy baptism, and, at the same time, health of body and soul.



Of the Residence of Alangalang. Chapter XXVIII.

This station lies in the interior of the island of Leite, five leguas
distant from Carigara. Its district is well inhabited, and has the
advantage of a good soil. Its distance, however, was so great that it
could not well be visited from Carigara, especially considering the
number of its population. On this account, and as, in the allotment
of the fourteen [new laborers], only one was assigned to Carigara
(namely, Father Francisco de Enzinas), the latter was obliged to
remain there in company with Father Mateo Sanchez; and Father Cosme
de Flores had to go to establish the Christian faith in Alangalang,
on account of his knowledge of the language, and the esteem and
affection in which he was held by the Indians. The first care of
this blessed father was to bring together, with great gentleness and
kindness, the inhabitants of all those villages, especially those
who were most remote and could be less easily assisted to reaching
that station--so that a large colony might be formed there, as was
done. He was establishing his church, his house, and his school among
them, and beginning a Christian community, when it pleased our Lord
to take him unto Himself, leaving his Indians orphans, disconsolate,
and alone. Thus they remained for several months, for there was at
the time no one who could supply their need except a brother who had
accompanied the father; and he consoled them by teaching them--but
without administering the sacraments, as he was a lay-brother. The
fathers at Carigara could not help them, being prevented by their
own occupations.



Of the entrance into Ogmuc. Chapter XXIX.

The station of Ogmuc lies on the shore of the sea, in the southern
part of the island of Leite, on the coast almost directly opposite to
Carigara, which is in the northern part. It has in the same island
a very good vicinity, as well as three smaller islands adjacent,
which they call Polo. All those people are friendly and docile and
received Ours with much affection and pleasure. This post was assigned
to Father Alonso Rodriguez with another companion; and it seems that
the gentleness and kindness of this father had its influence upon the
Indians even before they saw him as also later when they met and knew
him. Their governor and other persons came out to sea to receive him,
with much joy; and the chief, without delay, made arrangements on the
spot for his conversion, and wrote out the prayers, that he might learn
them. The rest followed his example, and not only in this matter, but
in at once offering all their children, with whom the father formed a
very promising school. Some of the youngest children were exceedingly
bright; and it was indeed a marvel to see the mass served, with grace
and address, by a child who was scarce able to move the missal. Many of
these children also helped us greatly in catechizing and instructing
their elders and in preparing them, and even urging them, to receive
holy baptism. This was done by a little child of only four years,
who seeing his father somewhat lukewarm in this respect, urged and
incited him with such energy that he aroused the father, and caused
him to entreat us urgently for baptism. They not only fulfilled this
office with their parents but even interceded with us in their behalf,
urging that we should not delay granting this favor. An incident befell
one of these children which in its very childishness gave token of the
esteem with which our holy gospel faith takes root in these tender
little hearts. He found himself among some heathens who were eating
meat on a Friday, and, without thought of wrong, began to eat with
them. Upon taking the first mouthful he was reminded of the day; and,
spitting it out, descended from the house and came in haste to Ours
in great sorrow at having committed a sin. Our fathers reassured him
and sent him away consoled; and were themselves greatly edified and
pleased at such a specimen of Christian faith, although so young and
so recently planted. Nearly all of those people were converted to
Christianity without much difficulty; but there was one man who was
much troubled on account of having three wives--all, like himself of
high rank. Although the thought of renouncing two of them was painful
to him, his greatest consideration was the dowry which he must thus
lose. The good father saw his predicament, and was greatly concerned
lest this man, for at slight temporal interest, might lose eternal
gain. Inspired by God our Lord, he formed a plan, and went to talk with
the woman who was most beloved by the man, hoping to persuade her to
receive baptism. Much persuasion, however, was not necessary; for she
herself desired it, and expressed herself to that effect--adding that,
even though it should displease her husband, she would begin the task;
and that, instead of returning to his house, she would go directly
to that of a Christian woman, who should instruct and prepare her
for baptism. These sentiments she expressed privately not only to
the father, but even to her husband, before many other persons. As
she said, so she acted; and her solemn baptism was celebrated with
many feasts, dances, and rejoicings. The husband seeing this, put
away the other two wives, giving them the amounts of their dowry;
and, freed from this obstacle, received baptism and was married in
Christian fashion. On the feast-day of the glorious resurrection of
Christ our Lord, we celebrated the baptism of this man and eleven other
chiefs, who were also baptized amid great festivities and rejoicing,
and with the concourse of many people.

I have thus given an account of what took place in the five stations
in that island of Leite. Before we pass on to the rest, it will be
fitting to explain, as far as we can, their usages in marriage and
divorce--as well to make more intelligible what we have already
related as to have a better understanding of a topic which in the
course of our remaining narrative must frequently arise.



Of marriages, dowries, and divorces among the Filipinos. Chapter XXX.

I had lived in the Filipinas for almost ten years before I learned that
there was any man who had married several wives; and I did not know
it until I went to the islands of Ibabao and Leite, for in Manila,
Mindoro, Marinduque, and Panai, I had not observed the practice of
such a custom. I had, however, been once told by a Spaniard that in
a certain part of Mindanao, toward Dapitan, it was the custom for
the Bissayan women (the inhabitants of Mindanao also are Bissayans)
to marry two husbands; the practice of having several wives I had
understood to belong only to the Mahometans who dwell in Mindanao
and Burnei. It is certainly, however, not a general custom in the
Filipinas to marry more than one wife; and even in the districts where
this is done the practice is by no means general. The most common
and general usage is to marry one woman. The Bissayans always try to
procure a wife from their own class, and closely connected with them in
relationship. The Tagalos do not insist so much on this latter point:
they are satisfied if the wife be not of inferior rank. As I have
already stated, in neither race is any other impediment considered than
the first degree of kindred. Uncle and niece marry as readily as do
first cousins; but brother and sister, grandfather and granddaughter,
or father and daughter, can in no case marry. There is a marked
distinction between concubinage and wedlock; because the latter,
besides consent, has its own ceremonies, as we shall later see. For
marriage, moreover, they have distinct formalities of betrothal,
which are accompanied by conventional penalties, most rigorously
executed. Here is an example: Si Apai promises to marry Cai Polosin;
these married persons make an agreement with another married pair,
while the wives are with child, that if the wombs of their respective
wives should bear a male and a female those two children shall be
joined in marriage, under a penalty of ten gold taes. This compact is
solemnized by a feast, where they eat, drink, and become intoxicated;
and he who later is the occasion of breaking the compact must pay the
penalty. This is betrothal. In the marriage there figures a dowry,
and the surrender of the woman, with consent for the present, but
not perpetual. It is not the wife, but the husband, who gives her
the dowry--an amount agreed upon, and fixed in accordance with his
means. This is what some authors [88] relate of various nations,
which were accustomed to purchase women as their wives. In addition
to the dowry the husband is wont to make some presents to the parents
and relatives--more or less, according to his means. While I was in
Tigbauan the chief of the island of Cuyo came to marry his son to
the daughter of Tarabucon, chief of Oton, which is close by the town
of Arebalo and a mission-village under the fathers of St. Augustine
They were married by a minister of high standing in that order, named
Father Pedro de Lara, [89] who was then vicar of that convent. From him
and from another religious of the same house I learned that besides
the dowry (which was very large), and a generous offering sent to
the convent, the husband bestowed, in his grandeur and munificence,
presents upon the parents of the bride, her brothers and relations, and
even upon the numerous slaves. The marriage lasted no longer than did
peace between them; for they are divorced on the slightest occasion. If
the cause of the divorce is unjust, and the man parts from his wife,
he loses the dowry; if it is she who leaves him, she must restore the
dowry to him. But if the man has just cause for divorce, and leaves
her, his dowry must be restored to him; if in such case the wife
leaves him, she retains the dowry. For the husband, the adultery of
his wife is sufficient ground for divorce; for the woman, just cause
for divorce is more limited. In case of divorce, the children are
divided equally between the two, without distinction of sex; thus, if
they are two in number, one falls to the father and one to the mother;
and in a state of slavery the same thing occurs when husband and wife
belong to different masters. If two persons own one slave, the same
division is made; for half belongs to each, and his services belong to
both alike. These same modes of marriage and divorce are in use among
those who marry two or three wives. The man is not obliged to marry
them all in one day; and, even after having one wife for many years,
he may take another, and yet another--indeed, like the Mahometans as
many as he can support. I believe that this evil custom in the islands
of Mindanao and Leite has been derived from that sect; for they are
increasing throughout the world, propagating their cursed doctrine
with as much zeal and concern as we do our holy faith. It had taken
root in Burnei before we took possession of the Filipinas; and from
that island they had come to preach it in Manila, where they had begun
to teach it publicly when our people arrived and tore it up by the
roots. Less than fourteen years ago it was introduced into Mindanao,
on this side of the island, which is no small reason for sorrow and
regret. While the marriage-bond lasts, the husband is, as with us,
the lord of all; or, at least, all the wealth is kept together, and
both parties endeavor to increase it as much as they can--although
they are wont to steal from each other for their own purposes.



Of the island of Ibabao, and how the Society entered it. Chapter XXXI.

It is this island which first gives joy to the vessels which sail
hence for the Filipinas; for it is the first land descried in our
passage westward. A headland on its coast is the celebrated cape of
Espiritu Santo, which we sight on arriving at the islands, and for
which we sought. With this island on the left, and the great island of
Manila on the right, we enter directly the Filipinas Islands, leaving
the islands of the Ladrones three hundred leguas behind. It also forms
with the island of Leite, which lies south of it, a very narrow strait,
through which a few ships have penetrated--especially those which
under stress of weather, and driven back by the force of the storms,
have been compelled to take refuge in the port of Cebu. The island is
large and populous, and all around it are many adjacent islands, also
inhabited. All its people are generally regarded as very peaceable,
and they have made an excellent beginning in receiving the gospel,
the chiefs being most distinguished in this regard--which is a matter
of considerable importance, as they open the way for the others by
their example. The first one of the Society to enter that island for
instruction was Father Francisco de Otaco, who went thither with two
companions. Although in the beginning hardships did not fail them,
through their lack of material resources, they were so well provided
with those that were spiritual that one could well recompense the
other. They arrived on the western side of the island, which is
eastward of the archipelago, at a village called Tinagon, [90] without
any fixed or chosen post, and arrived there very opportunely for their
purpose since at that time a plague, communicated from other districts,
prevailed in that part of the island, causing the death of many
people. Accordingly, they at once set about their task, and labored
diligently, going from house to house, and from one sick person to
another, teaching and baptizing. But the unexpected results lightened
their toil; for the number of those who were thoroughly prepared
for and received baptism was very great, and the number of baptized
persons who died from the disease reached a thousand souls. Besides
the church of this central station which was recently built, six
other churches were erected in that district, not far distant from
it. In each one of them was a school with a goodly number of children,
and a master to instruct them; and the pupils were so devoted to it
that the threat that had most effect on them was to say their teacher
would leave them. Our fathers went through those villages, visiting
the sick and aiding them, as well as they could, with remedies for
both body and soul. In the course of these visitations an incident
occurred which well exhibits the forbearance with which God awaits
our conversion, the ease with which we find Him when we seek Him,
and the patience and perseverance which a minister of the gospel
needs in teaching, convincing, entreating, urging, and waiting for
the conversion of a soul. One of the fathers had been visiting the
sick of a certain village, and was on his way homeward, some distance
away, to partake of a little nourishment and obtain repose, as night
was closing in. Turning his eyes to one side he descried a wretched
house which he did not remember to have visited that day. To satisfy
himself of this he mounted a few steps of the ladder, and looking from
the door into the interior of the house beheld a man stretched upon
the floor. Upon approaching he found him motionless and almost dead,
but with enough consciousness to answer "No" to the father's query
if he desired baptism. The father remained with him a long time,
seeking to convince him. Finally, seeing how little this availed,
and that the hour was late, he concluded to leave him. But grief
at seeing that soul lost, and the secret strength which our Lord
gave him, constrained him to wait, and to persist in urging the sick
man--an action so opportune that the latter at last said "Yes," and
listened to the short instruction which is wont to be given upon such
occasions. Thus, in sorrow for his sins he expired immediately after
baptism, with an "Oh, God!" on his lips, torn from his very heart.

One of the islands adjacent to Ibabao is Maripipi, whose inhabitants
were all baptized in one day in the following fashion. This island
is three leguas distant by sea from Ibabao, for which reason our
fathers could not visit it as often as the people desired. Seeing
this, its inhabitants all resolved to embark in their boats and come
themselves to seek holy baptism. The chiefs disembarked at Tinagon,
and, after them, all their followers with their wives and children,
all of them eagerly seeking the sacrament; but the father told them,
through a chief who acted as spokesman, that they must first learn
the doctrine, and that when they understood it he would baptize
them. The chief's only answer was to recite the doctrine, after which
he said that he had learned it from the others. With the evidence of
such faith and good disposition, the father baptized them all; and,
satisfied and joyful, they embarked again for their island.

Some months later, Father Miguel Gomez was sent from the college of
Sebu in order to ascertain the disposition of the inhabitants of the
eastern part of the island for receiving our holy faith; he found them
so well inclined that, erecting a church in a village called Catubig,
not far from the cape of Espiritu Santo, he converted many of that
district to Christianity; indeed, whole villages of that island came
to him, and even many from islands lying adjacent to it in that broad
sea. He was particularly astonished at one of the chiefs of Catubig,
a man who lived, under the natural law, without blame and had good
principles, one of which was to abominate polygamy. This chief was
exceedingly pleased at hearing the catechism, and, requesting holy
baptism, for this purpose cut off his own hair, which is esteemed
as much among those people as among the Chinese. There was another,
a sick old man, who, before he saw our fathers, learning that they
were in that place, sent to request holy baptism, which he afterward
most devoutly received. In this mission many special incidents
occurred which gave evidence that this harvest was fully ripe to be
gathered for Christ; but, as it was not quite ready for the reaping,
[91] and the father was needed in his own college whence he had
departed, he was obliged to return to it, with this good news of his
journey. These villages, with their new Christians, were assigned to
the fathers of Tinagon, who ministered to them so far as they could,
until more suitable provision could be made for them by sending a
father who could more readily assist them; this has not yet been done,
through lack of workers.



Of the island of Bohol, and the entry of the Society therein. Chapter
XXXII.

Bohol is one of the smaller islands of the Filipinas, but is actually
large and populous, inhabited by a people of lighter complexion,
and generally more comely, than are the other Bissayans. They are
a race of such spirit and valor that they have spread through many
neighboring islands, where their descendants still preserve the name
of Boholans of which they are very proud--just as we, when in foreign
kingdoms, are proud of the name of Spaniards. The island is rich in
mines and placers of gold, and abundantly provided with game, fish,
rice, sugar-cane, palms, and other kinds of food. In the year one
thousand five hundred and sixty-four, the adelantado Miguel Lopez de
Legazpi arrived there with his fleet--entering through the channel
which they call El Frayle ["The Friar"]--when, as we have stated, he
set out from Nueva Espana in quest of those islands. A chief of that
island, named Catunao--whom our fathers have now baptized, as we shall
soon relate--gave information to Miguel Lopez of Sebu (which is six
leguas distant from Bohol), and, accompanying him thither as a guide,
was of great assistance to him in the reduction of the island. It was
the good fortune of Father Juan de Torres and Father Gabriel Sanchez to
instruct this people, for they were the first preachers of Jesus Christ
in Bohol. They entered the island with much confidence and consolation,
on learning that its people, like those in the neighboring island of
Sebu, did not practice polygamy--an affliction which to the fathers
in Ibabao and Leite was a source of great sorrow, since they found in
this evil custom a serious impediment to the conversion of many who
were not otherwise hindered from receiving holy baptism. Not only were
the Boholans free from this, but none of their immoral practices (for
they had others) could hinder their conversion; for all at once they
abandoned all of these, together with their idolatry. Those fathers
wrote to us concerning two in particular, of which--although they are
not peculiar to the people of that island, but are general among all
the others--I desire to give an account for the better understanding
and greater clearness of this narrative; one relates to their dead,
and their mode of shrouding and burying them; the other, to their
feasts, festivals, and drunken revels. I shall speak of the general
practices in both, beginning with the first.



The manner which the Filipinas had of shrouding and burying their
dead. Chapter XXXIII.

The first and last concern of the Filipinos in cases of sickness was,
as we have stated, to offer some sacrifice to their anitos, or divatas,
which were their gods. These sacrifices were offered, as we have said,
with dancing to the sound of a bell; and it would happen, as I have
sometimes heard, that in the most furious part of the dance and the
bell-ringing, when the catolona or bailana was exerting most force,
all at once she stopped at the death of the sick person. After the
death there followed new music, the dirges and lamentations, which
were also sung, accompanied by weeping, not only by the mourners but
by others--the former on account of their sorrow and grief; the latter
for their wages and profit, for they were hired for this purpose, as is
and has been the custom among other nations of greater reputation. To
the sound of this sad music they washed the body of the dead person,
perfuming it with the gum of the storax-tree and other aromatics which
they are wont to use, and clothing it in the best garments which the
dead man possessed; then, after having kept and mourned over it for
three days, they buried it. Others anointed the body with aromatic
balsams which prevent corruption, especially with the juice of a sort
of ivy which grows there abundantly, and is truly a very valuable
drug, which they call _buyo_. [92] It is very pungent, and for the
living is a notable stimulant, also strengthening the teeth, hardening
the gums, and sweetening the breath. Consequently both Spaniards and
Indians make much use of it, and always carry it in their mouth, as
they use the coca in Piru. With the juice of this plant, then, they
anointed the dead body, and so injected it through the mouth that it
penetrated the whole body. Thus prepared, many bodies have been found
uncorrupted after a lapse of many years; but they did not place the
corpses in the earth, but in their dwellings, enclosed in coffins of
the hardest wood, incorruptible, and with the cover so fitted that
it was impossible for the air to enter. Moreover, they placed gold
in the mouths of the corpses, and laid with them many articles of
value; and thus they buried them, under the house, richly adorned,
and with the corpse another chest, containing garments. Besides this,
they usually were careful to carry to the burial various viands,
which they left there for the dead person. In former times, they
would not let them depart to the other world alone, but gave male and
female slaves to accompany the dead. These slaves, having first eaten
a hearty meal, were then immediately killed, that they might go with
the dead man. It once happened that they buried with a chief a vessel
manned by many rowers, who were to serve him in his voyages in the
other world. The usual place of burial was the dead man's own house,
at least in the lower part--where a great pit was dug, in which the
coffin was placed. A small railing was constructed about the pit, and,
leaving it open, they placed inside the food which they brought. Others
buried their bodies in the open field, and for several days burned
fires beneath their houses and set guards, so that the dead man might
not return and carry away with him those whom he had left.

After the burial the mourning ceased, but not the feasting and
intoxication, which lasted more or less time according to the rank of
the deceased. The widow or widower, and the orphans and other relatives
who felt most keenly their grief, expressed their sorrow by fasting,
abstaining from meat, fish, and other viands--eating during this
period only vegetables, and those in very small quantities. Among
the Tagalos the color for mourning is black, and among the Bissayans
white. The latter also tear out their hair and eyebrows, which makes
them ugly indeed. Upon the death of a chief, silence must be observed
in the village during the period of mourning, until the interdict
was raised--a longer or shorter time, according to his rank; and
during that time no sound of a blow or other noise might be heard
in any house under penalty of some misfortune. In order to secure
this quiet, the villages on the coast placed a sign on the banks of
the river, giving notice that no one might travel on that stream,
or enter or leave it, under penalty of death--which they forcibly
inflicted, with the utmost cruelty, upon whomsoever should break
this silence. Those who died in war were extolled in their dirges,
and in the obsequies which were celebrated the sacrifices made to
or for them lasted for a long time, accompanied by much feasting and
intoxication. If the deceased had met death by violence, whether in
war or in peace, by treachery, or in some other way, the mourning
habits were not removed, or the interdict lifted, until the sons,
brothers, or relatives had killed many others--not only of the
enemies and murderers, but also other persons, strangers, whoever
they might be, who were not their friends. As robbers and pirates,
they scoured the land and sea, going to hunt man and killing all whom
they could, until they had satiated their fury. When this was done,
they made a great feast for invited guests, raised the interdict,
and, in due time, abandoned their mourning.

In all these practices may be clearly seen traces of the paganism and
of those ancient rites and usages so magnified and recorded by noted
writers, by which many other nations more civilized--and, perchance,
some more barbarous than this one--made themselves famous and deserving
of mention. Certainly balsams, and the perfumes, not only of ointments
and fragrant spices, but of herbs and odoriferous flowers, are all
known to have been in most ancient use among the Greeks and Romans,
and in the Hebrew commonwealth--derived, perhaps, from intercourse
with pagan peoples, as we read of it in the grave and burial of King
Asa. [93] The bathing of the dead and of those who touched them is
also found in Holy Writ; and in accounts of the commonwealths of the
Egyptians and Persians, and is practiced at the present day, among
many nations; also the custom of placing food in their sepulchres,
which is rebuked by St. Augustine. [94]

Who does not know that the men and women hired as mourners are the
mourners and singers whom the sacred authors so repeatedly mention? and
that, even before the commonwealth of the Hebrews was established by
God our Lord, the holy Job called upon those who were ready to fulfil
this office and to raise their voices in wailing and lamentation for
anyone who would hire them, to lament the day of his birth as if it
had been the day of his death? [95] This practice extended later to
an infinite number of nations, especially to the Canaanites, who
formed their troop of singers and musicians, and, with much skill
and effect, mourned the deceased, as they did at Sifara--the mother
beginning to intone a chant, which was then taken up by those most
learned and skilled in that office." [96]

The preservation of bodies, as far as possible, from corruption is
a common practice among all those nations who desired and attempted
to perpetuate the memory of their dead by burning the bodies and
preserving their ashes; by erecting sumptuous mausoleums or pyramids
(in their estimation, eternal); or by engraving in bronze or hard
stone the names and deeds of their dead.

Burial in the house of the deceased was a custom of the Ethiopians;
and burial at their gates, of the Persians. The adornment of the corpse
with jewels and rich garments was practiced by the Hebrews, Persians,
and Indians, and, before their time, by all the eastern Arabs of the
age and country of holy Job; they filled their houses (which were
rather their sepulchres than their abodes) with treasures of gold and
silver." [97] The custom of placing in the mouth of the corpse gold
or other means for the purchase of necessities and, in particular,
of a safe passage, is much ridiculed by Lucian, in those ancients of
theirs negotiating for the boat and ferry of Charon; and indeed it
served no other end than to excite the covetousness of those who,
to profit by the gold, opened the sepulchres and disinterred the
dead--as Hyrcanus and Herod desecrated the grave of David, and the
Ternates did in Bohol, as we shall later see." [98]

As for the banquets, they were precisely those which occurred at the
ancient festivals and funeral feasts practiced by all countries and
nations, sacred and profane. [99]

The observance of silence seems to be what not only the profane
writers meant by summoning mortals to the shades and darkness, mute
and silent; but what the sacred writers intended in calling death
and dead men mute.

In the sacred tongue they called the sepulchre itself "silence," [100]
or "the place of silence"--on account both of the dumbness of the
deceased, who was no longer able to have intercourse with the living,
and of the silence and wonder in which the living remained, their
grief for the dead, and the solitude in which they sat, depriving
them of voice and speech; even more effectual for this was the
consideration of the wretchedness, insignificance, and transientness
of their own species, which they saw in their neighbor, friend or
relative, when in so evil a plight, a threat and warning to them of
a like fate. [101] In short, since all these usages arose, partly
from some confused perception or conjecture of the natural reason,
partly (and more probably) from the blindness and madness into which
the devil plunged them, those islanders practiced rites and customs
similar to those of former times and nations, for they too were men,
subject to the same deception. Truly in this, as in a thousand other
things, is verified that grave saying and query of the Wise Man:
"What is it that is now happening?" and he answers himself, saying,
"That which happened in the past." Again he asks himself: "What were
the customs of our ancestors?" and again he replies, "Those which
will be, and which those who are yet unborn will practice." [102]
The same I would say of the following.



Of feasting and intoxication among the Filipinos. Chapter XXXIV.

The time for their feasts, wherein they ate and drank to excess (and
they drank, too, much more than they ate), was, as we have said,
upon occasions of illness, death, and mourning. Such was also their
custom at betrothals, weddings, and sacrifices, and with guests and
visitors. Upon all these occasions there was not a door closed against
anyone who might desire to go to drink with them--for they designate
a feast by the term "drinking," not "eating." In the feasts which
they held upon occasions of sacrifice, they were wont to place at one
side of the table a plate, upon which he who chose would throw, by
way of religious ceremony, some mouthful of food, which he refrained
from eating out of respect to the anito. They eat, sitting in a low
position; and their tables are small, low, and round or square in
shape, without covering or napkins, the plates containing the victuals
being placed on the table itself. They eat in groups of sufficient
number to surround the table; and it may happen that a house is filled
from one end to another with tables, and guests drinking. The food is
placed all together upon various plates, and they have no hesitation
in putting the hands of all into the same dish, or in drinking out
of the same vessel. They eat but little, drink often, and spend much
time in the feast. When they are satiated with food and intoxicated
with the drink, they remove the tables and clear the house; and, if
the feast is not one of mourning, they sing, play musical instruments,
dance, and in this way, spend days and nights, with great uproar and
shouting--until finally they fall, exhausted and drowsy. But they are
never seen to become, in their intoxication, so frenzied or crazed
that they commit excesses; on the contrary, they preserve, in the
main, their ordinary conduct, and even under the influence of wine,
act with as much respect and prudence as before, although they are
naturally more lively and talkative, and utter witty remarks. It is
proverbial among us that none of them, upon leaving the feast late at
night in a state of intoxication, fails to reach his home. Moreover,
if they have occasion to buy or sell anything, they not only make no
mistake in the bargaining, but if it be necessary to weigh the gold or
silver for the price (which is the common usage among those nations,
each person carrying for that purpose a small pair of scales in his
wallet), they do it with such accuracy that the hand never trembles,
nor is there any error in the weight.



Of the labors of Father Juan de Torres and Father Gabriel Sanchez in
the island of Bohol. Chapter XXXV.

All these evils and excesses were abandoned when our fathers entered
that island, for after their arrival there God our Lord brought
it about that the wonted songs and noises were no longer heard,
the natives abstaining from them in order not to displease the
fathers. The greatest difficulty which one encounters among those
peoples is to teach the prayers to the adults, who are naturally lazy
and negligent; and to the old men, who are hindered by their age. The
plan and method which is followed in this matter is, not to constrain
them too much. In this regard the Boholans acted with such liberality
that our fathers, upon arriving at some villages, found the old men
learning, of their own free will, the prayers from their children. When
asked if they wished to become Christians, they answered that they were
already preparing themselves, and that after they had learned what was
needful, they would receive holy baptism. So well were they inclined
toward the good. They have excellent dispositions; and whenever any
good habit or civilized custom is taught to them, they do not fail
to practice it--which is no small pleasure and comfort for those
who teach them. In the church they conduct themselves devoutly and
reverently, kneeling on both knees with hands clasped across their
breasts. They attend baptismal services, at the conclusion of which
they embrace the newly-baptized and, kneeling, recite with these
a "Salve," as a token of thanksgiving. A pestilence, attended by
pains in the stomach and head, had attacked this people, and was so
fatal that entire villages of the island were being depopulated. But
our Christians, in the ardor of their faith, took holy water as a
medicine and were healed, so that not one of them died. An instance
of this occurred, which I shall relate. An infidel woman was reduced
by this sickness to such a pass that they did not expect her to live
throughout the night. They summoned the father, and representing
to him the woman's danger, besought him urgently to baptize her at
once. The father did not think that such haste was necessary, or,
at least, that the sick woman was entirely prepared for holy baptism,
and so contented himself with repeating to her some of the catechism
appropriate to the occasion, to wait until morning came. As a further
kindness, in order to cure her body, he asked her if she believed
that the holy water, by virtue of Almighty God, our Creator, could
heal the sick. Upon her answering "Yes," he gave her some to drink,
and with that left her. In the morning they came to tell him that
she whom they had regarded as half dead was already healed. A little
girl had been reduced by the same disease to the last extremity,
and they were already bewailing her as dead; the father hastened to
the spot and grieving lest she should die without the sacraments,
asked for holy water, that he might give her a possible remedy for
body as well as soul. Seeing that the child was unable to drink it,
he asked those who were present if they believed that God our Lord,
and not their idols, could by means of that water give health to the
sick one, and all answered "Yes." The water was then applied to that
part where they said the child felt the greatest pain; and, consoling
her parents with good hopes, he left her; and within a few hours they
sent to tell him that the child was well. Accordingly, they use this
holy medicine frequently in all their sicknesses, and it has become
a general practice throughout all these islands. I have often seen an
Indian woman approach the basin of holy water with her babe in arms,
and taking some in her hands, give it to the little one to drink,
so ordinary and universal is this devotion.

In Bohol, within only eight months, they gained the village of Baclayun
with its hamlets (which was the first station that our Society
maintained in that island), besides the villages of Lobo (which is
a river of much volume), where more than three thousand souls were
instructed and catechized, as well as many in the villages of two
other islands adjacent to Bohol. In all those places were baptized a
large number of those best prepared and able to receive the sacrament,
among them the good old Catunao (whom we mentioned above) with his
wife. Between the two, they surely had lived two hundred and thirty
years, and the woman was younger than he, Our Lord did not see fit to
take him away until He had repaid him for his good services in having
been the guide who introduced Christian people into the Filipinas. He
was always seated, for he could no longer walk. So satisfied was he at
being baptized that during the remainder of his life (which was little
more than a year) he was continually repeating, with much delight,
"Jesus, Mary."



Of the Island of Mindanao. Chapter XXXVI.

Mindanao is closer to the equinoctial line than the islands of Ibabao,
Leite, Sebu, and Bohol, and is larger than almost all those four
together. I shall say no more of its richness and fertility than
that it is not inferior to the most fertile of all of them. Besides
that, it is this island only that abounds in civet and cinnamon. The
cinnamon grows among the mountains, and the civet is obtained in
large quantities from the many civet-cats which only this island
breeds. The natives in nearly all of the island are friendly; but
in the southern part along the river of Mindanao (which they call,
and is, another Nile in its grandeur and breadth), the people, with
those of some adjoining districts, are rebellious and turbulent,
and are enticed by the Ternatans, who have introduced there the
doctrine of Mahoma. As a result, both of those peoples are enemies,
not only to us, but to our friends in the same island. An incident
occurred there which I shall not fail to relate, to show the valor of
those islanders. While the Spaniards had their camps and garrisons
stationed on this river, together with some vessels anchored in the
water, there was celebrated the marriage of a friendly chief with
the daughter, or the sister, of another chief who dwelt farther up
the river; and the commander of that camp, as a token of friendship,
undertook to honor this event by despatching two galliots up the
stream to convey the bride. The Mahometan enemy, Silongan, who dwelt
in the district through which they must pass, upon learning that our
people had gone by, and when they were to return, made no attempt to
hinder their passage with the bride, although they were actually at
open war with us; but he went unprotected to the bank of the river
with dignified pace and sober garb, carrying a fan, and gazing with
much interest on the galliots and their passengers. Recognizing him,
our soldiers in the arrogance of youth, and in hatred to the enemy,
applied their matches, and fired a few shots. The bullets, which
were generously aimed at his feet, did not touch him, although they
fell near by; nor did they cause in him any more agitation or anger
than if the matter were some jest which he disregarded. This was the
courage of an enemy--one of the dwellers in the southern part of the
island; I will relate an instance of valor in a friendly native, an
inhabitant of the northern region of Mindanao. A man went out from
Botuan to fish upon the sea, embarking with his wife and children in
two separate boats. On returning to land when the fishing was over, the
man with his boat was somewhat farther from the shore; and the wife,
with their children in her boat, made more haste to reach the land, on
account of some vessels of Ternatans, which were coasting from point
to point--their enemies and ours, as I have said. These invaders,
seeing their prey alone and defenseless, were not willing to lose
it; accordingly, some of them went in a little skiff, and seized the
woman and the children, carrying them away captive. The poor wretch
who had been thus despoiled, reached the shore some distance behind
them; and seeing that he could not overtake them, began to shout to
them, standing on the beach, and was able to utter such insults to the
robber--calling him a coward, who laid his hands on women and children
alone--that he compelled the other to take up the challenge. He added,
that if he himself should be overcome, his wife and children would not
be unjustly plundered from him, but fairly won as spoils by dint of a
valiant arm. The Ternatan (who was no less spirited than valiant) came
to land, at this provocation, with the woman and the children. Having
placed the latter at one side, they furiously began their combat;
but as the native of Botuan was not only courageous, but fought with
justice on his side, that circumstance so aided him that, after some
attempts, he killed his adversary with two spear-thrusts, and departed
in contentment with his wife and children, whom he had gained anew.

The southern part of the island fell to the lot of Father Valerio
de Ledesma and Father Manuel Martinez, who went there early in
November of the year fifteen hundred and ninety-six. There not only
did the demons, upon their arrival, offer them visible opposition,
trying to affright and terrify them at night with horrible sights
and sounds--such as they are wont to display when God our Lord
permits them--but they found the inhabitants by no means tractable,
on account of their fierce and violent natures. But this was a sort
of test to which our Lord subjected them in order that He might soon
console them by the conversion of many chiefs--especially that of
one whom they had least expected to yield on account of his fierce
and warlike character and the terror which he inspired throughout
the region. This conversion was most edifying, and occurred in
the following manner. On a certain Sunday the fathers invited the
people to come to the church on the following Sunday, enjoining them
not to fail to be present; they heeded this injunction faithfully,
repairing to the church in great numbers. There they formed a class
of all the children, and under the guidance of one of the fathers,
who bore a cross, they marched in good order to a spot where were
explained to them some of the mysteries of our holy faith; thence
they returned to the church, where, before an assemblage of all the
people, Father Manuel Martinez preached a sermon. Our Lord inspired
his words with such force that he subdued their hearts, so hard and
obstinate; and in the very middle of the sermon Elian (for such was
his name) fell upon his knees, and eagerly and strenuously sought
baptism. This sight greatly affected many Spaniards who were present,
as well as the Indians who beheld this great change in their chief
(whom they greatly respected), and they were all moved to tears. This
emotion was increased by the action of the superior, Father Valerio
de Ledesma, who, having remained among the others to hear the sermon,
arose, while the audience were overcome by such emotion and wonder,
drew forth a crucifix, and, holding it in his hands, showed the great
obligations which we are under to that Lord who gave up his life
for our deliverance. By this means he enkindled even more the fire,
and aroused the force of heroic determination for right in Elian,
who at last approached the holy crucifix and kissed its feet with
profound reverence; and after him Osol and others performed the same
pious act. Thereupon Elian, desirous that he might not lose time
in a matter which so deeply concerned him, publicly announced that
anyone whom he owed, or to whom he might be under any obligation,
might come to him and be paid therefor. He divorced all but one of
his wives, and returning to each one the gold that was due for her
dowry, sent them all back to their homes. He himself remained in
our house to learn the prayers and catechism, in order to receive
baptism sooner. This conversion was a great help to the others, who
followed his example, saying: "If the father of us all is becoming a
Christian, what else is left for us to do?" A few days after that,
our fathers, having found this method and plan of converting these
peoples successful, gained another chief, from a different district,
by practically the same measures. The conversion of this chief,
and the condition of the Christian community there, are told by
Father Valerio de Ledesma in a clause of one of his letters, thus:
"Thanks to God, all the river is now seeking baptism, and one may
hear nothing else but the chanting of the doctrine throughout the
village and in the houses, whether the people labor, or row, or walk
about. I have visited all the houses, without exception, and have
so allotted the children who know the doctrine that while working
they may sing it and teach it to the others. As there are not enough
boys for every nouse, I have made arrangements that those who live in
neighboring houses should assemble in the chief of these, and respond
to the boy who sings. In those houses of prominent persons the singing
does not cease, day or night. All this our Lord has accomplished, by
subduing their headmen--especially Silongan, who by his many wives
(six in number), and the large _buguei_ (that is, the dowry) which
he had given them, was held back as if by fetters: and yet he freed
himself from his bonds, by divorcing the five wives, and keeping only
his first one. Then, after a sermon by Father Manuel Martinez, he fell
upon his knees in public, and sought baptism; thereupon I embraced
him and drew forth a crucifix, which he adored. I encouraged him to
persevere, and those who were looking on to imitate him; and at that
it seemed as if all were conquered. On that day arrived a rich cargo
of silk and gold; we baptized a son of his, and he himself will receive
the sacrament when he shall learn the doctrine." Here the letter ends.

In the month of April of the same year, Father Juan del Campo, with
the brother Gaspar Gomez, had gone to the northern part of the island
to the great river of Mindanao, accompanying Captain Estevan Rodriguez
de Figueroa, governor of that island, who went with a well-equipped
fleet to pacify the rebels and expel the cursed sect of Mahoma. The
brother was soon obliged to return, for the purpose of conveying
to Manila the body of the governor, who unfortunately died on the
same day when he reached Mindanao. Father Juan del Campo was left
alone with the army, enduring many hardships with the soldiers, and
accomplishing good results among them, as well as among the friendly
Indians, about which he wrote a copious narrative. While so engaged
death found him, and carried him away--as I believe, when he was
certain of enjoying life--three months and a half after his arrival at
Mindanao. Although he died alone and without the sacraments, as there
was no one to administer them, he met death with great edification,
leaving in that camp a sweet odor of sanctity, and the title of a true
servant of God. He was a native of Sevilla, thirty-three years of age
and had spent eight years in the religious life; he was overflowing
with fervor, and so zealous for the good of souls that all--whether
Indians, Negroes, Spaniards, Chinese, or other peoples--ever found
him disposed to consider himself their debtor, and to succor them
with the utmost willingness and alacrity, for which reason he was
burdened with many toils and painful nights. He never lay down for
the purpose of slumber, but only when sleep seized him unawares in
the midst of his occupations. He possessed the gift of languages, by
which I mean that he learned many with great facility. He also had
the gift of ministering to various peoples and those of different
classes at the same time, thoroughly satisfying them all. At times
he delivered three discourses or sermons to the Spaniards in one day,
because the occasion demanded it. At the same time he did not neglect
the Indians with all their variety of tribes and tongues. It was a
providence of our Lord that he remained alive after the decease of
the governor; for with his good judgment and kindly disposition he not
only consoled and animated the army, but was of great service to them,
and gave them wise advice, in matters of importance which required
careful management. He scourged himself every morning when he arose for
prayer, and almost always wore a hair-cloth shirt. He never ate supper,
that he might be better prepared for his prolonged vigils, study, and
prayers. In fine, he employed so well the short time that he spent in
the religious life that I am sure that it was equivalent to a service
of many years. He lectured on rhetoric in our college of Avila and was
able to give instruction in theology. He fulfilled this office most
satisfactorily and profitably to his students, for his intellect and
erudition were very profound. On holidays and feast-days he rested
by going from village to village, preaching each day two, three,
or four sermons. His manner of treating persons was very gracious,
and consequently he aroused all Avila to fervor, ecclesiastics as
well as laymen. All regarded him as their apostle and teacher, and
so treated him, whether present or absent. Leaving that employment,
he went forth to the Filipinas, where he arrived, as we have said,
in June of the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-five. During
the voyage he was not idle, but rather kindled the fervor of all on
the ship with discourses and sermons, as I was told in his praise
by the commander of the fleet, and by the father commissary of the
Holy Office in the province of Pintados, the associate of the right
reverend bishop of Sebu. I conducted him to Leite where I left him
with Father Cosme de Flores as foundation-stones of Christianity in
that region, where they accomplished the fruitful results that I have
described. In Mindanao his greatest affliction was to find himself
alone, foreseeing, from his great labors and little strength, that
he had not long to live, and knowing that at his death he had no one
who might aid and console him. He thus expressed himself a very few
days before he died, to a soldier to whom he had just administered
extreme unction: "Render thanks to God that you have had some one to
administer to you at this hour the holy sacraments; unhappy wretch
am I, who have no one to do as much for me." But God our Lord, who
is a faithful friend, supplied this want, according him a glorious
death, with abundant consolation from heaven. A few of his pious and
devout followers received his body, burying it in the very chapel
where he celebrated mass--without funeral rites, but with grief and
tears, and concern that his bones should be preserved until borne
to a more worthy resting place. This was done as soon as his death
was made known; his remains were carried to Sebu, and laid in our
church, and solemn obsequies were celebrated. It fell to me to make
this journey, accompanied by Father Juan de Sanlucar, who went as
superior. The latter seeing that there was but little inclination
among those Indians for conversion as long as the Mahometan rebels
remained unsubdued, and that we were being occupied, not with them,
but with the soldiers of the camp, ministering to them as curas (the
office of a secular priest rather than ours), although he continued
these labors for almost a year (for I had returned immediately with
the remains), was finally obliged to retire from the field. The camp
was also withdrawn, and their fort there was dismantled.

(_To be concluded_.)





BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA


_Relacion de las Filipinas_, by Pedro Chirino, S.J.--This is translated
in full from the original printed work, from the copies owned by
Harvard University, and Edward E. Ayer, of Chicago.

All the rest of the matter contained in this volume is obtained from
the Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla. "Principal points in regard
to the trade of the Filipinas" is a rare printed pamphlet therein; all
the remaining documents are from the original MSS. in that collection,
their press-marks being thus indicated:

1. _Expedition to the Malucas Islands_.--"Simancas--Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y expedientes del presidente y oidores de dicha
Audiencia vistos en el Consejo; anos de 1600 a 1612; est. 67, caj. 6,
leg. 19."

2. _Documents relating to commerce_.--"Simancas--Secular; cartas y
espedientes de personas seculares de dicha Audiencia; anos de 1569-;
est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 34."

3. _Letter from Morga_.--The same as No. 1.

4. _Chinese mandarins at Manila_.--The same as No. 1.

5. _Resignation by bishop_.--"Simancas--Eclesiastico; cartas y
espedientes del arzobispo de Manila  vistos en el Consejo; anos de
1579 a 1679; est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 32."

6. _Letters from Benavides_.--The same as No. 5.

7. _Letters from the Audiencia and fiscal_, July, 1603.--The same as
No. 1.

8. _Letter from Acuna_, July 20, 1603.--"Simancas--Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y espedientes del gobernador de Filipinas vistos
en el Consejo; anos de 1600 a 1628; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 7."

9. _Letters from ecclesiastics_, December,
1603.--"Simancas--Eclesiastico; cartas y espedientes de personas
eclesiasticas vistos en el Consejo; anos 1570 a 1608; est. 68, caj. 1,
leg. 42."

10. _Uprising of the Sangleys_--(a) Letter from the Audiencia: the
same as No. 1. (b) Letter from Santa Catalina: the same as No. 9. (c)
Letter from Benavides: the same as No. 5. (d) Letters from Acuna:
the same as No. 8.






NOTES

[1] The viceroy of India from May, 1591 to May, 1597 was Matias
de Albuquerque; he was succeeded by Francisco da Gama, Conde de
Vidiguera, a grandson of the noted Vasco da Gama. On December 25,
1600, Ayres de Saldanha became viceroy, holding that office a little
more than four years. "During the 'captivity' or subjection to Spain
(1580-1640) India was governed entirely through the _Casa da India_ at
Lisbon, and altogether in the interests of Portugal and the Portuguese
officials, who, as will be seen in vol. ii, jealously excluded Spanish
interference."--Gray and Bell, note in _Voyage of Francis Pyrard_
(Hakluyt Society's publication no. 76, London, 1887), i, p. 439.

[2] _Galagala_: the name of a coniferous tree (also known as _piayo_
and _damar; Agathis orantifolia_), which produces a resin that is
used for burning, for lighting, and for calking vessels. See Blanco's
_Flora_, p. 528; and U.S. Philippine Commission's _Report_, 1900,
iii, p. 282.

[3] Montero y Vidal recounts (_Hist. de la pirateria_, i, pp. 146-150)
the piratical raids made about this time by the Joloans and
Mindanaos. When they saw that the fort at La Caldera was abandoned,
they collected a force of three thousand men, in fifty caracoas, and
(July, 1599) invaded the coasts of Cebu, Negros, and Panay, ravaging
with fire and sword, and carrying away eight hundred captives. In
the following year these Moros came against the Spanish settlement
of Arevalo (now Iloilo), in Panay, with eight thousand men; but
they were repulsed by a handful of Spaniards, aided by a thousand
Indian allies. Gallinato led an expedition (February, 1602) against
the Joloans, inflicting considerable loss on them, but was unable
to reduce their forts; and he was compelled, by lack of supplies,
to return to Manila. In the summer of 1602 another Moro expedition
sallied out from Mindanao and harried all the northern islands, even
attacking Luzon; they carried away much booty and many captives. A
partial punishment was inflicted upon them by Spanish expeditions,
but they were not subdued; and the Moro pirates were a constant source
of terror and danger until recent times.

[4] Each paragraph is accompanied in the original MS. by a marginal
note summarizing its contents; this is here omitted, as containing
no additional information.

[5] This decree was issued at Lisbon, March 31, 1582, by Felipe II;
a copy of it (addressed to Penalosa) appears in the MS. from which
we have obtained this group of documents on the Maluco expedition.

A royal decree dated June 22, 1599, orders that all military
expeditions in the islands thereafter must be sanctioned by the
council of war, the cabildo of Manila, and the Audiencia.

[6] In 1526, the cabildo of the City of Mexico gave permission for the
citizens "to have their tepuzque gold converted at the smelting works"
into coin. "For two years oro tepuzque was exclusively used, and the
intrinsic value fluctuated so much that a standard was demanded. In
September, 1528 the cabildo adopted the resolution that all such money
should be examined and stamped." See Bancroft's _Hist. Mexico_, iii,
p. 669.

[7] Spanish, _quando lo que se mada es cosa muy conueniente a la
Republica._ The context would apparently require _inconueniente_,
"injurious to the commonwealth;" there is apparently this typographical
error of omission in the original printed text.

[8] The president and members of a tribunal of commerce, appointed
to try and decide causes which concern navigation and trade.

[9] Children resulting from the unions between Chinese and Indians
are known as zambaigos.

[10] In 1603 Monterey, then viceroy of Nueva Espana, was promoted
to the viceroyalty of Peru. The salaries of these offices were
respectively twenty thousand and thirty thousand ducats (Bancroft's
_Hist. Mexico_, iii, p. 2).

[11] The "piece of eight" was a coin having the weight and value of
eight reals of silver; the "piece of four," one of half that value.

[12] Reference is apparently made here to the preceding document,
"Principal points in regard to the trade of the Filipinas."

[13] See La Concepcion's account of the result of this expedition
(_Hist. de Philipinas_, iv, pp. 16-18). The Spanish troops joined the
Portuguese at Tidore, and together they besieged the Malay fort at
Terrenate; but after ten days the Portuguese refused to continue the
siege, and retreated; this compelled Gallinato, the Spanish commander,
to return with his troops to Manila.

[14] _Daifu-sama_: the official title of Iyeyasu, then the chief
secular ruler (Shogun) in Japan, which power he gained by his victory
at the great battle of Sekigahara (October, 1600). With him began
the Shogunate of the Tokugawa family, which lasted for two hundred
and fifty years. Iyeyasu labored to secure the peace of the empire,
both internal and external, and to this end undertook to eradicate
the Christian religion in Japan; and formed a code of laws for his
people. He was a man of high character and ability, and was deified
after his death. This event occurred in 1616, when he was seventy-four
years old. See Rein's _Japan_, pp. 293-303.

[15] La Concepcion describes this fire (_Hist. de Philipinas_,
iv, pp. 30-32); he states that the loss therein was estimated at a
million of pesos, "a loss which indicates how opulent was then the
city of Manila."

[16] The emperor of China at this time was Wanleh (see _Vol_. III,
p. 228); he died in 1620. See account of his reign (begun in 1572)
in Boulger's _Hist. China_, ii, pp. 153-204.

[17] _Garbanzo_: the chick-pea, a sort of pulse commonly used in Spain.

[18] The name of the Moro pirates who inhabit the little islands of the
Sulu group east of Tawi-tawi, and the islands between these and Borneo.

[19] These names are corrupt Spanish renderings of the Chinese
names Nanking and Peking. For accounts of the "Middle Kingdom," or
China proper, and its provinces, and the origin and meaning of their
various appellations, see W. Winterbotham's _Chinese Empire_ (London,
1796), i, pp. 40 _et seq_.; and S. Wells Williams's _Middle Kingdom_
(New York, 1871), i, pp. 3 _et seq_.

[20] In the official transcript of this document furnished
us from the Sevilla archives, this word is written _teatinos_
("Theatins")--apparently the copyist's conjecture for an illegible
or badly-written word in the original MS. But the Theatins had no
establishments in the Philippines; and the mention of Chirino in
the second of these letters (next following this one) of Benavides
proves that he referred to the Jesuits (Spanish _iesuitas_), not to
the Theatins.

[21] "The see being vacant"--for Benavides had but just arrived at
Manila, and an interregnum of nearly five years had elapsed since
the death of his predecessor, Santibanez.

[22] Referring to a ceremony performed at mass, also known as the
"kiss of peace." This was given at mass from the earliest times, in
the various Catholic branches of the Church.  In the Western churches,
"it was only at the end of the thirteenth century that it gave way
to the use of the 'osculatorium'--called also 'instrumentum' or
'tabella pacis,' 'pax,' etc.--a plate with a figure of Christ on
the cross stamped upon it, kissed first by the priest, then by the
clerics and congregation. Usually now the pax is not given at all in
low masses, and in high mass an embrace is substituted for the old
kiss, and given only to those in the sanctuary" (Addis and Arnold's
_Catholic Dictionary_, p. 497).

[23] Perez (p. 63) gives but little information regarding this
friar. He seems to have been in the islands as early as 1591, and from
1594 to 1603, engaged in various official duties. In the last-named
year he went to Spain and Rome, afterward going to Mexico, where he
acted as procurator in 1608.

[24] In this paragraph, as in one in the preceding letter of Benavides,
the official transcription of the text has _teatinos_, where "Jesuits"
occurs in the translation; but the mention of Chirinos shows that
the latter reading is correct. See note 20, _ante_, on p. 109.

[25] Spanish _hermita_ (sometimes meaning "hermitage"); a reference
to what is now a suburb of Manila, situated on the shore of the bay,
and called Hermita or Ermita. "In its parish church is venerated,
with great devotion, the image of its tutelar saint, Our Lady of
Guidance--to which holy image were especially commended, in former
days, the ships from Nueva Espana" (Buzeta and Bravo's _Diccionario_,
ii, p. 77).

[26] This was the eldest daughter of Felipe III--Anna Maria, generally
known as Anne of Austria. Born in 1601, she was married at the age of
fourteen to Louis XIII of France; and after his death was regent during
the minority of her son, Louis XIV. She died on January 20, 1666.

[27] Diego de Guevara, belonging to a noble family in Spain, entered
in early youth the Augustinian order, at Salamanca. In 1593 he came to
the Philippines with a company of twenty-four missionaries, and held
various official positions in his order. In 1602 he founded a convent
in Bungo, in Japan. Sent to Spain in 1603, with news of the Chinese
insurrection, he did not reach the court until three years later;
he remained there until 1610, when he returned to the Philippines
as visitor for his order. From 1616 until his death in 1621, he was
bishop of Nueva Caceres.

[28] Spanish, _reformados_; literally "reformed," but referring to
those who belong to religious houses of strict discipline.

[29] A royal decree dated at Barcelona, June 13, 1599, orders the
governor and Audiencia of the Filipinas to take suitable measures
for restricting the number of Chinese allowed to live in Manila, or
in other parts of the islands. The copy of this decree preserved in
the Sevilla archives contains also an extract from a letter to Acuna
(dated November 29, 1603) in which he is thus directed by the king:
"You have been informed by other despatches of the difficulties (which
had been pointed out to the said Don Francisco [Tello] and other
persons) arising from the number of Sangleys who have remained in the
Parian of that city and its outskirts, so that you might be watchful
for the security of the country. The said Don Francisco writes at
present, that having examined into the matter, and conferred upon
it, he finds (as at that time appeared best) that the most expedient
way was to continue the measure that has been taken since he entered
upon that governorship--namely, that the ships which bring the said
Chinese be sent back [to China] each year full of people. In this
way they can be removed and the country cleared of them, with more
gentleness and kind treatment, as has already been done with many of
them. He thinks that if the captains of the ships are not allowed to
carry more than a hundred Sangleys, including sailors and merchants,
the desired object will be attained--that is, that there should not be
in the country more than three thousand Sangleys, including craftsmen,
gardeners, and workers in all trades. What seems best to us, and I
accordingly so charge you, is to make use of this means, or of others
which may appear to you expedient, so that the country may be secure,
and have only the Sangleys necessary for its service."

[30] This Silonga was one of the most noted of the Moro chiefs; he was
afterward converted by a Jesuit missionary. See account of the raid
made by Buhisan (Buycan), and of Acuna's efforts to suppress piracy,
in Montero y Vidal's _Hist. Pirateria_, i, pp. 148-152.

[31] Pedro Chirino was born in 1557 in Osuna of Andalucia. He graduated
in both civil and canon law at Sevilla, and entered the Society of
Jesus at the age of twenty-three. Having been appointed to the mission
in the Filipinas in place of Father Alonso Sanchez, he arrived there
in 1590 with the new governor, Gomez Perez Dasmarinas. He acted as
missionary to the Tagalos and the Pintados, and was superior of the
Jesuit colleges at Manila and Cebu. He cultivated the friendship of
Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa, whom he advised to found the college
of San Ignacio and the seminary of San Jose in Manila. On July 7,
1602, he left Cavite for Acapulco by the vessel "San Antonio" with
appointment by Visitor Diego Garcia as procurator of the mission, in
order to take immediate action in the affairs of the mission at both
the royal and pontifical courts. He obtained a decree from Father
General Claudius Aquaviva, by which the mission in the Filipinas
was elevated to a vice-province, independent of the province of
Mexico. His relation was written in 1603, and passed the censorship of
vice-provincial Luis de la Puente in Valladolid. On July 17, 1606, he
returned to Manila. The village of Taitai was removed to its present
site by him. His death occurred September 16, 1635. His biography
was written by Father Juan de Bueras in the annals of the province
of Filipinas for 1634-35, signed by the author in Manila, May 26,
1636; and by Father Pedro Murillo Velarde in part ii, book ii, chap,
i, of _Historia de la Provincia de Philipinas de la Compania de Jesus._

Of the many manuscripts left by Father Chirino, I possess the most
important. It is the original manuscript, and is entitled _Primera
Parte de la Historia de la Provincia de Philipinas de la Compania de
Jesus_.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[32] Referring to Morga's _Sucesos de las Islas Philipinas_ (Mexico,
1609). I have seen the only copy of the new edition of this work
published in Madrid, by Justo Zaragoza, in 1880--the only copy,
because the balance of the edition was sold as waste-paper, as its
sale was anticipated by the edition of Dr. Rizal published in Paris
in 1890.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[33] His death occurred in Mactan, on the morning of April 28,
1521.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[34] Chirino writes here somewhat inaccurately. Magalhaes and Loaisa
sailed directly from Spain, and went through the Strait of Magellan;
Saavedra was the first who went to the Philippines from Nueva Espana
(1527), and was followed in this route by Villalobos in 1542. See
accounts of these voyages in _Vols_. I and II of this series.

[35] Carlos V disapproved of Villalobos entering the Malucos, and
on this account was on the point of depriving the viceroy of Nueva
Espana, Don Antonio de Mendoza, of his office, as the latter had given
instructions as to the manner of performing the expedition.--_Pablo
Pastells, S.J._

[36] Cosmo de Torres was born in 1510 at Valencia; he departed for
India in 1538, and was admitted to the Jesuit order by St. Francis
Xavier, on March 20, 1548. He was afterward sent to Japan, where he
began the work of christianizing that people. He died on October 10,
1570, after a long and arduous missionary career. (Sommervogel's
_Bibliotheque_, viii, p. 112.)

St. Francis Xavier's ministry in the Indias and Japan began in 1542,
and lasted ten years; he died on December 2, 1552.

[37] The name "Philipinas" was given to the islands by Villalobos, and
confirmed by Felipe II in a decree dated at Valladolid, and directed
to the viceroy of Nueva Espana, Don Luis de Velasco, September 24,
1559.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[38] The others were Andres de Urdaneta, Andres de Aguirre, Diego de
Herrara, Pedro de Gamboa. The sixth died at the port of Navidad. Father
Rada also died at sea, while returning to Manila from an expedition
to Borneo. Felipe II ordered his manuscripts to be collected and
preserved in the archives.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[39] See description of this incident, and illustration presenting
a view of the image (which is still in existence), in _Vol_. II of
this series, pp. 120, 217.

[40] See Loraca's account of the beliefs of the Moros, _Vol_. V,
pp. 171-175.

[41] An account of the festivities held in Manila in 1623 on the
occasion of the accession of Philip IV to the Spanish crown, includes
the mention of bull-fights. The festivities were attended by the entire
town, civil and political. This account, which contains valuable
social observations, is an extract from a manuscript owned by the
Compania general Tabacos de Filipinas, Barcelona, and was published
privately (1903) in an edition of 25 copies by Senor Don Jose Sanchez
Garrigos. It will be presented in this series, if space will permit.

[42] These winds are known as _baguios_ or _tifones_ (English
"typhoons"). See full account of them, with diagrams, tables,
etc. (prepared largely from data and reports furnished by the Jesuit
fathers in the Manila observatory), in U.S. Philippine Commission's
_Report_, 1901, iv, pp. 290-344.

[43] Diego Vazquez de Mercado, later archbishop of Manila.--_Pablo
Pastells, S.J._

[44] Regarding this sharpening of the teeth, see Virchow's "Peopling of
the Philippines" (Mason's translation), in Smithsonian Institution's
_Annual Report_, 1899, pp. 523, 524. Jagor says--_Travels in the
Philippines_ (London, 1875), p. 256: "The further circumstance
that the inhabitants of the Ladrones and the Bisayans possess
the art of coloring their teeth black, seems to point to early
intercourse between the Bisayans and the Polynesians." The Jesuit
Delgado mentions--_Hist. de Filipinas_ (Manila, 1892), p. 328--the
custom of adorning the teeth with gold. Cf. Sawyer's _Inhabitants of
Philippines_, p. 342.

[45] In the margin (p. 9), are various references to
authors. "Book 7, chap. 2 and 56; and book 16, chap. 36,"
probably refers to the _Naturalis historia_ of the elder
Pliny. "Ludovic. Vartom. Nauigat. lib. 5. cap. 12," refers to book 5,
chap. 12 of the _Itinerario_ of Lodovico Barthema (Roma, 1510). Another
reference is to Thomas Malvenda's _De Antichristo_, book 3, chap. 12.

The word for "cane" here used is the Tagal name for several
species of the bamboo (_Bambus_), the largest and most useful being
_B. arundo_. Both this and the bejuco (_Calamus_) were commonly
mentioned under the general term _canas_ ("canes," or "reeds,"):
and not only the bejuco, but one species of bamboo (_B. mitis_)
yields clear water as a beverage for man's use. See Blanco's _Flora_,
pp. 187-189.

[46] A marginal note (p. 9) opposite this line cites "book 13,
chap. 11," presumably of the same work that is mentioned in the
preceding note.

[47] The palmo was a measure of length used in Spain and Italy,
varying from eight and one-third to ten and one-third inches.

[48] The first Franciscan religious arrived at Manila June 24,
1577. These were fathers Fray Pedro Alfaro, Fray Pedro de Jerez, Fray
Pablo de Jesus, Fray Juan de Plasencia, Fray Juan Bautista Pesaro,
Fray Alonso de Medina, Fray Sebastian de Baeza, Fray Francisco
Mariano, Fray Diego de Oropesa, Fray Agustin de Tordesillas, Fray
Antonio Barriales, and Fray Francisco Menor, and two choristers and
lay brothers.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[49] Domingo de Salazar was born in Labastida (in Alavese Rioja) in
1512. He joined the Order of St. Dominic in 1546 at Salamanca; and at
forty years of age he went to Mexico. In 1579 he was appointed first
bishop of the Filipinas, and took possession of his seat in 1581. In
virtue of the bull _Fulti proesidio_, promulgated by Gregory XIII,
he erected the principal church of Manila into a cathedral church,
December 21 of the same year. Immediately thereafter he held the first
council, being assisted by both the secular and regular clergy. In
1591 he returned to Acapulco and Mexico, whence he went to Espana
in 1593. He died in Madrid, December 4, 1594, and was buried in the
church of Santo Tomas of his order.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[50] Don Gonzalo Ronquillo was born at Arevalo, of an illustrious
family. His father was a military officer, his grandfather a civil
magistrate, and his brother a distinguished warrior. From 1572 to
1575, Gonzalo Ronquillo served in the Audiencia of Mexico as chief
constable; then returning to Spain, he made an offer to the king
to conduct six hundred colonists to the Filipinas Islands. This was
accepted, and he was appointed governor of the islands, for which he
departed from Spain early in 1579. On the way he lost so many of his
colonists, by desertion or death, that only three hundred and forty
remained when he left Panama, February 24, 1580; they reached Manila
on June 1 following. In 1581 he founded the town of Arevalo on the
island of Panay. Ronquillo's death occurred at Manila, on February 14,
1583--caused, according to a letter written by his cousin Don Diego to
the king, by his grief at the proceedings of Doctor Sande from Mexico
in reprisal for the severe residencia which, by order of the king,
Ronquillo had taken of Sande's government.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[51] These auditors received two thousand pesos of nugget gold (_oro
de minas_) annually; and the president, four thousand pesos.--_Pablo
Pastells, S.J._

[52] _Dedo_: originally, a finger (cf. French _doigt_): by extension,
a measure of length ("a finger's breadth"); see _Vol_. III, p. 201.

[53] Dr. Francisco de Sande, a native of Caceres, left Acapulco to
enter upon his governorship of the Filipinas, April 6, 1575, and
arrived at Manila August 25, entering immediately upon his duties.
Pedro de Chaves named in his honor the newly-founded city of Nueva
Caceres.  Sande directed a personal expedition to Borneo, sailing
from Manila for this purpose March 3, 1578, accompanied by forty-six
native vessels.  He took possession of that great island April 20,
and reentered Manila July 29 with twenty-one galleys and galleots,
six ships, one hundred and seventy pieces of artillery, and other
war material taken from the enemy.  His governorship ended June 1,
1580.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[54] A small island between Sangir and Tagolanda (_Vol_. XI, p. 297).

[55] Sommervogel only mentions two priests of this name in the missions
of India, but both of them were of later date.

[56] The supreme pontiff, Gregory XIII, erected the episcopal see
of Manila December 21, 1581, with the publication of the bull _Fulti
praesidio_. Clement VIII elevated it into a metropolitan church August
14, 1591, assigning to it as suffragan, the churches of Cebu, Nueva
Segovia, and Nueva Caceres. To these was added that of Santa Isabel
de Paro in 1865, and lastly those of Lipa, Tuguegaras, Capiz, and
Zamboanga, in virtue of the apostolic decree _Quae in mari sinico_,
given by Leo XIII at St. Peter's in Roma, September 17, 1902.--_Pablo
Pastells, S.J._

[57] "The balete tree (_Ficus Urostigima_--Sp.) corresponds to our
witch elm, and certainly at night has a most uncanny appearance. Each
of these great trees has its guardian spirit, or Ticbalan" (Sawyer,
_Inhabitants of Philippines_, pp. 214, 343). See also Blanco's _Flora_,
art. "Ficus." Chirino speaks of this tree as having no fruit; he must
have observed specimens which bore only sterile flowers.

[58] The _Erythrina_ (_indica_, Lam.; _carnea_, Bl.); see Blanco's
_Flora_, pp. 393, 394, and Delgado's _Historia_, pp. 429, 430, for
descriptions of this tree (named by them _dapdap_).

[59] _Anona_, of several species; one is commonly known as
"custard-apple," another as "sour-sop." The species _A. squamota_
(Tagal, _Ates_) is regarded as producing the best fruit.

[60] A species of wild hog, _Sus scropha_. In all the large islands
of the Asiatic archipelago may be found wild swine, of various
species. "The flesh of the hog must have formed a principal part of
the animal food of the nations and tribes of the archipelago before
the conversion to Mohammedanism. It did so with the people of the
Philippine Islands on the arrival of the Spaniards, and it does so
still with all the rude tribes, and even with the Hindoos of Bali
and Lomboc"  (Crawfurd's _Dictionary_, pp. 152, 153). See Zuniga's
_Estadismo_ (Retana's ed.), ii, p. 438.*

[61] The Haraya is a Visayan dialect.

[62] That is, the most important things which happen to men in leaving
this world--death, judgment, heaven, and hell; this subject is also
included under the term "eschatology."

[63] They were Fathers Alonso de Humanes, superior, Juan del Campo,
Mateo Sanchez, Juan de Ribera, Cosme de Flores, Tomas de Montoya,
Juan Bosque, and Diego Sanchez. They left Acapulco March 22, and cast
anchor at Cavite June 10. Dr. Morga, appointed by virtue of a royal
decree, given at El Escorial, August 18, 1593, left Cadiz with his
wife and six children in February, 1594, and Acapulco on the same
date as the above-mentioned fathers. Under his charge was the aid
for the islands, taken to Manila by the galleons "San Felipe" and
"Santiago."--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[64] In _Menology of the English Province, S.J._ (Roehampton, 1874) is
the following notice (July 14): "At Manila, in the Philippine Islands,
in 1627, Father Thomas de Montoya, an Indian of Florida. After
thirty years of indefatigable labor among those nations, he died
by slow poison, given by the Bassians [Bisayans?] out of hatred
to the Faith." The statement regarding his nativity is, however,
erroneous. "Murillo Velarde states (_Historia_, lib. viii, cap. x,
no. 57) that this father was born, not in Florida, but at Zacatecas
(Mexico), in 1568. He entered the Society at the age of eighteen, in
the Mexican province, and passed over to that of the Philippines in
1595 (the year when it was formed). There he filled successively the
offices of Latin teacher at Manila, master of novices, and missionary
to the Pintados. These Indians poisoned him, after which it seems that
he returned to Manila, where his life was a continued martyrdom. To the
sufferings from the effect of the poison were added those of a violent
asthma. He possessed perfectly the Tagal language." (See _Woodstock
Letters_, 1900, vol. 29, pp. 154, 155.) He is also mentioned by Colin
(_Hist. misiones_, part ii, book iii, p. 334).--_E.I. Devitt, S.J._
(Georgetown College).

[65] Francisco de Borja (Borgia), Duke of Gandia (a city in Spain),
entered the Jesuit order in 1551, becoming its general in 1565;
he held this office until his death, September 30, 1572. He was
beautified in 1624, and canonized in 1671.

[66] His remains are now entombed to the right of the transept of
the Cebu cathedral.--_Pablo Pastells, S.J._

[67] Don Francisco Tello entered Manila July 14. He had left Acapulco
March 6, with Father Vera. The latter's companions were Fathers Lopez
de la Parra, Manuel Martinez, Valerio de Ledesma, Juan de Torres,
Gabriel Sanchez, Miguel Gomez, Juan de San Lucar, Francisco de Otazo,
Alonso Rodriguez, Cristobal Jimenez, Francisco de Encinas, Diego de
Santiago, Leonardo Scelsi, and Bartolome Martes.--_Pablo Pastells,
S.J._

[68] Various Philippine languages were studied and systematized by
the first missionaries to the islands, although none of these works
were printed, so far as is known, before 1610. Probably the earliest
of these was a vocabulary of the language of the Cebu islanders, by
Martin de Rada (who died in 1580). Other early Augustinians composed
linguistic works as follows: Agustin de Alburquerque (died 1580) an
_Arte_, or grammar, of the Tagal language; Diego Ochoa (died 1585),
an _Arte_ and vocabulary of the Pampango; Esteban Marin (died 1601),
_Artes_ of Igorrote and Zambal.

[69] Spanish, _actos solenes, i liciones de erudicion_. At Manila, in
Chirino's time, there was only what is called _collegium inchoatum_;
but in ordinary colleges of the Society, with a complete order of
classes, it was the custom, at the _solemnis instauratio studiorum_,
for the prefect of studies or the professor of rhetoric to inaugurate
the year's work by delivering a "learned discourse," before the
whole academic body; and to this function the appreciative public
was invited. Sometimes the students gave a public exhibition of
their work and proficiency. This "solemn act" might be a dramatic
representation--an original play written for the occasion--or it
might consist of literary exercises on the part of the scholars, music
being also introduced. The technical name for these purely literary
exercises was an "academy," or "specimen;" and naturally they would
take place during the course of the scholastic year Such was the
custom of the age, in Spanish countries.--_Rev. E.I. Devitt, S.J._

[70] Molave is the name of a tree whose wood is very hard and
highly valued for building purposes; it is called by the natives
"the queen of woods." The name molave is applied to several species
of _Vitex_. especially to _V. geniculata_, Bl.

[71] _Pina_: a silver design in the form of a pineapple.

[72] _i.e._, to scourge themselves, as a voluntary penance--a practice
then common among religious devotees. It was probably a survival from
the earlier practices of the associations of Flagellants, who publicly
scourged themselves, in penitential processions through the streets;
they appeared during the period 1260-1420.

[73] Cf. the belief of the Winnebago Indians regarding the fate of
departed souls (_Wisconsin Historical Collections_, xiii, p. 467).

[74] _Golo_: "the name of a charm for lovers, used by the ancient
Tagals" (Blumentritt, _Dicc. mitologico,_ p. 51). Regarding this
book of charms, cf. Retana's _Libro de aniterias_ (Madrid, 1894),
which reproduces a similar book, obtained from a Filipino native,
with explanations of such words and phrases as are intelligible;
it is preceded by extracts from the _Practica_ of Tomas Ortiz, O.S.A.

[75] Evidently a reference to the serpents of the genus _Python_,
allied to the boa-constrictor. They attain enormous size in the
forests, some specimens having been obtained over twenty-two feet
long. Young ones are often kept by the natives in their houses to
kill the rats; these snakes become tame and harmless.

[76] In the printed work, on the margin opposite this and the following
sentences, are various references, thus: "Isaiah, 60; Isaiah, 9; Psalm
79; Isaiah, 66; Psalm 35, whereon 'B. Amb. Greg. II. moral. c. 2'"--the
last apparently a reference to St. (and Pope) Gregory I's _Moralia
in Jobum_ (Basle, 1468?).

[77] In the margin of the printed page is a reference to Ezekiel, 8.

[78] Cf. Loarca's version of this and other myths, and his account of
the native beliefs and superstitious practices (_Vol_. V, pp. 121-141).

[79] The Tagals also called this bird _tigmamanukin_; its scientific
name is _Irene cyanogastra_, Meyer (Blumentritt's _Dicc. mitologico_,
pp. 34, 118). See Forbes's description of the "fairy bluebird" (_Irene
turcosa_) in his _Naturalist's Wanderings in the Eastern Archipelago_
(New York. 1885). p. 67.

[80] Naso (the native name for which is Siroan) and Potol are,
respectively, the southwest and northwest extremities of Panay
Island. Cf. the offerings made to rocks by the Huron Indians (_Jesuit
Relations_, x, p. 165).

[81] Probably referring to Cape San Agustin, the southeastern extremity
of Mindanao, at the eastern entrance of Sarangani Strait, where there
is always a heavy sea.

[82] For this reason it is called Puntas Flechas--_Pablo Pastells,
S.J._

[83] In the margin of the printed work is a reference to "3 Kings,
16"--_i.e._, the first Book of Kings in the Protestant version of
the Old Testament.

[84] See accounts of the practices of medicine-men among the northern
tribes of the North American Indians, in _Jesuit Relations, passim_.

[85] Among the infidels of Mindanao there are still four kinds of
sacrifices: human, called _pag-huaga_, practiced by the Bagobos; that
of swine, or _pag-balilig_; that of chickens, or _pag-talibong_; and
the _pag-cayag_, which is a poured-out offering of rice. The _baylanas_
sacrifice the victim by thrusting into the heart or throat of the
animal a _balarao_ or dagger, and suck the blood issuing from the
wound. Then they dance about the sacrifice in innumerable attitudes,
and sing, while trembling and making grimaces, the following stanza:



    Miminsad miminsad si mansilatan
    Vpud si Badla nga maga-dayao nang dunia.
        Baylan managun-sayao,
        Baylan managun-liguid.


afterward Badla will descend, who will give health to the earth. Let
the Baylanas [priests] dance, let the Baylanas dance about."--_Pablo
Pastells, S.J._

[86] A marginal note in the printed work cites II Corinthians, 8.

[87] St. Marcellinus, the thirtieth of the Roman pontiffs, was elected
in 296 A. D., and died in 304.

[88] The following references appear on the margin of the printed page:
Boethius, _Topica_ (Tolentino, 1484), book 2. Andreas Tiraquellus,
_Ex commentariis in Pictonum cosuetudines, sectio De legibus
connubialibus_ (Parisis, 1513), law 4. Francisco Ribera, _In librum
duodecim prophetarum commentarii_ (Salmanticae, 1587), Hosea, 3.

[89] Perez (p. 44) only records the various churches served by this
father, from 1596 to 1607, and his death in the latter year.

[90] Apparently at the point of Tinagoan, on Buad Island, off the
western coast of Samar.

[91] In the margin is a reference to II Timothy, 4.

[92] _Piper betel_; the method of using it as a stimulant is
described in _Vol_. IV, p. 22a. The _coca_ to which the betel-nut is
here compared is the dried leaf of a Peruvian shrub (_Erythroxylon
coca_). of stimulant and tonic qualities. From it is obtained the
well-known anaesthetic cocaine.

[93] Marginal references (of which some throughout this page of
Chirino are too indefinite to be verified): _II Paralipomenon_ (the
appellation, in Roman Catholic versions of the Bible, of the books
named "Chronicles" in the Protestant version), 16. Onuphrius, book 2.

[94] Marginal references: _Fastorum Plutarchi in Sylla_. Plinius,
book II, chap. 10. _Ecclesiastes_, 34. _Sermo 15_ of St. Jerome, 9.

[95] Marginal references: _II Paralipomenon_, 35. _Job_, 3. Aristotle,
cited by Varro, book 6.

[96] Marginal references: _Judges_, 4, and thereon Procopius of
Gaza--probably a reference to his commentaries, _Commentarii in
Octateuchum_ (a Latin translation; Tiguri, 1555).

[97] Marginal references: _Herodotus and Diodorus_, book 3. Pineda's
_Job_, 3, v. 16--the _Commentarium in Job libri tredecim_ of Joannes
de Pineda (of Sevilla).

[98] Marginal references: Josephus, _Antiquitates_, book 13,
chap. 15; book 16, chap. 11. Gregorius Giraldus, _Syntagma de
funeratibus_. Eustatius, on Homer, p. 393--referring to one of the
works on Homer by Eustathius of Thessalonica.

[99] Marginal references: Athenaeus, book 7. Alessandro Sardi (of
Ferrara), _De moribus ac ritibus gentium libri III_ (Venetiis, 1557).

[100] A side note in the original gives the Hebrew dvmh _duma_,
which means "silences," and hence "sepulchres."

[101] Marginal references: Virgil, _AEneid_, 6. Hosea, 10,
v. 15. Pineda's _Job_, 3, v. 13.

[102] A marginal note refers to Ecclesiastes, 1; but it is not quoted
directly by Chirino, who seems only to use it as a suggestion for
his own thought.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898:
Volume XII, 1601-1604, by Edited by Blair and Robertson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, ***

***** This file should be named 15022.txt or 15022.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/0/2/15022/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and The PG Distributed Proofreaders Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
