The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative Of The Most Remarkable
Particulars In The Life Of James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw, An African Prince, As Related By Himself, by James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Narrative Of The Most Remarkable Particulars In The Life Of James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw, An African Prince, As Related By Himself

Author: James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw

Release Date: February 14, 2005 [EBook #15042]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAMES ALBERT UKAWSAW GRONNIOSAW ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Charles Aldarondo and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





A

NARRATIVE

OF THE

MOST REMARKABLE PARTICULARS

IN THE LIFE OF

JAMES ALBERT UKAWSAW GRONNIOSAW,

AN AFRICAN PRINCE,

As related by HIMSELF.

     _I will bring the Blind by a Way that they know not, I will lead
     them in Paths that they have not known: I will make Darkness Light
     before them and crooked Things straight. These Things will I do
     unto them and not forsake them._ Isa. xlii. 16.


BATH:

Printed by W. GYE in Westgate-Street; and sold by T. MILLS,

Bookseller, in King's-Mead-Square.

Price Six-Pence.

1772


TO THE

RIGHT HONOURABLE

The _Countess_ of Huntingdon;

THIS

NARRATIVE

Of my _LIFE_,

And of God's wonderful Dealings with me, is,

(_Through Her LADYSHIP'S Permission_)

_Most Humbly Dedicated,

By her LADYSHIP'S

Most obliged

And obedient Servant,_

JAMES ALBERT.




THE PREFACE to the READER.


This Account of the Life and spiritual Experience of James Albert was
taken from his own Mouth and committed to Paper by the elegant Pen of a
young Lady of the Town of Leominster, for her own private Satisfaction,
and without any Intention at first that it should be made public. But
she has now been prevail'd on to commit it to the Press, both with a
view to serve Albert and his distressed Family, who have the sole
Profits arising from the Sale of it; and likewise as it is apprehended,
this little History contains Matter well worthy the Notice and Attention
of every Christian Reader.

Perhaps we have here in some Degree a Solution of that Question that has
perplex'd the Minds of so many serious Persons, viz. In what Manner will
God deal with those benighted Parts of the World where the Gospel of
Jesus Christ hath never reach'd? Now it appears from the Experience of
this remarkable Person, that God does not save without the Knowledge of
the Truth; but, with Respect to those whom he hath fore-known, though
born under every outward Disadvantage, and in Regions of the grossest
Darkness and Ignorance, he most amazingly acts upon and influences their
Minds, and in the Course of wisely and most wonderfully appointed
Providences, he brings them to the Means of spiritual Information,
gradually opens to their View the Light of his Truth, and gives them
full Possession and Enjoyment of the inestimable Blessings of his
Gospel. Who can doubt but that the Suggestion so forcibly press'd upon
the Mind of Albert (when a Boy) that there was a Being superior to the
Sun, Moon, and Stars (the Objects of African Idolatry) came from the
Father of Lights, and was, with Respect to him, the First-Fruit of the
Display of Gospel-Glory? His long and perilous Journey to the Coast of
Guinea, where he was sold for a Slave, and so brought into a Christian
Land; shall we consider this as the alone Effect of a curious and
inquisitive Disposition? Shall we in accounting for it refer to nothing
higher than mere Chance and accidental Circumstances? Whatever Infidels
and Deists may think; I trust the Christian Reader will easily discern
an All-wise and Omnipotent Appointment and Direction in these Movements.
He belong'd to the Redeemer of lost Sinners; he was the Purchase of his
Cross; and therefore the Lord undertook to bring him by a Way that he
knew not, out of Darkness into his marvellous Light, that he might lead
him to a saving Heart-Acquaintance and Union with the triune God in
Christ reconciling the World unto himself; and not imputing their
Trespasses. As his Call was very extraordinary, so there are certain
Particulars exceedingly remarkable in his Experience. God has put
singular Honour upon him in the Exercise of his Faith and Patience,
which in the most distressing and pitiable Trials and Calamities have
been found to the Praise and Glory of God. How deeply must it affect a
tender Heart, not only to be reduc'd to the last Extremity himself, but
to have his Wife and Children perishing for Want before his Eyes! Yet
his Faith did not fail him; he put his Trust in the Lord, and he was
delivered. And at this Instant, though born in an exalted Station of
Life, and now under the Pressure of various afflicting Providences, I am
persuaded (for I know the Man) he would rather embrace the Dung-hill,
having Christ in his Heart, than give up his spiritual Possessions and
Enjoyment, to fill the Throne of Princes. It perhaps may not be amiss to
observe that James Albert left his native Country, (as near as I can
guess from certain Circumstances) when he was about 15 Years old. He now
appears to be turn'd of Sixty; has a good natural Understanding; is well
acquainted with the Scriptures, and the Things of God, has an amiable
and tender Disposition, and his Character can be well attested not only
at Kidderminster, the Place of his Residence but likewise by many
creditable Persons in London and other Places. Reader, recommending this
Narrative to your perusal, and him who is the Subject of it to your
charitable Regard,

I am your faithful and obedient Servant,

For Christ's Sake,

W. Shirley.




AN

ACCOUNT

OF

JAMES ALBERT, &c.


I was born in the city Bournou; my mother was the eldest daughter of the
reigning King there, of which Bournou is the chief city. I was the
youngest of six children, and particularly loved by my mother, and my
grand-father almost doated on me.

I had, from my infancy, a curious turn of mind; was more grave and
reserved in my disposition than either of my brothers and sisters. I
often teazed them with questions they could not answer: for which reason
they disliked me, as they supposed that I was either foolish, or insane.
'Twas certain that I was, at times, very unhappy in myself: it being
strongly impressed on my mind that there was some Great Man of power
which resided above the sun, moon and stars, the objects of our worship.
My dear indulgent mother would bear more with me than any of my friends
beside.--I often raised my hand to heaven, and asked her who lived
there? was much dissatisfied when she told me the sun, moon and stars,
being persuaded, in my own mind, that there must be some Superior
Power.--I was frequently lost in wonder at the works of the Creation:
was afraid and uneasy and restless, but could not tell for what. I
wanted to be informed of things that no person could tell me; and was
always dissatisfied.--These wonderful impressions begun in my childhood,
and followed me continually 'till I left my parents, which affords me
matter of admiration and thankfulness.

To this moment I grew more and more uneasy every day, in so much that
one saturday, (which is the day on which we keep our sabbath) I laboured
under anxieties and fears that cannot be expressed; and, what is more
extraordinary, I could not give a reason for it.--I rose, as our custom
is, about three o'clock, (as we are oblig'd to be at our place of
worship an hour before the sun rise) we say nothing in our worship, but
continue on our knees with our hands held up, observing a strict silence
'till the sun is at a certain height, which I suppose to be about 10 or
11 o'clock in England: when, at a certain sign made by the priest, we
get up (our duty being over) and disperse to our different houses.--Our
place of meeting is under a large palm tree; we divide ourselves into
many congregations; as it is impossible for the same tree to cover the
inhabitants of the whole City, though they are extremely large, high and
majestic; the beauty and usefulness of them are not to be described;
they supply the inhabitants of the country with meat, drink and
clothes;[A] the body of the palm tree is very large; at a certain season
of the year they tap it, and bring vessels to receive the wine, of which
they draw great quantities, the quality of which is very delicious: the
leaves of this tree are of a silky nature; they are large and soft; when
they are dried and pulled to pieces it has much the same appearance as
the English flax, and the inhabitants of Bournou manufacture it for
cloathing &c. This tree likewise produces a plant or substance which has
the appearance of a cabbage, and very like it, in taste almost the same:
it grows between the branches. Also the palm tree produces a nut,
something like a cocoa, which contains a kernel, in which is a large
quantity of milk, very pleasant to the taste: the shell is of a hard
substance, and of a very beautiful appearance, and serves for basons,
bowls, &c.

[Footnote A: It is a generally received opinion, in _England_, that the
natives of _Africa_ go entirely unclothed; but this supposition is very
unjust: they have a kind of dress so as to appear decent, though it is
very slight and thin.]

I hope this digression will be forgiven.--I was going to observe that
after the duty of our Sabbath was over (on the day in which I was more
distressed and afflicted than ever) we were all on our way home as
usual, when a remarkable black cloud arose and covered the sun; then
followed very heavy rain and thunder more dreadful than ever I had
heard: the heav'ns roared, and the earth trembled at it: I was highly
affected and cast down; in so much that I wept sadly, and could not
follow my relations and friends home.--I was obliged to stop and felt
as if my legs were tied, they seemed to shake under me: so I stood
still, being in great fear of the Man of Power that I was persuaded in
myself, lived above. One of my young companions (who entertained a
particular friendship for me and I for him) came back to see for me: he
asked me why I stood still in such very hard rain? I only said to him
that my legs were weak, and I could not come faster: he was much
affected to see me cry, and took me by the hand, and said he would lead
me home, which he did. My mother was greatly alarmed at my tarrying out
in such terrible weather; she asked me many questions, such as what I
did so for, and if I was well? My dear mother says I, pray tell me who
is the great Man of Power that makes the thunder? She said, there was no
power but the sun, moon and stars; that they made all our country.--I
then enquired how all our people came? She answered me, from one
another; and so carried me to many generations back.--Then says I, who
made the _First Man_? and who made the first Cow, and the first Lyon,
and where does the fly come from, as no one can make him? My mother
seemed in great trouble; she was apprehensive that my senses were
impaired, or that I was foolish. My father came in, and seeing her in
grief asked the cause, but when she related our conversation to him, he
was exceedingly angry with me, and told me he would punish me severely
if ever I was so troublesome again; so that I resolved never to say any
thing more to him. But I grew very unhappy in myself; my relations and
acquaintance endeavoured by all the means they could think on, to divert
me, by taking me to ride upon goats, (which is much the custom of our
country) and to shoot with a bow and arrow; but I experienced no
satisfaction at all in any of these things; nor could I be easy by any
means whatever: my parents were very unhappy to see me so dejected and
melancholy.

About this time there came a merchant from the _Gold Coast_ (the third
city in Guinea) he traded with the inhabitants of our country in ivory
&c. he took great notice of my unhappy situation, and enquired into the
cause; he expressed vast concern for me, and said, if my parents would
part with me for a little while, and let him take me home with him, it
would be of more service to me than any thing they could do for me.--He
told me that if I would go with him I should see houses with wings to
them walk upon the water, and should also see the white folks; and that
he had many sons of my age, which should be my companions; and he added
to all this that he would bring me safe back again soon.--I was highly
pleased with the account of this strange place, and was very desirous of
going.--I seemed sensible of a secret impulse upon my mind which I could
not resist that seemed to tell me I must go. When my dear mother saw
that I was willing to leave them, she spoke to my father and grandfather
and the rest of my relations, who all agreed that I should accompany the
merchant to the Gold Coast. I was the more willing as my brothers and
sisters despised me, and looked on me with contempt on the account of my
unhappy disposition; and even my servants slighted me, and disregarded
all I said to them. I had one sister who was always exceeding fond of
me, and I loved her entirely; her name was Logwy, she was quite white,
and fair, with fine light hair though my father and mother were
black.--I was truly concerned to leave my beloved sister, and she cry'd
most sadly to part with me, wringing her hands, and discovered every
sign of grief that can be imagined. Indeed if I could have known when I
left my friends and country that I should never return to them again my
misery on that occasion would have been inexpressible. All my relations
were sorry to part with me; my dear mother came with me upon a camel
more than three hundred miles, the first of our journey lay chiefly
through woods: at night we secured ourselves from the wild beasts by
making fires all around us; we and our camels kept within the circle, or
we must have been torn to pieces by the Lyons, and other wild creatures,
that roared terribly as soon as night came on, and continued to do so
'till morning.--There can be little said in favour of the country
through which we passed; only a valley of marble that we came through
which is unspeakably beautiful.--On each side of this valley are
exceedingly high and almost inaccessible mountains--Some of these pieces
of marble are of prodigious length and breadth but of different sizes
and colour, and shaped in a variety of forms, in a wonderful manner.--It
is most of it veined with gold mixed with striking and beautiful
colours; so that when the sun darts upon it, it is as pleasing a sight
as can be imagined.--The merchant that brought me from Bournou, was in
partnership with another gentleman who accompanied us; he was very
unwilling that he should take me from home, as, he said, he foresaw many
difficulties that would attend my going with them.--He endeavoured to
prevail on the merchant to throw me into a very deep pit that was in the
valley, but he refused to listen to him, and said, he was resolved to
take care of me: but the other was greatly dissatisfied; and when we
came to a river, which we were obliged to pass through, he purpos'd
throwing me in and drowning me; but the Merchant would not consent to
it, so that I was preserv'd.

We travel'd 'till about four o'clock every day, and then began to make
preparations for night, by cutting down large quantities of wood, to
make fires to preserve us from the wild beasts.--I had a very unhappy
and discontented journey, being in continual fear that the people I was
with would murder me. I often reflected with extreme regret on the kind
friends I had left, and the idea of my dear mother frequently drew tears
from my eyes.--I cannot recollect how long we were in going from Bournou
to the Gold Coast; but as there is no shipping nearer to Bournou than
that City, it was tedious in travelling so far by land, being upwards of
a thousand miles.--I was heartily rejoic'd when we arriv'd at the end of
our journey: I now vainly imagin'd that all my troubles and inquietudes
would terminate here; but could I have looked into futurity, I should
have perceiv'd that I had much more to suffer than I had before
experienc'd, and that they had as yet but barely commenc'd.

I was now more than a thousand miles from home, without a friend or any
means to procure one. Soon after I came to the merchant's house I heard
the drums beat remarkably loud, and the trumpets blow--the persons
accustom'd to this employ, are oblig'd to go upon a very high structure
appointed for that purpose, that the sound might be heard at a great
distance: They are higher than the steeples are in England. I was
mightily pleas'd with sounds so entirely new to me, and was very
inquisitive to know the cause of this rejoicing, and ask'd many
questions concerning it: I was answer'd that it was meant as a
compliment to me, because I was Grandson to the King of Bournou.

This account gave me a secret pleasure; but I was not suffer'd long to
enjoy this satisfaction, for in the evening of the same day, two of the
merchant's sons (boys about my own age) came running to me, and told me,
that the next day I was to die, for the King intended to behead me.--I
reply'd that I was sure it could not be true, for that I came there to
play with them, and to see houses walk upon the water with wings to
them, and the white folks; but I was soon inform'd that their King
imagined that I was sent by my father as a spy, and would make such
discoveries at my return home that would enable them to make war with
the greater advantage to ourselves; and for these reasons he had
resolved I should never return to my native country.--When I heard this
I suffered misery that cannot be described.--I wished a thousand times
that I had never left my friends and country.--But still the Almighty
was pleased to work miracles for me.

The morning I was to die, I was washed and all my gold ornaments made
bright and shining, and then carried to the palace, where the King was
to behead me himself (as is the custom of the place).--He was seated
upon a throne at the top of an exceeding large yard, or court, which you
must go through to enter the palace, it is as wide and spacious as a
large field in England.--I had a lane of lifeguards to go through.--I
guessed it to be about three hundred paces.

I was conducted by my friend, the merchant, about half way up; then he
durst proceed no further: I went up to the King alone--I went with an
undaunted courage, and it pleased God to melt the heart of the King, who
sat with his scymitar in his hand ready to behead me; yet, being himself
so affected, he dropped it out of his hand, and took me upon his knee
and wept over me. I put my right hand round his neck, and prest him to
my heart.--He sat me down and blest me; and added that he would not kill
me, and that I should not go home, but be sold, for a slave, so then I
was conducted back again to the merchant's house.

The next day he took me on board a French brig; but the Captain did not
chuse to buy me: he said I was too small; so the merchant took me home
with him again.

The partner, whom I have spoken of as my enemy, was very angry to see me
return, and again purposed putting an end to my life; for he represented
to the other, that I should bring them into troubles and difficulties,
and that I was so little that no person would buy me.

The merchant's resolution began to waver, and I was indeed afraid that I
should be put to death: but however he said he would try me once more.

A few days after a Dutch ship came into the harbour, and they carried me
on board, in hopes that the Captain would purchase me.--As they went, I
heard them agree, that, if they could not sell me _then_, they would
throw me overboard.--I was in extreme agonies when I heard this; and as
soon as ever I saw the Dutch Captain, I ran to him, and put my arms
round him, and said, "father, save me." (for I knew that if he did not
buy me, I should be treated very ill, or, possibly, murdered) And though
he did not understand my language, yet it pleased the Almighty to
influence him in my behalf, and he bought me _for two yards of check_,
which is of more value _there_, than in England.

When I left my dear mother I had a large quantity of gold about me, as
is the custom of our country, it was made into rings, and they were
linked into one another, and formed into a kind of chain, and so put
round my neck, and arms and legs, and a large piece hanging at one ear
almost in the shape of a pear. I found all this troublesome, and was
glad when my new Master took it from me--I was now washed, and clothed
in the Dutch or English manner.--My master grew very fond of me, and I
loved him exceedingly. I watched every look, was always ready when he
wanted me, and endeavoured to convince him, by every action, that my
only pleasure was to serve him well.--I have since thought that he must
have been a serious man. His actions corresponded very well with such a
character.--He used to read prayers in public to the ship's crew every
Sabbath day; and when first I saw him read, I was never so surprised in
my whole life as when I saw the book talk to my master; for I thought it
did, as I observed him to look upon it, and move his lips.--I wished it
would do so to me.--As soon as my master had done reading I follow'd
him to the place where he put the book, being mightily delighted with
it, and when nobody saw me, I open'd it and put my ear down close upon
it, in great hope that it wou'd say something to me; but was very sorry
and greatly disappointed when I found it would not speak, this thought
immediately presented itself to me, that every body and every thing
despis'd me because I was black.

I was exceedingly sea-sick at first; but when I became more accustom'd
to the sea, it wore off.--My master's ship was bound for Barbadoes. When
we came there, he thought fit to speak of me to several gentlemen of his
acquaintance, and one of them exprest a particular desire to see me.--He
had a great mind to buy me; but the Captain could not immediately be
prevail'd on to part with me; but however, as the gentleman seem'd very
solicitous, he at length let me go, and I was sold for fifty dollars
(_four and sixpenny-pieces in English_). My new master's name was
Vanhorn, a young Gentleman; his home was in New-England in the City of
New-York; to which place he took me with him. He dress'd me in his
livery, and was very good to me. My chief business was to wait at table,
and tea, and clean knives, and I had a very easy place; but the servants
us'd to curse and swear surprizingly; which I learnt faster than any
thing, 'twas almost the first English I could speak. If any of them
affronted me, I was sure to call upon God to damn them immediately; but
I was broke of it all at once, occasioned by the correction of an old
black servant that liv'd in the family--One day I had just clean'd the
knives for dinner, when one of the maids took one to cut bread and
butter with; I was very angry with her, and called upon God to damn her;
when this old black man told me I must not say so. I ask'd him why? He
replied there was a wicked man call'd the Devil, that liv'd in hell, and
would take all that said these words, and put them in the fire and burn
them.--This terrified me greatly, and I was entirely broke of
swearing.--Soon after this, as I was placing the china for tea, my
mistress came into the room just as the maid had been cleaning it; the
girl had unfortunately sprinkled the wainscot with the mop; at which my
mistress was angry; the girl very foolishly answer'd her again, which
made her worse, and she call'd upon God to damn her.--I was vastly
concern'd to hear this, as she was a fine young lady, and very good to
me, insomuch that I could not help speaking to her, "Madam, says I, you
must not say so," Why, says she? Because there is a black man call'd the
Devil that lives in hell, and he will put you in the fire and burn you,
and I shall be very sorry for that. Who told you this replied my lady?
Old Ned, says I. Very well was all her answer; but she told my master of
it, and he order'd that old Ned should be tyed up and whipp'd, and was
never suffer'd to come into the kitchen with the rest of the servants
afterwards.--My mistress was not angry with me, but rather diverted with
my simplicity and, by way of talk, She repeated what I had said, to many
of her acquaintance that visited her; among the rest, Mr. Freelandhouse,
a very gracious, good Minister, heard it, and he took a great deal of
notice of me, and desired my master to part with me to him. He would not
hear of it at first, but, being greatly persuaded, he let me go, and Mr.
Freelandhouse gave L50. for me.--He took me home with him, and made me
kneel down, and put my two hands together, and pray'd for me, and every
night and morning he did the same.--I could not make out what it was
for, nor the meaning of it, nor what they spoke to when they talk'd--I
thought it comical, but I lik'd it very well.--After I had been a little
while with my new master I grew more familiar, and ask'd him the meaning
of prayer: (I could hardly speak english to be understood) he took great
pains with me, and made me understand that he pray'd to God, who liv'd
in Heaven; that He was my Father and best Friend.--I told him that this
must be a mistake; that _my_ father liv'd at Bournou, and I wanted very
much to see him, and likewise my dear mother, and sister, and I wish'd
he would be so good as to send me home to them; and I added, all I could
think of to induce him to convey me back. I appeared in great trouble,
and my good master was so much affected that the tears ran down his
face. He told me that God was a Great and Good Spirit, that He created
all the world, and every person and thing in it, in Ethiopia, Africa,
and America, and every where. I was delighted when I heard this: There,
says I, I always thought so when I liv'd at home! Now if I had wings
like an Eagle I would fly to tell my dear mother that God is greater
than the sun, moon, and stars; and that they were made by Him.

I was exceedingly pleas'd with this information of my master's, because
it corresponded so well with my own opinion; I thought now if I could
but get home, I should be wiser than all my country-folks, my
grandfather, or father, or mother, or any of them--But though I was
somewhat enlighten'd by this information of my master's, yet, I had no
other knowledge of God but that He was a Good Spirit, and created every
body, and every thing--I never was sensible in myself, nor had any one
ever told me, that He would punish the wicked, and love the just. I was
only glad that I had been told there was a God because I had always
thought so.

My dear kind master grew very fond of me, as was his Lady; she put me to
School, but I was uneasy at that, and did not like to go; but my master
and mistress requested me to learn in the gentlest terms, and persuaded
me to attend my school without any anger at all; that, at last, I came
to like it better, and learnt to read pretty well. My schoolmaster was a
good man, his name was Vanosdore, and very indulgent to me.--I was in
this state when, one Sunday, I heard my master preach from these words
out of the Revelations, chap. i. v. 7. _"Behold, He cometh in the clouds
and every eye shall see him and they that pierc'd Him."_ These words
affected me excessively; I was in great agonies because I thought my
master directed them to me only; and, I fancied, that he observ'd me
with unusual earnestness--I was farther confirm'd in this belief as I
look'd round the church, and could see no one person beside myself in
such grief and distress as I was; I began to think that my master hated
me, and was very desirous to go home, to my own country; for I thought
that if God did come (as he said) He would be sure to be most angry with
_me_, as I did not know what He was, nor had ever heard of him before.

I went home in great trouble, but said nothing to any body.--I was
somewhat afraid of my master; I thought he disliked me.--The next text I
heard him preach from was, Heb. xii. 14. _"follow peace with all men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the LORD."_ he preached the
law so severely, that it made me tremble.--he said, that GOD would judge
the whole world; Ethiopia, Asia, and Africa, and every where.--I was
now excessively perplexed, and undetermined what to do; as I had now
reason to believe my situation would be equally bad to go, as to
stay.--I kept these thoughts to myself, and said nothing to any person
whatever.

I should have complained to my good mistress of this great trouble of
mind, but she had been a little strange to me for several days before
this happened, occasioned by a story told of me by one of the maids. The
servants were all jealous, and envied me the regard, and favour shewn me
by my master and mistress; and the Devil being always ready, and
diligent in wickedness, had influenced this girl, to make a lye on
me.--This happened about hay-harvest, and one day when I was unloading
the waggon to put the hay into the barn, she watched an opportunity, in
my absence, to take the fork out of the stick, and hide it: when I came
again to my work, and could not find it, I was a good deal vexed, but I
concluded it was dropt somewhere among the hay; so I went and bought
another with my own money: when the girl saw that I had another, she was
so malicious that she told my mistress I was very unfaithful, and not
the person she took me for; and that she knew, I had, without my
master's permission, order'd many things in his name, that he must pay
for; and as a proof of my carelessness produc'd the fork she had taken
out of the stick, and said, she had found it out of doors--My Lady, not
knowing the truth of these things, was a little shy to me, till she
mention'd it, and then I soon cleared myself, and convinc'd her that
these accusations were false.

I continued in a most unhappy state for many days. My good mistress
insisted on knowing what was the matter. When I made known my situation
she gave me John Bunyan on the holy war, to read; I found his experience
similar to my own, which gave me reason to suppose he must be a bad man;
as I was convinc'd of my own corrupt nature, and the misery of my own
heart: and as he acknowledg'd that he was likewise in the same
condition, I experienc'd no relief at all in reading his work, but
rather the reverse.--I took the book to my lady, and inform'd her I did
not like it at all, it was concerning a wicked man as bad as myself; and
I did not chuse to read it, and I desir'd her to give me another, wrote
by a better man that was holy and without sin.--She assur'd me that
John Bunyan was a good man, but she could not convince me; I thought
him to be too much like myself to be upright, as his experience seem'd
to answer with my own.

I am very sensible that nothing but the great power and unspeakable
mercies of the Lord could relieve my soul from the heavy burden it
laboured under at that time.--A few days after my master gave me
Baxter's _Call to the unconverted_. This was no relief to me neither; on
the contrary it occasioned as much distress in me as the other had
before done, _as it_ invited all to come to _Christ_ and I found myself
so wicked and miserable that I could not come--This consideration threw
me into agonies that cannot be described; insomuch that I even attempted
to put an end to my life--I took one of the large case-knives, and went
into the stable with an intent to destroy myself; and as I endeavoured
with all my strength to force the knife into my side, it bent double. I
was instantly struck with horror at the thought of my own rashness, and
my conscience told me that had I succeeded in this attempt I should
probably have gone to hell.

I could find no relief, nor the least shadow of comfort; the extreme
distress of my mind so affected my health that I continued very ill for
three Days, and Nights; and would admit of no means to be taken for my
recovery, though my lady was very kind, and sent many things to me; but
I rejected every means of relief and wished to die--I would not go into
my own bed, but lay in the stable upon straw--I felt all the horrors of
a troubled conscience, so hard to be born, and saw all the vengeance of
God ready to overtake me--I was sensible that there was no way for me to
be saved unless I came to _Christ_, and I could not come to Him: I
thought that it was impossible He should receive such a sinner as me.

The last night that I continued in this place, in the midst of my
distress these words were brought home upon my mind, _"Behold the Lamb
of God."_ I was something comforted at this, and began to grow easier
and wished for day that I might find these words in my bible--I rose
very early the following morning, and went to my school-master, Mr.
Vanosdore, and communicated the situation of my mind to him; he was
greatly rejoiced to find me enquiring the way to Zion, and blessed the
Lord who had worked so wonderfully for me a poor heathen.--I was more
familiar with this good gentleman than with my master, or any other
person; and found myself more at liberty to talk to him: he encouraged
me greatly, and prayed with me frequently, and I was always benefited by
his discourse.

About a quarter of a mile from my Master's house stood a large
remarkably fine Oak-tree, in the midst of a wood; I often used to be
employed there in cutting down trees, (a work I was very fond of) I
seldom failed going to this place every day; sometimes twice a day if I
could be spared. It was the highest pleasure I ever experienced to set
under this Oak; for there I used to pour out all my complaints to the
LORD: and when I had any particular grievance I used to go there, and
talk to the tree, and tell my sorrows, as if it had been to a friend.

Here I often lamented my own wicked heart, and undone state; and found
more comfort and consolation than I ever was sensible of
before.--Whenever I was treated with ridicule or contempt, I used to
come here and find peace. I now began to relish the book my Master gave
me, Baxter's _Call to the unconverted_, and took great delight in it. I
was always glad to be employ'd in cutting wood, 'twas a great part of my
business, and I follow'd it with delight, as I was then quite alone and
my heart lifted up to GOD, and I was enabled to pray continually; and
blessed for ever be his Holy Name, he faithfully answer'd my prayers. I
can never be thankful enough to Almighty GOD for the many comfortable
opportunities I experienced there.

It is possible the circumstance I am going to relate will not gain
credit with many; but this I know, that the joy and comfort it conveyed
to me, cannot be expressed and only conceived by those who have
experienced the like.

I was one day in a most delightful frame of mind; my heart so overflowed
with love and gratitude to the Author of all my comforts.--I was so
drawn out of myself, and so fill'd and awed by the Presence of God that
I saw (or thought I saw) light inexpressible dart down from heaven upon
me, and shone around me for the space of a minute.--I continued on my
knees, and joy unspeakable took possession of my soul.--The peace and
serenity which filled my mind after this was wonderful, and cannot be
told.--I would not have changed situations, or been any one but myself
for the whole world. I blest God for my poverty, that I had no worldly
riches or grandeur to draw my heart from Him. I wish'd at that time, if
it had been possible for me, to have continued on that spot for ever. I
felt an unwillingness in myself to have any thing more to do with the
world, or to mix with society again. I seemed to possess a full
assurance that my sins were forgiven me. I went home all my way
rejoicing, and this text of scripture came full upon my mind. _"And I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts that
they shall not depart from me."_ The first opportunity that presented
itself, I went to my old school-master, and made known to him the happy
state of my soul who joined with me in praise to God for his mercy to me
the vilest of sinners.--I was now perfectly easy, and had hardly a wish
to make beyond what I possess'd, when my temporal comforts were all
blasted by the death of my dear and worthy Master Mr. Freelandhouse, who
was taken from this world rather suddenly: he had but a short illness,
and died of a fever. I held his hand in mine when he departed; he told
me he had given me my freedom. I was at liberty to go where I would.--He
added that he had always pray'd for me and hop'd I should be kept unto
the end. My master left me by his will ten pounds, and my freedom.

I found that if he had lived 'twas his intention to take me with him to
Holland, as he had often mention'd me to some friends of his there that
were desirous to see me; but I chose to continue with my Mistress who
was as good to me as if she had been my mother.

The loss of Mr. Freelandhouse distress'd me greatly, but I was render'd
still more unhappy by the clouded and perplex'd situation of my mind;
the great enemy of my soul being ready to torment me, would present my
own misery to me in such striking light, and distress me with doubts,
fears, and such a deep sense of my own unworthiness, that after all the
comfort and encouragement I had received, I was often tempted to believe
I should be a Cast-away at last.--The more I saw of the Beauty and Glory
of God, the more I was humbled under a sense of my own vileness. I
often repair'd to my old place of prayer; I seldom came away without
consolation. One day this Scripture was wonderfully apply'd to my mind,
_"And ye are compleat in Him which is the Head of all principalities and
power."_--The Lord was pleas'd to comfort me by the application of many
gracious promises at times when I was ready to sink under my troubles.
_"Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by Him seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them._ Hebrews
x. ver. 14. _For by one offering He hath perfected for ever them that
are sanctified."_

My kind, indulgent Mistress liv'd but two years after my Master. Her
death was a great affliction to me. She left five sons, all gracious
young men, and Ministers of the Gospel.--I continued with them all, one
after another, till they died; they liv'd but four years after their
parents. When it pleased God to take them to Himself, I was left quite
destitute, without a friend in the world. But I who had so often
experienced the Goodness of GOD, trusted in Him to do what He pleased
with me.--In this helpless condition I went in the wood to prayer as
usual; and tho' the snow was a considerable height, I was not sensible
of cold, or any other inconveniency.--At times indeed when I saw the
world frowning round me, I was tempted to think that the LORD had
forsaken me. I found great relief from the contemplation of these words
in Isaiah xlix. v. 16. _"Behold I have graven thee on the palms of my
hands; thy walls are continually before me."_ And very many comfortable
promises were sweetly applied to me. The lxxxix. Psalm and 34th verse,
_"My covenant will I not break nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips."_ Hebrews, chap. xvi. v. 17, 18. Phillipians, chap. i. v. 6;
and several more.

As I had now lost all my dear and valued friends every place in the
world was alike to me. I had for a great while entertain'd a desire to
come to England.--I imagined that all the Inhabitants of this Island
were _Holy_; because all those that had visited my Master from thence
were good, (Mr. Whitefield was his particular friend) and the authors of
the books that had been given me were all English. But above all places
in the world I wish'd to see Kidderminster, for I could not but think
that on the spot where Mr. Baxter had liv'd, and preach'd, the people
must be all _Righteous_.

The situation of my affairs requir'd that I should tarry a little
longer in New-York, as I was something in debt, and was embarrass'd how
to pay it.--About this time a young Gentleman that was a particular
acquaintance of one of my young Master's, pretended to be a friend to
me, and promis'd to pay my debts, which was three pounds; and he assur'd
me he would never expect the money again.--But, in less than a month, he
came and demanded it; and when I assur'd him I had nothing to pay, he
threatened to sell me.--Though I knew he had no right to do that, yet as
I had no friend in the world to go to, it alarm'd me greatly.--At length
he purpos'd my going a Privateering, that I might by these means, be
enabled to pay him, to which I agreed.--Our Captain's name was ---- I
went in Character of Cook to him.--Near St. Domingo we came up to five
French ships, Merchant-men.--We had a very smart engagement that
continued from eight in the morning till three in the afternoon; when
victory declar'd on our side.--Soon after this we were met by three
English ships which join'd us, and that encourag'd us to attack a fleet
of 36 Ships.--We boarded the three first and then follow'd the others;
and had the same success with twelve; but the rest escap'd us.--There
was a great deal of blood shed, and I was near death several times, but
the LORD preserv'd me.

I met with many enemies, and much persecution, among the sailors; one of
them was particularly unkind to me, and studied ways to vex and teaze
me.--I can't help mentioning one circumstance that hurt me more than all
the rest, which was, that he snatched a book out of my hand that I was
very fond of, and used frequently to amuse myself with, and threw it
into the sea.--But what is remarkable he was the first that was killed
in our engagement.--I don't pretend to say that this happen'd because he
was not my friend: but I thought 'twas a very awful Providence to see
how the enemies of the LORD are cut off.

Our Captain was a cruel hard-hearted man. I was excessively sorry for
the prisoners we took in general; but the pitiable case of one young
Gentleman grieved me to the heart.--He appear'd very amiable; was
strikingly handsome. Our Captain took four thousand pounds from him; but
that did not satisfy him, as he imagin'd he was possess'd of more, and
had somewhere conceal'd it, so that the Captain threatened him with
death, at which he appear'd in the deepest distress, and took the
buckles out of his shoes, and untied his hair, which was very fine, and
long; and in which several very valuable rings were fasten'd. He came
into the Cabbin to me, and in the most obliging terms imaginable ask'd
for something to eat and drink; which when I gave him, he was so
thankful and pretty in his manner that my heart bled for him; and I
heartily wish'd that I could have spoken in any language in which the
ship's crew would not have understood me; that I might have let him know
his danger; for I heard the Captain say he was resolv'd upon his death;
and he put his barbarous design into execution, for he took him on shore
with one of the sailors, and there they shot him.

This circumstance affected me exceedingly, I could not put him out of my
mind a long while.--When we return'd to New-York the Captain divided the
prize-money among us, that we had taken. When I was call'd upon to
receive my part, I waited upon Mr. ----, (the Gentleman that paid my debt
and was the occasion of my going abroad) to know if he chose to go with
me to receive my money or if I should bring him what I owed.--He chose
to go with me; and when the Captain laid my money on the table ('twas an
hundred and thirty-five pounds) I desir'd Mr. ---- to take what I was
indebted to him; and he swept it all into his handkerchief, and would
never be prevail'd on to give a farthing of money, nor any thing at all
beside.--And he likewise secur'd a hogshead of sugar which was my due
from the same ship. The Captain was very angry with him for this piece
of cruelty to me, as was every other person that heard it.--But I have
reason to believe (as he was one of the Principal Merchants in the city)
that he transacted business for him and on that account did not chuse to
quarrel with him.

At this time a very worthy Gentleman, a Wine Merchant, his name Dunscum,
took me under his protection, and would have recovered my money for me
if I had chose it; but I told him to let it alone; that I wou'd rather
be quiet.--I believed that it would not prosper with him, and so it
happen'd, for by a series of losses and misfortunes he became poor, and
was soon after drowned, as he was on a party of pleasure.--The vessel
was driven out to sea, and struck against a rock by which means every
soul perished.

I was very much distress'd when I heard it, and felt greatly for his
family who were reduc'd to very low circumstances.--I never knew how to
set a proper value on money. If I had but a little meat and drink to
supply the present necessaries of life, I never wish'd for more; and
when I had any I always gave it if ever I saw an object in distress. If
it was not for my dear Wife and Children I should pay as little regard
to money now as I did at that time.--I continu'd some time with Mr.
Dunscum as his servant; he was very kind to me.--But I had a vast
inclination to visit England, and wish'd continually that it would
please Providence to make a clear way for me to see this Island. I
entertain'd a notion that if I could get to England I should never more
experience either cruelty or ingratitude, so that I was very desirous to
get among Christians. I knew Mr. Whitefield very well.--I had heard him
preach often at New-York. In this disposition I listed in the
twenty-eighth Regiment of Foot, who were design'd for Martinico in the
late war.--We went in Admiral Pocock's fleet from New-York to Barbadoes;
from thence to Martinico.--When that was taken we proceeded to the
Havannah, and took that place likewise.--There I got discharged.

I was then worth about thirty pounds, but I never regarded money in the
least, nor would I tarry to receive my prize-money least I should lose
my chance of going to England.--I went with the Spanish prisoners to
Spain; and came to Old-England with the English prisoners.--I cannot
describe my joy when we were within sight of Portsmouth. But I was
astonished when we landed to hear the inhabitants of that place curse
and swear, and otherwise profane. I expected to find nothing but
goodness, gentleness and meekness in this Christian Land, I then
suffer'd great perplexities of mind.

I enquir'd if any serious Christian people resided there, the woman I
made this enquiry of, answer'd me in the affirmative; and added that she
was one of them.--I was heartily glad to hear her say so. I thought I
could give her my whole heart: she kept a Public-House. I deposited with
her all the money that I had not an immediate occasion for; as I thought
it would be safer with her.--It was 25 guineas but 6 of them I desired
her to lay out to the best advantage, to buy me some shirts, hat and
some other necessaries. I made her a present of a very handsome large
looking glass that I brought with me from Martinico, in order to
recompence her for the trouble I had given her. I must do this woman the
justice to acknowledge that she did lay out some little for my use, but
the 19 guineas and part of the 6, with my watch, she would not return,
but denied that I ever gave it her.

I soon perceived that I was got among bad people, who defrauded me of my
money and watch; and that all my promis'd happiness was blasted, I had
no friend but GOD and I pray'd to Him earnestly. I could scarcely
believe it possible that the place where so many eminent Christians had
lived and preached could abound with so much wickedness and deceit. I
thought it worse than _Sodom_ (considering the great advantages they
have) I cryed like a child and that almost continually: at length GOD
heard my prayers and rais'd me a friend indeed.

This publican had a brother who lived on Portsmouth-common, his wife was
a very serious good woman.--When she heard of the treatment I had met
with, she came and enquired into my real situation and was greatly
troubled at the ill usage I had received, and took me home to her own
house.--I began now to rejoice, and my prayer was turned into praise.
She made use of all the arguments in her power to prevail on her who had
wronged me, to return my watch and money, but it was to no purpose, as
she had given me no receipt and I had nothing to show for it, I could
not demand it.--My good friend was excessively angry with her and
obliged her to give me back four guineas, which she said she gave me out
of charity: Though in fact it was my own, and much more. She would have
employed some rougher means to oblige her to give up my money, but I
would not suffer her, let it go says I "My GOD is in heaven." Still I
did not mind my loss in the least; all that grieved me was, that I had
been disappointed in finding some Christian friends, with whom I hoped
to enjoy a little sweet and comfortable society.

I thought the best method that I could take now, was to go to London,
and find out Mr. Whitefield, who was the only living soul I knew in
England, and get him to direct me to some way or other to procure a
living without being troublesome to any Person.--I took leave of my
Christian friend at Portsmouth, and went in the stage to London.--A
creditable tradesman in the City, who went up with me in the stage,
offer'd to show me the way to Mr. Whitefield's Tabernacle. Knowing that
I was a perfect stranger, I thought it very kind, and accepted his
offer; but he obliged me to give him half-a-crown for going with me, and
likewise insisted on my giving him five shillings more for conducting me
to Dr. Gifford's Meeting.

I began now to entertain a very different idea of the inhabitants of
England than what I had figur'd to myself before I came amongst
them.--Mr. Whitefield receiv'd me very friendly, was heartily glad to
see me, and directed me to a proper place to board and lodge in
Petticoat-Lane, till he could think of some way to settle me in, and
paid for my lodging, and all my expences. The morning after I came to my
new lodging, as I was at breakfast with the gentlewoman of the house, I
heard the noise of some looms over our heads: I enquir'd what it was;
she told me a person was weaving silk.--I express'd a great desire to
see it, and ask'd if I might: She told me she would go up with me; she
was sure I should be very welcome. She was as good as her word, and as
soon as we enter'd the room, the person that was weaving look'd about,
and smiled upon us, and I loved her from that moment.--She ask'd me many
questions, and I in turn talk'd a great deal to her. I found she was a
member of Mr. Allen's Meeting, and I begun to entertain a good opinion
of her, though I was almost afraid to indulge this inclination, least
she should prove like all the rest I had met with at Portsmouth, &c. and
which had almost given me a dislike to all white women.--But after a
short acquaintance I had the happiness to find she was very different,
and quite sincere, and I was not without hope that she entertain'd some
esteem for me. We often went together to hear Dr. Gifford, and as I had
always a propensity to relieve every object in distress as far as I was
able, I used to give to all that complain'd to me; sometimes half a
guinea at a time, as I did not understand the real value of it.--This
gracious, good woman took great pains to correct and advise me in that
and many other respects.

After I had been in London about six weeks I was recommended to the
notice of some of my late Master Mr. Freelandhouse's acquaintance, who
had heard him speak frequently of me. I was much persuaded by them to go
to Holland.--My Master lived there before he bought me, and used to
speak of me so respectfully among his friends there, that it raised in
them a curiosity to see me; particularly the Gentlemen engaged in the
Ministry, who expressed a desire to hear my experience and examine me. I
found that it was my good old Master's design that I should have gone if
he had lived; for which reason I resolved upon going to Holland, and
informed my dear friend Mr. Whitefield of my intention; he was much
averse to my going at first, but after I gave him my reasons appeared
very well satisfied. I likewise informed my Betty (the good woman that I
have mentioned above) of my determination to go to Holland and I told
her that I believed she was to be my Wife: that if it was the LORD's
Will I desired it, but not else.--She made me very little answer, but
has since told me, she did not think it at that time.

I embarked at Tower-wharf at four o'clock in the morning, and arriv'd at
Amsterdam the next day by three o'clock in the afternoon. I had several
letters of recommendation to my old master's friends, who receiv'd me
very graciously. Indeed, one of the chief Ministers was particularly
good to me; he kept me at his house a long while, and took great
pleasure in asking questions, which I answer'd with delight, being
always ready to say, _"Come unto me all ye that fear GOD, and I will
tell what he hath done for my Soul."_ I cannot but admire the footsteps
of Providence; astonish'd that I should be so wonderfully preserved!
Though the Grandson of a King, I have wanted bread, and should have been
glad of the hardest crust I ever saw. I who, at home, was surrounded and
guarded by slaves, so that no indifferent person might approach me, and
clothed with gold, have been inhumanly threatened with death; and
frequently wanted clothing to defend me from the inclemency of the
weather; yet I never murmured, nor was I discontented.--I am willing,
and even desirous to be counted as nothing, a stranger in the world,
and a pilgrim here; for _"I know that my Redeemer liveth,"_ and I'm
thankful for every trial and trouble that I've met with, as I am not
without hope that they have been all sanctified to me.

The Calvinist Ministers desired to hear my Experience from myself, which
proposal I was very well pleased with: So I stood before 38 Ministers
every Thursday for seven weeks together, and they were all very well
satisfied, and persuaded I was what I pretended to be.--They wrote down
my experience as I spoke it; and the Lord Almighty was with me at that
time in a remarkable manner, and gave me words and enabled me to answer
them; so great was his mercy to take me in hand a poor blind heathen.

At this time a very rich Merchant at Amsterdam offered to take me into
his family in the capacity of his Butler, and I very willingly accepted
it.--He was a gracious worthy Gentleman and very good to me.--He treated
me more like a friend than a servant.--I tarried there a twelvemonth but
was not thoroughly contented, I wanted to see my wife; (that is now) and
for that reason I wished to return to _England_, I wrote to her once in
my absence, but she did not answer my letter; and I must acknowledge if
she had, it would have given me a less opinion of her.--My Master and
Mistress persuaded me much not to leave them and likewise their two Sons
who entertained a good opinion of me; and if I had found my Betty
married on my arrival in England, I should have returned to them again
immediately.

My Lady purposed my marrying her maid; she was an agreeable young woman,
had saved a good deal of money, but I could not fancy her, though she
was willing to accept of me, but I told her my inclinations were engaged
in England, and I could think of no other Person.--On my return home, I
found my Betty disengaged.--She had refused several offers in my
absence, and told her sister that, she thought, if ever she married I
was to be her husband.

Soon after I came home, I waited on Doctor Gifford who took me into his
family and was exceedingly, good to me. The character of this pious
worthy Gentleman is well known; my praise can be of no use or
signification at all.--I hope I shall ever gratefully remember the many
favours I have received from him.--Soon after I came to Doctor Gifford
I expressed a desire to be admitted into their Church, and set down with
them; they told me I must first be baptized; so I gave in my experience
before the Church, with which they were very well satisfied, and I was
baptized by Doctor Gifford with some others. I then made known my
intentions of being married; but I found there were many objections
against it because the person I had fixed on was poor. She was a widow,
her husband had left her in debt, and with a child, so that they
persuaded me against it out of real regard to me.--But I had promised
and was resolved to have her; as I knew her to be a gracious woman, her
poverty was no objection to me, as they had nothing else to say against
her. When my friends found that they could not alter my opinion
respecting her, they wrote to Mr. Allen, the Minister she attended, to
persuade her to leave me; but he replied that he would not interfere at
all, that we might do as we would. I was resolved that all my wife's
little debt should be paid before we were married; so that I sold almost
every thing I had and with all the money I could raise cleared all that
she owed, and I never did any thing with a better will in all my Life,
because I firmly believed that we should be very happy together, and so
it prov'd, for she was given me from the LORD. And I have found her a
blessed partner, and we have never repented, tho' we have gone through
many great troubles and difficulties.

My wife got a very good living by weaving, and could do extremely well;
but just at that time there was great disturbance among the weavers; so
that I was afraid to let my wife work, least they should insist on my
joining the rioters which I could not think of, and, possibly, if I had
refused to do so they would have knock'd me on the head.--So that by
these means my wife could get no employ, neither had I work enough to
maintain my family. We had not yet been married a year before all these
misfortunes overtook us.

Just at this time a gentleman, that seemed much concerned for us,
advised me to go into Essex with him and promised to get me employed.--I
accepted his kind proposal, and he spoke to a friend of his, a Quaker, a
gentleman of large fortune, who resided a little way out of the town of
_Colchester_, his name was _Handbarar_; he ordered his steward to set me
to work. There were several employed in the same way with myself. I was
very thankful and contented though my wages were but small.--I was
allowed but eight pence a day, and found myself; but after I had been in
this situation for a fortnight, my Master, being told that a Black was
at work for him, had an inclination to see me. He was pleased to talk to
me for some time, and at last enquired what wages I had; when I told him
he declared, it was too little, and immediately ordered his Steward to
let me have eighteen pence a day, which he constantly gave me after; and
I then did extremely well.

I did not bring my wife with me: I came first alone and it was my
design, if things answered according to our wishes, to send for her--I
was now thinking to desire her to come to me when I receiv'd a letter to
inform me she was just brought to bed and in want of many
necessaries.--This news was a great trial to me and a fresh affliction:
but my God, _faithful and abundant in mercy_, forsook me not in this
trouble.--As I could not read _English_, I was obliged to apply to some
one to read the letter I received, relative to my wife. I was directed
by the good Providence of God to a worthy young gentleman, a Quaker, and
friend of my Master.--I desired he would take the trouble to read my
letter for me, which he readily comply'd with and was greatly moved and
affected at the contents; insomuch that he said he would undertake to
make a gathering for me, which he did and was the first to contribute to
it himself. The money was sent that evening to London by a person who
happen'd to be going there: nor was this All the goodness that I
experienced from these kind friends, for, as soon as my wife came about
and was fit to travel, they sent for her to me, and were at the whole
expence of her coming; so evidently has the love and mercy of God
appeared through every trouble that ever I experienced. We went on very
comfortably all the summer.--We lived in a little cottage near Mr.
_Handbarrar's_ House; but when the winter came on I was discharged, as
he had no further occasion for me. And now the prospect began to darken
upon us again. We thought it most adviseable to move our habitation a
little nearer to the Town, as the house we lived in was very cold, and
wet, and ready to tumble down.

The boundless goodness of GOD to me has been so very great, that with
the most humble gratitude I desire to prostrate myself before Him; for I
have been wonderfully supported in every affliction. My GOD never left
me. I perceived light still through the thickest darkness.

My dear wife and I were now both unemployed, we could get nothing to do.
The winter prov'd remarkably severe, and we were reduc'd to the greatest
distress imaginable.--I was always very shy of asking for any thing; I
could never beg; neither did I chuse to make known our wants to any
person, for fear of offending as we were entire strangers; but our last
bit of bread was gone, and I was obliged to think of something to do for
our support.--I did not mind for myself at all; but to see my dear wife
and children in want pierc'd me to the heart.--I now blam'd myself for
bringing her from London, as doubtless had we continued there we might
have found friends to keep us from starving. The snow was at this season
remarkably deep; so that we could see no prospect of being relieved. In
this melancholy situation, not knowing what step to pursue, I resolved
to make my case known to a Gentleman's Gardiner that lived near us, and
entreat him to employ me: but when I came to him, my courage failed me,
and I was ashamed to make known our real situation.--I endeavoured all I
could to prevail on him to set me to work, but to no purpose: he assur'd
me it was not in his power: but just as I was about to leave him, he
asked me if I would accept of some Carrots? I took them with great
thankfulness and carried them home: he gave me four, they were very
large and fine.--We had nothing to make fire with, so consequently could
not boil them: But was glad to have them to eat _raw_. Our youngest
child was quite an infant; so that my wife was obliged to chew it, and
fed her in that manner for several days.--We allowed ourselves but one
every day, least they should not last 'till we could get some other
supply. I was unwilling to eat at all myself; nor would I take any the
last day that we continued in this situation, as I could not bear the
thought that my dear wife and children would be in want of every means
of support. We lived in this manner, 'till our carrots were all gone:
then my Wife began to lament because of our poor babies: but I comforted
her all I could; still hoping, and believing that _my_ GOD would not
let us die: but that it would please Him to relieve us, which _He_ did
by almost a Miracle.

We went to bed, as usual, before it was quite dark, (as we had neither
fire nor candle) but had not been there long before some person knocked
at the door & enquir'd if _James Albert_ lived there? I answer'd in the
affirmative, and rose immediately; as soon as I open'd the door I found
it was the servant of an eminent Attorney who resided at
_Colchester_.--He ask'd me how it was with me? if I was not almost
starv'd? I burst out a crying, and told him I was indeed. He said his
master suppos'd so, and that he wanted to speak with me, and I must
return with him. This Gentleman's name was _Danniel_, he was a sincere,
good Christian. He used to stand and talk with me frequently when I
work'd in the road for Mr. _Handbarrar_, and would have employed me
himself, if I had wanted work.--When I came to his house he told me that
he had thought a good deal about me of late, and was apprehensive that I
must be in want, and could not be satisfied till he sent to enquire
after me. I made known my distress to him, at which he was greatly
affected; and generously gave me a guinea; and promis'd to be kind to me
in future. I could not help exclaiming. _O the boundless mercies of my
God!_ I pray'd unto Him, and He has heard me; I trusted in Him and He
has preserv'd me: where shall I begin to praise Him, or how shall I love
Him enough?

I went immediately and bought some bread and cheese and coal and carried
it home. My dear wife was rejoiced to see me return with something to
eat. She instantly got up and dressed our Babies, while I made a fire,
and the first Nobility in the land never made a more comfortable
meal.--We did not forget to thank the LORD for all his goodness to
us.--Soon after this, as the spring came on, Mr. Peter _Daniel_ employed
me in helping to pull down a house, and rebuilding it. I had then very
good work, and full employ: he sent for my wife, and children to
_Colchester_, and provided us a house where we lived very
comfortably.--I hope I shall always gratefully acknowledge his kindness
to myself and family. I worked at this house for more than a year, till
it was finished; and after that I was employed by several successively,
and was never so happy as when I had something to do; but perceiving
the winter coming on, and work rather slack, I was apprehensive that we
should again be in want or become troublesome to our friends.

I had at this time an offer made me of going to _Norwich_ and having
constant employ.--My wife seemed pleased with this proposal, as she
supposed she might get work there in the weaving-manufactory, being the
business she was brought up to, and more likely to succeed there than
any other place; and we thought as we had an opportunity of moving to a
Town where we could both be employ'd it was most adviseable to do so;
and that probably we might settle there for our lives.--When this step
was resolv'd on, I went first alone to see how it would answer; which I
very much repented after, for it was not in my power immediately to send
my wife any supply, as I fell into the hands of a Master that was
neither kind nor considerate; and she was reduced to great distress, so
that she was oblig'd to sell the few goods that we had, and when I sent
for her was under the disagreeable necessity of parting with our bed.

When she came to _Norwich_ I hired a room ready furnished.--I
experienced a great deal of difference in the carriage of my Master from
what I had been accustomed to from some of my other Masters. He was very
irregular in his payments to me.--My wife hired a loom and wove all the
leisure time she had and we began to do very well, till we were
overtaken by fresh misfortunes. Our three poor children fell ill of the
small pox; this was a great trial to us; but still I was persuaded in
myself we should not be forsaken.--And I did all in my power to keep my
dear partner's spirits from sinking. Her whole attention now was taken
up with the children as she could mind nothing else, and all I could get
was but little to support a family in such a situation, beside paying
for the hire of our room, which I was obliged to omit doing for several
weeks: but the woman to whom we were indebted would not excuse us, tho'
I promised she should have the very first money we could get after my
children came about, but she would not be satisfied and had the cruelty
to threaten us that if we did not pay her immediately she would turn us
all into the street.

The apprehension of this plunged me in the deepest distress,
considering the situation of my poor babies: if they had been in health
I should have been less sensible of this misfortune. But My GOD, _still
faithful to his promise_, raised me a friend. Mr. Henry Gurdney, a
Quaker, a gracious gentleman heard of our distress, he sent a servant of
his own to the woman we hired the room of, paid our rent, and bought all
the goods with my wife's loom and gave it us all.

Some other gentlemen, hearing of his design, were pleased to assist him
in these generous acts, for which we never can be thankful enough; after
this my children soon came about; we began to do pretty well again; my
dear wife work'd hard and constant when she could get work, but it was
upon a disagreeable footing as her employ was so uncertain, sometimes
she could get nothing to do and at other times when the weavers of
_Norwich_ had orders from London they were so excessively hurried, that
the people they employ'd were often oblig'd to work on the
_Sabbath-day_; but this my wife would never do, and it was matter of
uneasiness to us that we could not get our living in a regular manner,
though we were both diligent, industrious, and willing to work. I was
far from being happy in my Master, he did not use me well. I could
scarcely ever get my money from him; but I continued patient 'till it
pleased GOD to alter my situation.

My worthy friend Mr. Gurdney advised me to follow the employ of chopping
chaff, and bought me an instrument for that purpose. There were but few
people in the town that made this their business beside myself; so that
I did very well indeed and we became easy and happy.--But we did not
continue long in this comfortable state: Many of the inferior people
were envious and ill-natur'd and set up the same employ and work'd under
price on purpose to get my business from me, and they succeeded so well
that I could hardly get any thing to do, and became again unfortunate:
Nor did this misfortune come alone, for just at this time we lost one of
our little girls who died of a fever; this circumstance occasion'd us
new troubles, for the Baptist Minister refused to bury her because we
were not their members. The Parson of the parish denied us because she
had never been baptized. I applied to the Quakers, but met with no
success; this was one of the greatest trials I ever met with, as we did
not know what to do with our poor baby.--At length I resolv'd to dig a
grave in the garden behind the house, and bury her there; when the
Parson of the parish sent for me to tell me he would bury the child, but
did not chuse to read the burial service over her. I told him I did not
mind whether he would or not, as the child could not hear it.

We met with a great deal of ill treatment after this, and found it very
difficult to live.--We could scarcely get work to do, and were obliged
to pawn our cloaths. We were ready to sink under our troubles.--When I
purposed to my wife to go to _Kidderminster_ and try if we could do
there. I had always an inclination for that place, and now more than
ever as I had heard _Mr. Fawcet_ mentioned in the most respectful
manner, as a pious worthy Gentleman; and I had seen his name in a
favourite book of mine, Baxter's _Saints everlasting rest_, and as the
Manufactory of _Kidderminster_ seemed to promise my wife some
employment, she readily came into my way of thinking.

I left her once more, and set out for _Kidderminster_, in order to judge
if the situation would suit us.--As soon as I came there I waited
immediately on _Mr. Fawcet_, who was pleased to receive me very kindly
and recommended me to _Mr. Watson_ who employed me in twisting silk and
worsted together. I continued here about a fortnight, and when I thought
it would answer our expectation, I returned to _Norwich_ to fetch my
wife; she was then near her time, and too much indisposed. So we were
obliged to tarry until she was brought to bed, and as soon as she could
conveniently travel we came to _Kidderminster_, but we brought nothing
with us as we were obliged to sell all we had to pay our debts and the
expences of my wife's illness, &c.

Such is our situation at present.--My wife, by hard labor at the loom,
does every thing that can be expected from her towards the maintenance
of our family; and God is pleased to incline the hearts of his People at
times to yield us their charitable assistance; being myself through age
and infirmity able to contribute but little to their support. As
Pilgrims, and very poor Pilgrims, we are travelling through many
difficulties towards our Heavenly Home, and waiting patiently for his
gracious call, when the Lord shall deliver us out of the evils of this
present world and bring us to the Everlasting Glories of the world to
come.--To HIM be Praise for Ever and Ever, AMEN.


FINIS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative Of The Most Remarkable
Particulars In The Life Of James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw, An African Prince, As Related By Himself, by James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAMES ALBERT UKAWSAW GRONNIOSAW ***

***** This file should be named 15042.txt or 15042.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/0/4/15042/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Charles Aldarondo and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
