The Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Vol. 44, No. 4,
April, 1890, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The American Missionary -- Vol. 44, No. 4, April, 1890

Author: Various

Release Date: April 12, 2005 [EBook #15609]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY -- ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










AMERICAN MISSIONARY

APRIL, 1890. VOL. XLIV. NO. 4.




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL

REMOVAL--REV. FRANK P. WOODBURY, D.D.

INDIAN CIVILIZATION--EMIGRATION OF COLORED PEOPLE

A COMPARISON

THE STEREOPTICON IN NEW ENGLAND

MRS. JANE TWICHELL WARE--PARAGRAPHS

AN ENTERPRISING WOMAN



THE SOUTH.

DEDICATION OF CHANDLER NORMAL INSTITUTE

CONGREGATIONALISM AROUND PARIS, TEXAS

MISSION CHURCH--PROSPEROUS CHURCH

THE WHITE CROSS LEAGUE

BEREA AND TEMPERANCE--"BECCA MUST GO"


THE INDIANS.

STREAKS OF LIGHT--ELIZABETH WINYAN

AN EXEMPLARY MOTHER


THE CHINESE.

TWO CHINESE ANNIVERSARIES


ADDRESS.

A COLORED MAN SPEAKS FOR HIS RACE

REV. GEO. M. MCCLELLAN


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

PARAGRAPHS

NOVEL DISH--MANY-SIDED WORK

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


RECEIPTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.V.


_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y. Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass. Rev.
F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill. Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass. Rev. HENRY HOPKINS,
D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D.,
_Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House. N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

PETER McCARTEE. CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman. ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


_For Three Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, ELBERT
B. MONROE.


_For Two Years._

J.E. RANKIN, WM. H. WARD, J.W. COOPER, JOHN H. WASHBURN, EDMUND L.
CHAMPLIN.


_For One Year._

LYMAN ABBOTT, CHAS. A. HULL, CLINTON B. FISK, ADDISON P. FOSTER ALBERT
J. LYMAN.


_District Secretaries_.

Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._ Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D.,
_151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._ Rev. C.W. HIATT, _64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XLIV. APRIL, 1890. No. 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association

       *       *       *       *       *

REMOVAL.


The Rooms of the American Missionary Association are now in the Bible
House, New York City. Correspondents will please address us
accordingly.

Visitors will find our Rooms on the sixth floor of the Bible House,
corner Ninth Street and Fourth Avenue; entrance by elevator on Ninth
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. FRANK P. WOODBURY, D.D.


It gives us great pleasure to announce the acceptance by Rev. Frank P.
Woodbury, D.D., of the position of Corresponding Secretary of this
Association. Since the death of our dear Brother Powell, with the large
increase of special resources and the general expansion of our work, an
addition to our administrative force has become an absolute necessity.
Dr. Woodbury brings to his new position special qualifications. His
eighteen years of successful work in his pastorate at Rockford, Ill.,
and his very effective two years' service in Minneapolis, have made him
acquainted with the work of a pastor and the needs of the churches. In
these pastorates, and in other services for the general interests of the
church, he has shown exceptional administrative gifts. These will find
ample range for activity in the Secretaryship. His public address at
several of our own Annual Meetings and on many other similar occasions,
attest his power as a platform speaker. He will meet with a warm welcome
to the duties of this office, and we are confident that he will receive
an equally cordial greeting in the churches, Conferences and
Associations.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIAN CIVILIZATION--NOW FOR A PUSH FORWARD.


The time has come for new vigor in the Indian service. Gen. Morgan has
been confirmed as Indian Commissioner, and his broad and well-matured
plans are ready to be put into operation. We hope that Congress will
make the necessary appropriations, and that nothing will hinder the
multiplication of Indian schools and the ingathering of pupils. With the
Sioux Indians, a great crisis has come. Their reservation is severed,
and a broad belt is opened in it for the incoming of the white man.
There will, of course, be the rush and confusion of new settlers, with
the almost inevitable demoralization of the Indians. But a still more
serious and protracted evil will grow out of the conflict of the two
races and the temptations to the Indians. If ever the friends of the
Sioux Indians needed to bestir themselves, it is just now. The helping
hand, the open school and the sanctifying Gospel, must forestall all bad
influences. So far as the work of the American Missionary Association is
concerned, the opening of this reservation to white settlement will
necessitate the removal of five or six of its out-stations, occasioning
spiritual loss and additional money appropriations.

While we hail with satisfaction the inauguration of Gen. Morgan's broad
plans, we feel that there should not be the least relaxation on the part
of the churches, in the "contract schools" and in the preaching of the
gospel. From John Eliot down, the gospel has been the great civilizing
power among the Indians, and it will be a fatal mistake to withhold it.
If the new Government policy is successful, the gospel is its essential
adjunct, and if there should be hindrances in carrying out that policy,
the steady stream of gospel influences will be all the more necessary.

       *       *       *       *       *

EMIGRATION OF COLORED PEOPLE.


We have seen a large map of a Southern railroad, on one side of which
were some highly-colored pictures. The first showed the tumble-down
cabin of a colored man, himself, wife and boy carrying from it their few
belongings to the favored land of promise. The next picture shows him
and his family in the woods in his new location, getting ready to build
his house. The third picture represents a fine log house, with green
fields well fenced, a mule and pigs and chickens in the yard; and the
last picture presents a large frame house with a veranda, in which the
colored man is seated in a large arm-chair, reading a magazine, and his
wife sitting by his side in a rocking chair, while near at hand is the
capacious barn, with mules grazing in the adjacent lot.

By the side of each picture is a running comment, supposed to be made by
the colored man himself, describing his hard lot 'where he first lived,
then telling of his purchase in the new land of promise, stating the
price and the terms of purchase; then follows his happy rejoicing over
his new location, and finally his triumphant joy in his wealth and fine
mansion.

It is by such representations, we are told, that the colored people in
various parts of the South are tempted to leave their homes for new
locations. The experience of those of their number who have made such
migrations has not usually been encouraging, and we fear that thousands
more will acquire a good deal of bitter knowledge learned in that same
expensive school.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COMPARISON.

_The French and the Negro._


A writer in the March number of The Forum has drawn a vivid picture of
France in its poverty, misery and tyranny in 1789, and contrasted with
this the thrift, the improved land culture, and the better clothing,
food, home and intelligence of the French peasantry of 1889. The
Revolution of 1789 broke the tyranny of the old crushing regime and
opened the way for the new world that brightens and gladdens the France
of to-day. But the Revolution did not itself make the great change; it
simply made it possible.

Two factors developed in French character were the practical forces in
the new prosperity--economy and the desire for ownership of lands and
homes. That economy was pushed, in many cases, almost to the extreme of
miserly hoarding. We give below a few brief extracts illustrating the
point in question:

    "The life led by a comfortable English or American farmer would
    represent wicked waste and shameful indulgence to a much richer
    French peasant. I, myself, know a laborer on wages of less than
    twenty shillings a week, who by thrift has bought ten acres of the
    magnificent garden land between Fontainebleau and the Seine, worth
    many thousand pounds, on which grow all kinds of fruits and
    vegetables, and the famous dessert grapes; yet who, with all his
    wealth and abundance, denies himself and his two children meat on
    Sundays, and even a drink of the wine which he grows and makes for
    the market."

    "The French peasant has great virtues, but he has the defects of
    his virtues, and his home life is far from idyllic. He is
    laborious, shrewd, enduring, frugal, self-reliant, sober, honest
    and capable of intense self-control for a distant reward; but that
    reward is property in land, in pursuit of which he may become as
    pitiless as a bloodhound."

    "Take him for all in all, he is a strong and noteworthy force in
    modern civilization. Though his country has not the vast mineral
    wealth of England, nor her gigantic development in manufactures
    and in commerce, he has made France one of the richest, most
    solid, most progressive countries on earth. He is quite as frugal
    and patient as the German, and is far more ingenious and skillful.
    He has not the energy of the Englishman, or the elastic spring of
    the American, but he is far more saving and much more provident.
    He 'wastes nothing, and spends little,' and thus, since his
    country comes next to England and America in natural resources and
    national energy, he has built up one of the strongest, most
    self-contained and most durable of modern peoples."

A very significant parallel is presented in these two pictures to one
that may be drawn between the Negro of 1861 and the Negro of 1961. The
Civil War corresponded to the Revolution in France. It broke the fetters
of the slave, and made his future a possibility. If, now, the Negro will
fill out the beautiful picture in imitation of the French peasant, he
must imitate him in rigid economy and in the ambition to own his own
land and his own home. We do not of course advise the penuriousness of
the miser, but the Negro is in little danger on that score. The grandest
impulse, even in economy and in obtaining property, is found in a
genuine Christian character. This is the work that our ministers and
teachers are endeavoring to accomplish, but we are sure It will aid them
to urge this practical saving of money, curtailing of needless expense,
and the making of most determined efforts to become owners of their own
homes.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE STEREOPTICON IN NEW ENGLAND.

REV. STANLEY E. LATHROP, SHERWOOD, TENN.


Secretary Roy of Chicago started an excellent thing when he arranged the
Stereopticon pictures to illustrate the great work of our Association.
After two months spent in traveling with these pictures and giving
explanatory lectures concerning them, the writer desires to testify to
their usefulness, and to express his thanks to the good people of New
England for the interest they have shown, and the cordial reception they
have given him in his travels. Evidently the work of the Association is
"on a boom" in New England. Everywhere a great many questions were
asked, and great many expressions of hearty interest manifested. During
eight weeks, the audiences averaged over four hundred in number, in
spite of "la grippe" and the rainy, sloppy weather that prevailed. In
this time we traveled over five thousand miles, giving the Stereopticon
lecture in forty-three different places, and making twenty-three other
addresses upon the work, to audiences numbering in several cases nearly
a thousand, and a total aggregate of over twenty-five thousand people.
The descendants of the Pilgrims are thoroughly interested in our
missionary work. The pictures of the people, buildings, etc., among the
ten millions of people among whom our work is going on, in the West and
South, were greatly enjoyed, with an evident increase of interest and of
contribution. In view of all my past experiences, of four years of
military service in the South, and my twelve years of missionary work in
that region, this two months of travel and intercourse with so many
intelligent friends and helpers of our Association has been a privilege
and an enjoyment. God bless the good people of New England, and the
grand work of our American Missionary Association!

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. JANE TWICHELL WARE.


The early and honored workers under the American Missionary Association
in the South are passing away. But the sharp sorrow of parting from them
is relieved by the memory of their self-denying and useful work, and
especially where these dear friends threw over those dark days and
trying experiences the halo of personal excellence, sweetness of
disposition and a manner full of cheerful vivacity.

Such an one was Mrs. Ware. She entered the service among the Freedmen in
the autumn of 1865, and in Norfolk, Virginia; Charleston, South
Carolina; and Atlanta, Georgia, cast the radiance of her bright
countenance and cheerful spirits over her serious and most successful
work. She was a joy in the circle of her associates and an inspiration
to her pupils.

In 1869, the year in which the Atlanta University was founded, she was
united in marriage to Rev. E.A. Ware, its President, and they with
others gave the moulding touch to the University, and won for it the
confidence of the friends at the North, and an annual appropriation from
the State of Georgia. In her own pleasant home and in various services
to the institution, she made herself useful. In 1885 her husband died
suddenly from heart failure, and from that time onward she was left to
face alone the serious pulmonary trouble which two years before had
fastened itself upon her. Bravely and in hope did she battle with the
adversary, until at length in the home of her brother, Rev. Jos. H.
Twichell, of Hartford, she passed away February 17, 1890, in the
forty-sixth year of her age, and her remains were laid to rest among her
kindred in the village burying ground at Plantsville, Connecticut. A
bright light has faded out from earth, a brighter one has dawned in
Heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARAGRAPHS.


The mention of the fact, in the last number of the MISSIONARY, that Dr.
Patton was one of the members of the Convention in Albany that formed
the American Missionary Association, suggests the inquiry as to how many
of those then present are now alive? If those who know the facts, either
by their personal presence on that occasion or otherwise, will send to
us the names of such survivors, we will be greatly obliged.

An envelope containing a gift of five dollars was dropped into the
contribution bag recently among others, after an address concerning our
work. It was from a faithful colored woman who had spent her life in
domestic service, and represented as true and earnest self-denial as
money could. Not all the heroism and self-sacrifice are in the field
work, among the missionaries of our great Association, as true and
earnest as they are. There is the same spirit of devotion to the Master
in the collecting field. We thank God for it, and take courage to go
forward in this work of saving these destitute millions in our land.

"I enclose a draft for fifty dollars to be used by the American
Missionary Association in such way as they think wilt do the most good.
I am in my ninety-first year but when I read of the doings of the
Association in Chicago, it made me feel almost young. My prayer to God
is that he will continue his blessing on the Association."

In the February number of the MISSIONARY, mention is made of a beautiful
box, the workmanship of a friend of the Association, _fourscore_ and two
years old. It was the wish of this venerable brother that the box should
be sold and the proceeds devoted to our work. A gentleman in Boston
offered twelve dollars for the box. We have since received an offer of
twenty dollars from a friend, with permission, however, to hold the
matter open a little longer for a still higher bid. Who speaks next?

       *       *       *       *       *

"You will be interested to learn that E.A. Johnson, of Raleigh, N.C.,
has just been admitted to the bar here. He passed a very good
examination, the only colored man among twenty-four whites. It made some
of them quite vexed to have him promptly answer questions on which they
failed, but when he received his license, the Judge commended him, and
the young men all congratulated him."

It is said that the colored pupils fail when they reach mathematics. A
scholar in one of our Southern institutions made an original
demonstration of an intricate problem in geometry, in a method different
from any known previously by his teacher, an accomplished scholar, and
it was correct.

From Le Moyne Institute, Memphis, Tennessee: Not a week passes that we
do not have to turn away earnest applicants from the school for want of
room. Fully two hundred such applicants have gone sadly away from our
door during the past months.

A colored minister in the South applying for a position as a preacher,
says, "I feel to say woe be under me if I preach not."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. A.W. Curtis writes from Raleigh, N.C.: "It is estimated that thirty
thousand Negroes have gone South and West from North Carolina since the
exodus from this State began. Most of them are crowded out because of
repeated crop failures in the eastern counties. Many of them have joined
in the movement, with the hope of doing better, who were doing passably
well at home. Many have been discouraged by the attitude of the State
toward the colored people."

Rev. J.W. Freeman, of Dudley, N.C., writes: "The emigration casts a
great depression on all our spiritual work among the colored people now
In this locality."

       *       *       *       *       *

AN ENTERPRISING WOMAN.


A letter from Louisiana says, "I visited a Negro family the other day in
a settlement where there is no school, and found the following condition
of things: A white lady was boarding with them and giving instruction
for her board. She is teaching them how to live. Eight months ago no one
in this family could read. The father only could speak English. Now all
speak some English. All except the youngest can read a little in the
Bible. They sang a gospel hymn for me and repeated quite a number of
Bible verses and the Lord's prayer. The colored mother I believe to be
one of the smartest women in America. With the help of her children--the
father spends all he gets for whiskey--she has built her house, supports
her family, makes her own furniture, spins and weaves cloth from cotton
she has raised, and has engaged this white lady to educate her and her
children, she herself leading the class. The children are all very quick
to learn. The home was tidy and well-kept. The children were clean and
neat. I shall look to see something grand come from that family."

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM A SCHOOL GIRL TO HER PASTOR IN ONE OF OUR INSTITUTIONS.


"I am a Christian and I think I enjoy it better than being a sinner, and
always doing something on earth to please myself and not trying to
please my Saviour who died for me, that through him I might be saved. I
am enjoying this week of prayer, and it seems to me we would have better
Christians if we had more prayer. I feel as if I need your prayers both
night and morning. It does seem so hard for me to overcome my trials and
temptations which come to me so very often. I hope you will join in
earnest prayers to help me overcome my temptations."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Negro, having all this promise and potency in him, is to be our
neighbor in these coming years. Whether we like it or not, he is to be
our fellow citizen, sharing with us the responsibilities and the
blessings of the republic. Before he was ripe for it he had the power of
a sovereign thrust upon him, and no man but by crime can take from him
the right and duty of joint rulership with us. It must be admitted that,
in the present condition of the average Southern Negro, he is not a
satisfactory neighbor nor a safe ruler. But that is not his fault; it is
his misfortune. His illiteracy is a National peril; his moral weakness
is a danger to himself and to the society in which he lives. But these
are the results of the cruel and corrupting system in which we held him
fast; the disabilities we have imposed upon him. And they suggest to us
certain helpful duties we owe to him; certain helpful ministries we are
under obligation to render him in order to enable him to attain that
large and splendid future toward which Providence seems to be pointing.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEDICATION OF CHANDLER NORMAL INSTITUTE.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY C.W. HIATT.


The tenth of February was a great day in Lexington, Kentucky. It marked
two special events, the dedication of Chandler Normal Institute, and the
opening of a great "Hoss sale." Anybody who knows the "Blue-grass
region" will understand what the latter means. The world flocks to
Lexington on such occasions in quest of thoroughbreds, and the country
rids itself in consequence, at fabulous prices, of droves of genuine
Kentucky plugs. Buyers go home wiser, sellers richer. But not everybody
on this day was discussing "Abdallah" and "Hambletonian." Long before
the appointed hour, a stream of people began moving to a part of the
city where two pikes intersect, the point of attraction being a fine
three-story red brick structure known as the "Chandler Normal
Institute." This building occupies a commanding position on a hill which
overlooks the city. It was erected and furnished by the liberality of
one esteemed lady, Mrs. Phoebe Chandler, of Andover, Massachusetts, at
an outlay of some fifteen thousand dollars, and is given to the cause of
Christian education under the care of the American Missionary
Association. On this particular day, the building was formally
consecrated to its work with appropriate and impressive services. At two
o'clock in the afternoon the spacious chapel was filled to its utmost by
crowds of colored people, some of whom had come for miles in carriages,
to witness the event. The presence also of numerous whites, representing
the foremost professional and social circles of Lexington, was a
significant fact. These friends, by their close attention and frequent
signs of approval, as well as by their own eloquent contributions to the
programme, gave unmistakable evidence of earnest sympathy with the good
cause.

The exercises were opened with prayer and Scriptural reading, after
which the Principal, Mr. Frederick W. Foster, made an address of
welcome, marked for its practical force and fine discretion. The
visiting Secretary then, in an address of half an hour, gave his
understanding of the importance of Christian education as the solution
of National problems, both North and South, closing with a formal
God-speed to this institution as it started forth on its noble career.
To this address, Rev. Mr. Tate, of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church, made a scholarly, eloquent and touching response. He reviewed
the work of the Association for his people, eulogized the friend who had
made this special benefaction, and urged upon his hearers to make the
most, under God, of the high privileges thus brought to them from afar.

Informal addresses from both white and colored visitors followed. The
eloquent periods of Dr. L.P. Todd, dwelling fully upon the brotherhood
of man, the witty and practical remarks of Prof. John Schackleford, of
Kentucky State College, and the wise and cogent exhortations of Rev. W.
S. Fulton, D.D., cannot be reported; suffice it to say, that they gave a
spiritual uplift and fine dignity to the occasion. These noble men are
staunch supporters of our work, and freely give to our corps of teachers
the benefits of fatherly and fraternal fellowship.

A resolution expressing the gratitude of the colored people for this
generous gift was adopted with enthusiasm, and the inspiring exercises
came to a close with the praises of God in the well-known words of
Bishop Ken: "Praise God, from whom all blessings flow."

The event marks the beginning of an epoch in our work in this place. One
dark brother said: "It is the greatest day for the colored people of
Lexington since the emancipation."

       *       *       *       *       *

CONGREGATIONALISM AROUND PARIS, TEXAS.

BY REV. J.D. PETTIGREW.


It gives me much pleasure to tell you what we are doing for the Master
and for Congregationalism in this part of the great field. I came to
Paris nearly eleven months ago and assumed the pastorate of the First
Congregational Church. I had been here but a short time when I found
that there were three other Congregational Churches out in the country
near Paris, and that there had once been a Quarterly Conference made up
of these four churches; but this Conference had died out ere I came. I
thought that such an organization, if revived, would be a great stimulus
to the churches, and especially to those out in the country, two of
which were, at that time, without pastors. So I sent out cards notifying
the brethren that the Conference would convene at a specified day, and
urging them to come in full representation.

A few, very few, responded. We organized. After transacting a little
business the Conference adjourned to meet at our next regularly
appointed time. Before the time for our next meeting we were all made to
rejoice by the coming of Rev. M.R. Carlisle, a graduate of both the
collegiate and theological courses of Talladega College, from Alabama,
to assume the pastoral charge of two of these churches--Dodd City and
Bois D'Arc.

He and I drew up a plan to re-organize the old Conference into a more
excellent and practical one. We offered our plan at the next meeting of
the Conference, and it was cheerfully received. The effect of this plan
was to change the name from Conference to Association, and to divide the
Association into three distinct departments, each with its own set of
officers, as follows: a Sunday-school Department, composed of the
different Sunday-schools of the churches; a Missionary Department,
composed of the different church missionary societies; and a Church
Department, composed of the different churches.

Each department had its own distinct programme and business; but the
combined programmes of all made up the "general programme" of the
Association. This plan works excellently, and serves as a wonderful
stimulus to each of these departments of church work. We have, in our
next meeting, to add the department of Christian Endeavor.

Our last session, held with our church in Paris on the 28th of December,
1889, was indeed a grand success. Previous to its meeting, I heard of
four other Congregational Churches in the Indian Territory, under the
auspices of the American Home Missionary Society. I sent them an
invitation to join the Association. These churches promptly sent
delegates who connected their churches with the Association.

One brother from the Territory heard of the Association, but was not
able to pay his way on the train to Paris. So, as he said to me, "I left
my wife and children in the care of God, and I put myself into his hands
and came; and I walked every step of the way." This brother walked forty
miles to meet the Association, and his fidelity had a great effect upon
the whole meeting. We tried to make it pleasant for him, and took up a
special collection to send him back home on the train.

Space will not allow me to speak touching the spiritual strength and
interest of the meeting. We had many valuable papers read and discussed,
and closed our session on the Sabbath with the following programme:
"Sabbath morning from 9-11 o'clock, Sabbath-school; 11-12:30, Sermon,
'Congregationalism in the South,' Rev. J.D. Pettigrew; at 3 o'clock P.M.
Sermon, by Rev. A. Gross, from the Indian Territory; 7:30 o'clock P.M.,
Quarterly Sermon, by Rev. M.R. Carlisle, followed by the administration
of the Lord's Supper." The brethren left for their fields of labor
filled with encouragement and enthusiasm.' Those from the Indian
Territory seemed to be especially strengthened.

Our next meeting is to be with the Bois D'Arc church. We have now eight
churches and mission stations represented, and it is only a question of
time before our Association will be a power for God and
Congregationalism in this part of the State. I think we have a bright
future before us here.

       *       *       *       *       *

A MISSION CHURCH.

REV. GEO. C. HOWE, CHARLESTON, S.C.


The work at Tradd Street Mission in our city is carried on now in just
the same way as since its organization. After Sunday-school is over at
Plymouth Church, about 11 o'clock, a number of our young people,
including the Pastor, Superintendent Herron and Miss Deas, who acts as
organist, go immediately to the mission about a mile away, and conduct
the Sunday-school there. We have eight classes, with an average
attendance of eleven to a class. One class is composed of adults. We
finish work there at one o'clock. On Thursday night, I go down and
preach, and in case I am unable to go, Deacon Hollens takes the service
for me.

Last Thursday night, an Irishman about thirty-five years old came in
while we were singing, and when I began to speak on the temptations of
Christ, he sat and listened in open-mouthed wonder. Before I finished he
arose and came forward, his eyes glistening with tears, and gave me his
hand, saying: "I belong to the Catholic Church, but they never told me
that truth from the Word, never explained it that way. That _is the
truth_, I know it. I was just going after a drink, but I shall not do it
now. I thank you, and hope I have not intruded by coming in." It was
quite an incident to see a strong man of an opposite race and creed, in
a place where the "Jews desire to have no dealing with the Samaritans,"
coming up and acknowledging with tears that he had never heard the truth
of God's word before.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PROSPEROUS CHURCH.

REV. STERLING N. BROWN.


We know you will rejoice with us in the good work at Plymouth Church,
Washington, D.C. In January we began a special series of meetings. I
preached short sermons nearly every night, save Saturdays, for more than
three weeks. About fifty have been hopefully brought to a saving
knowledge of Christ. The church was never, perhaps, more deeply stirred
than at this time. There seems to be a thirsting for a deeper work of
grace among Christians, a thorough coming out from the world. It was a
beautiful sight yesterday, when before the altar twenty-nine "new
recruits" took upon themselves the covenant of the church.. The most of
the remaining converts will unite with us at our next communion. A few
of them will join elsewhere. Our church is getting well organized for
work along all lines of Christian activity. The Endeavor Society among
our young people, now the largest in number in the district, is a real
power for good. The Sunday-school is taking on new life. There is before
us in this city "an exceeding good land," but before full possession,
many battles must be fought, spiritual and financial. But we have great
reason to be thankful.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WHITE CROSS LEAGUE.

PROF. H.H. WRIGHT, FISK UNIVERSITY.


I want to lay before you a short account of the work of the White Cross
League, of this University, as reported by the members at a meeting held
at my house last Sunday night. You may not be aware that late last
school year I called together a dozen or two of our best young men and
induced them to take the White Cross pledge--to treat all women with
respect, to refrain from indecent jests and coarse language, to maintain
that the law of personal purity is as binding on men as upon women, etc.
At the meeting last Sunday night one after another gave his experience
touching the White Cross movement. One young man reported that through
his persuasion, public and private, especially the latter, three or four
couples who had been living together unlawfully went before the proper
authorities and were married. Another testified that he had personally
felt the restraining influence of his pledge, while he acted as waiter
at a summer hotel. The pledge had a great restraining influence upon him
and was a safeguard. Another found it necessary to organize a Wednesday
night Bible meeting of his own, for the regular meetings of the churches
did not give him the opportunity he desired.

All the young men testified to the good influence of the pledge upon
their own lives, but one young man's report of his work was of especial
interest. He is head waiter at the hotel at Lake ----, where about 250
servants, men and women, are employed. He took a squad of seventy-eight
colored men from the South to the Lake at the opening of the season,
engaging them on condition that there was to be no gambling among them.
Immediately on arriving he organized a Y.M.C.A. among them, and held
meetings Sunday afternoons and two evenings during the week through the
summer, all well attended. At some of these meetings he spoke of the
White Cross movement, and was successful in gaining the approbation of
most of the members of the Association. The nature of the pledge and of
the talks got out among the women servants, and ere long at their
invitation he assembled from seventy-five to one hundred of them and
gave them a very earnest talk on the value and duty of virtuous lives.
Many were affected to tears, and all were seriously impressed. After
that they seemed to look to him as their protector, and often said they
were so glad they had a head man who would endeavor to shield them from
temptation and wrong. And the remarkable thing about it is, that these
women servants are white!

The proprietor of the hotel, on closing the season, told our student
that if he had been told that such a work as he had accomplished among
his help could be done he would have declared it impossible. What is to
be the outcome of this little movement so auspiciously begun? It seems
to me that if wisely carried on the possibilities for good are very
great.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEREA AND TEMPERANCE.


For nearly twelve years there has been a temperance organization
centering at Berea. By personal canvass it has secured signers to the
total abstinence pledge, until the aggregate number is between two
thousand and three thousand.

The length of the district from north to south is not less than ten
miles, and the greatest breadth seven or eight miles. The number of
votes polled at a general election is about six hundred. For nearly ten
years the sale of intoxicating liquors within the district has been
illegal, it having been voted out by the people by a large majority soon
after the great Murphy movement. Just on the border of the district were
two or three men, distillers in a small way and venders of the fiery
liquid, who thought the enthusiasm of the Murphy movement was past, and
took the necessary steps to have a poll opened on the liquor question,
at the August election of 1888. But they had underrated the effect of
these years of temperance education. Nearly all our students become
signers of the pledge and workers in whatever field they may visit; and
the people of the country immediately around us have been profiting by
the teachings of these meetings. When the question was clearly
presented, "Shall we again have the legalized liquor traffic among us?"
the activity of the friends of sobriety and order was as great as that
of the selfish advocates of license. Meetings were held in every
neighborhood. On election day, seventy-five ladies, of the noblest in
the district, were at the voting place. Refreshments were furnished in
abundance and free of charge. Doubtful voters were met with argument and
persuasion. All was as orderly as if it were a religious meeting. The
result showed 435 for temperance to 131 for liquor--more than three to
one. The victory was complete, and the district stands as the banner
temperance district of the State.

BEREA COLLEGE REPORTER.

       *       *       *       *       *

"BECCA MUST GO!"


  Say "Becca must go," Yes, "Becca must go,"
  I don't hardly see why it needs to be so,
  She's nice--very quiet. She's no trouble at all,
  She couldn't hurt any one, Becca's so small.

  She don't understand it--the poor little child--
  When I seat her alone she looks strange and wild,
  And when I dismiss her she never looks 'round,
  But she goes off alone looking down to the ground.

  Her mother's afflicted, her home life is bad,
  When I see little Becca I always feel sad.
  She learns very quickly, she sings like a lark,
  But Becca must go, for her skin is so dark.

  I am asked to "dismiss her," and "send her away,"
  She must not study here and with others play,
  I don't like to do it, but then, don't you know,
  There are some who won't like it, so "Becca must go."

  Not many stand up for poor Becca down here,
  They talk very strangely, and act very queer,
  Her skin's not much darker than mine, but, you know,
  Her hair curls a little, so "Becca must go."

  Now Preacher and Teacher from East and from West,
  If you would succeed you must do like the rest;
  Be partial to white folk or take the disgrace,
  Of showing regard for a down-trodden race.

  E.N. RUDDOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *

STREAKS OF LIGHT.

REV. C.L. HALL, FORT BERTHOLD, NORTH DAKOTA.


A girl about seventeen years of age writes the following to her teacher
while she is away from school for a short vacation among her people:

"DEAR FRIEND:--I will now try to write a few lines to-night to tell you
all about what we are doing now; first I tell you when first we came
home we told the girls to come to our house that we would have prayer
meeting the first thing; I tell you they are real good girls, L----,
M----, A---- and M----; we did not expect them to come; it is far away
and they were so tired yet they did not mind, they come right away
before we saw them. We went upon the hills, Mary and I, we prayed, and
when we came back we was surprise to see the girls coming. So we had
prayer meeting; that was the first time that L---- ever prayed; we
thought we would have prayer meeting to-day, but we are sorry the girls
did not come, they did not know; we expect to go to Minot Monday if
nothing should happen."

Another says:--"I don't want to see the Indian dance. I like to stay in
the house and I like to read the Bible every morning, and in the
afternoon I ask God to bless the boys and girls and keep you always, and
I know he will help all if we ask him."

N---- and G----, two little sisters away on a vacation where no Sabbath
is observed, go away on the prairie alone and have prayers together.
After evening service those who wished to follow Christ were asked to
remain to an inquiry meeting, and eight remained, and in their own
language some expressed very clearly a desire to follow Christ and a
consciousness of their own sin and weakness.

Mrs. B----'s husband died very earnestly endeavoring to teach her the
faith he had come to have, and asking her again and again to have no
idols, but to worship and believe in God alone. She is now an earnest
seeker after light, is visited on Sunday by a leading man who lives near
her, and who is asked to tell them on the Sabbath of the religion and
the God of whom her husband had told her.

A father, a hearer, but yet a heathen, says: "I want to put the boy in a
school where he will learn God's ways. I do not want him in a school
where religion is not taught."

       *       *       *       *       *

ELIZABETH WINYAN.


Many of our readers will remember being interested at our meeting in
Chicago by the appearance and speech of an Indian woman from our Oahe
Station, Elizabeth Winyan. We have now to communicate the sad tidings of
her death, after a brief, but severe illness. Her life was an eventful
and a useful one. Elizabeth was the name given her by the missionaries.
Winyan was her Indian name. She was born near Mankato, Minnesota, in
1831. At the age of twenty-five she became one of the early converts
under Drs. Williamson and Riggs. She came to live at the mission, and
learned to sew and do all household work. Dr. Williamson set her to
teaching some women, and so began her missionary labor. She was a woman
of great physical strength. When she was living at the Sisseton Agency,
she cut with her own hands and hauled to the Agency, driving the ox-team
herself, wood enough to pay for putting her little house in good repair
and to buy some farming implements. She was a faithful friend. This
fidelity she proved during the Indian uprising in 1862. When the mission
families were fleeing from their burning houses at midnight, they forgot
to take any food along. While they were hiding on an island in the
Minnesota River, she, _at the risk of her own life_, carried to them
bread and meat. In 1875, she and Miss Collins went to assist Rev. T.L.
Riggs in starting the Oahe Mission, near Fort Sully, on the Missouri. At
the time of her death she was in charge of an out-station on the
Cheyenne River, forty miles from the central mission. Her duties were to
hold meetings on the Sabbath, one general prayer meeting on Thursday
night, and a women's meeting on Friday night, to teach every day, visit
the sick, attend funerals, and teach the women to sew, cook, wash and
iron.

Miss Collins says of her: "There is no one to fill her place. She was
one of the grandest women I ever knew. May God help our poor bereaved
Dakotas."

       *       *       *       *       *

AN EXEMPLARY MOTHER.


The recent death of Elizabeth Winyan calls to mind a little story
connected with the training of her son, which may not be without point
even now.

Elizabeth Winyan taught Edwin, her son, to believe in God and in prayer.
She tells a story of how Edwin, as a child, wanted to wear "civilized
clothes." She made him a shirt and trousers, and then he needed a hat
and shoes. She said, "I told him to pray for them; in the meantime I
worked as well as prayed, and on Saturday, when my work was done, the
missionary's wife gave me a hat and a pair of shoes for Edwin. He was
delighted and so was I. Since that time he has never doubted that God
would answer prayer." She said: "I taught Edwin to give to the Lord from
a baby. When he was not old enough to know his duty, I put the penny in
his hand and held his hand over the basket, and dropped in the penny.
Sometimes I would only be able to get one penny, and that I would give
to Edwin to put in the collection, for I wanted him to form a habit of
giving; I knew I ought to give, and God knows I would when I had a
penny, but my son must be taught." This son has grown up a good
Christian, speaks English, is a teacher, and is now a missionary at
Standing Rock. He owes much to his faithful Christian mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO CHINESE ANNIVERSARIES.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY J.E. ROY, D.D.


One was that of the New Year, which is the first of February. It was at
Los Angeles. The celebration lasts three or four days. The Christian
Chinese observe the festival with Christian ceremonies. In the forenoon,
I was with the Congregational brethren at their rooms in Chinatown.
Their schoolroom was decorated with all the colors and characters of the
native land. A table was spread with fruits and nuts and candies and
cakes and flowers. The Chinese lily was the appropriate New Year's
adornment. The services were prayer, much singing of Moody and Sankey
songs, recitations of Scripture and addresses by their own men and by
visitors. The room was filled with sympathetic touring friends. After
the public service, the goodies of the table were passed around. In the
afternoon, I went to the Presbyterian, and my wife to the United
Presbyterian, service, which was much after the same sort. In the
former, the Rev. Mr. Condit and his wife, who had long ago returned from
China to engage in this work, were the leaders. After the Superintendent
of the Methodist Chinese Sunday-school had spoken, a brother in the
mission, following, called him a good Presbyterian. Although these
foreigners fall into the church order of the people who have led them
into the Jesus way, they recognize these divisions as simply so many
families akin, and so there is a constant visiting and affiliation among
them as Christians. The whole occasion was one to inspire faith in the
Gospel as suited to the needs of our common humanity, and faith in the
beneficent results upon those who have not known of the true God and
Saviour. On the afternoon of the following Sunday, in Dr. Hutchins'
church, I visited the Congregational Chinese Sunday-school,
superintended by a lawyer and taught by members of that parish. Mr.
Dorland, the Superintendent, is giving himself to this work with great
enthusiasm, and his associates share in the same. The thing which
delighted me in Dr. Hutchins' church, and in all this round of our
Chinese Missions, was the fact that the local church is taking these
Chinese of the A.M.A. schools into their fellowship, not only that of
the Sunday-school but of church membership. Whatever views may be held
as to the political economy of exclusion, these Christians seem to
realize that God has brought these pagans to their doors to be cared for
in Christ's name. Mrs. Sheldon and her daughter, the missionaries of the
American Missionary Association, teaching the night-school, serving in
the Sunday-school, and by every feasible ministry, are confirming the
judgment of one of our pastors that these lady missionaries are their
"Evidences of Christianity."

The other anniversary was that of our mission at San Diego--Miss M.M.
Elliot, the missionary teacher, and Chin Toy, the helper. Rev. W. C.
Pond, D.D., of San Francisco, the Superintendent of our Chinese work,
which he takes in addition to the pastoral care of the Bethany Church,
had come down for his annual visitation of the missions in Southern
California. In the Mission Chapel, at the time of the night-school, Dr.
Pond conducts the rehearsal and, on Sunday night, in the Tabernacle of
the First Congregational Church, presides at the public service. The
great assembly room is packed with interested listeners who soon become
delighted. After opening devotions, conducted by the pastor, Rev. Mr.
Voorhees, and his choir, the young brethren proceed with a prayer in the
Chinese, then with the Lord's Prayer in concert, both in English and in
Chinese. Then come songs in solo and in concert, from the Moody and
Sankey book, and recitations of Scripture passages. "Dare to be a
Daniel," was rendered in solo with fine effect as to the music, and
especially as to the idea of daring to become Christians in the face of
the derision of their pagan friends. The Ten Commandments, as recited by
one, and each responded to in music by the school in the words of the
prayer-book, were deeply impressive. And so was the "Missionary
Exercise," with nine questions by Quon Newy, answered by as many men one
after another, Quon Tape, Sam Tai, Quon Dick, Korn Ock, Korn Chow, Korn
Zee, Chong Chung, Lee Wing, and Linn Yee.

The characteristic feature of the evening was the address, in good
English, of Chin Toy. Dr. Pond introduced him as having been a shoemaker
at San Francisco, who, upon conversion, about to be baptized in his
church, was locked into his apartment of the shoeshop by some of his
pagan friends, who thought that after the passing of the baptismal
occasion of Sunday morning he would get over his desire to be a Jesus
man. So, Sunday afternoon, he was released. But at night he appeared at
the Bethany and was baptized into Christ. He is now with Loo Quong, an
A.M.A. evangelist, and at present is serving as "helper" at the San
Diego mission. His address was a logical and eloquent setting forth of
the difficulties in the way of the Chinese becoming Christians; and, at
the end, it was an appeal to American Christians to improve their
opportunity to become missionaries to the heathen whom God had brought
to their door.

Short addresses were then made by Rev. F.B. Perkins, of the Second
Church, and by District Secretary Roy--the former declaring that that
meeting alone was enough to repay all effort in that line; enough to
remove all prejudice. Indeed, only this week, a former pastor of that
church, Rev. J.B. Silcox, now of the East Oakland Church, told me that a
similar anniversary held in that same Tabernacle a year ago, had melted
down all prejudice. Indeed, it is now, as in the days of the primitive
Christians: wheresoever it is seen that people of the despised classes
have received the Holy Ghost, that is the end of caste distinction.
"Forasmuch, then, as God gave them the like gift as He did unto us who
had believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that I should
withstand God?"


       *       *       *       *       *

A COLORED MAN SPEAKS FOR HIS RACE.

Address at the Annual Meeting in Chicago,

BY THE REV. GEO. M. MCCLELLAN.


About eleven years ago, out in the country, near Louisville, there was
born a little colored girl. She was her father's first child, and he was
justly proud of her, and calculated that there must be some fitting name
for her somewhere, and that he must get it out of a book. He could not
read, but he could spell a little, and therefore he got him a copy of
Webster's blue-backed speller, and spelled the book half way through
until he found the word "heterogeneous;" therefore that little girl was
christened "Heterogeneous." This morning this programme was handed to
me, and I saw on it "Chinese, Indian, Negro, White;" and I couldn't help
thinking of Heterogeneous. As I looked over the subjects, and thought
that I would have to speak about something, I thought that "Chinese,
Indian, White man and Negro," was quite a subject for a speech. But I
was inclined to be fair, like a certain minister, who was always
preaching on infant baptism. He preached on infant baptism, no matter
what the text was. The deacons and the people of the church got tired of
it, and they concluded to give him some text that would relate to facts,
before there were any infants. So they turned to the Book of Genesis,
and found the text "Adam, where art thou?" And when the minister came to
the pulpit Sunday morning, the deacons gave this text to him and told
him, "Here is a text we want you to preach upon." He demurred a little
and wondered why they had not given him more time, but finally concluded
to preach on this text. He got up and said: "There are three points in
this text: First, that men are always somewhere; second, that they are
very often where they ought not to be; third, the text is dead set
against infant baptism; and as the time is short, I will speak on point
third." Now, I said to myself that either of these themes was a worthy
one; but as Chinese comes first, Indian second, and Negro third, and, as
the time is brief, I will speak on point third.

Not long ago I saw in an illustrated paper President Harrison with his
Cabinet, represented as all lolling over asleep; and in the group there
stood a Negro, his mouth open, his collar open, his teeth showing, and
with a large scroll in his hand. Beneath this picture was this remark:
"Wake up to the question of the day," and on that scroll which the Negro
had in his hand were the words: "What are you gwine to do with the black
man?"

Now, that question has been asked here indirectly to-day: and, my
friends, do you know that sometimes, as we have heard this question
discussed, we wonder just exactly how people do consider us in this
country. There have been some who have advocated colonization. Some have
said that we would have to be sent back to Africa or out West, or to
South America. One man thinks that extermination will be the final
thing to be resorted to. It may be a fault in my education, it may be
that this American Missionary Association has not educated me all
right--for I am a product of the Association,--but I have been taught to
suppose that we Negroes were free, independent, American citizens, at
liberty to choose where we will stay and how long we will stay. It seems
that very eminent men are discussing the feasibility of sending us to
Africa, and whether it is wise to go to the expense if it is thought
best to send us there. Now, my friends, it does not seem to me that
there is any question about it so far as we are concerned. The whites
may go if they want to, but we are not going to budge! So long as this
is a free country we are going to stay here; it satisfies us. It seems
to me God has so settled it.

The question is not, what are you going to do with the colored man, but
what are you going to do for him? A great deal has been done, and it has
been said that more has been done for the Negroes than for any other
people. That is true: and the Negro has done more in these last
twenty-five years than any other people on whom money and time and labor
has been expended. The American Missionary Association found out long
ago what the Negro problem was. They established schools and sent
teachers among us, and when they came to us, they came at once,
assuming--not as Senator Eustis has done, that the Negroes have an
inherent sense of inferiority, and that they should take an assigned
place; not as Governor Lee has insisted, that the all-important thing
for the white man to do is to keep the Negro down; and not as Senator
Gibbs of Georgia, who a few weeks ago insisted that the white people are
in imminent peril, and even went so far as to bring a bill before the
Legislature as to whether the Negroes should be driven out of that
State. That is not the way these teachers have come down to us. They
have assumed that we are as capable as other people, that we have the
same needs; and because they have come to us with this assumption to
begin with, because they have received us in this way, we have made the
progress that we have.

Now, of all things that are most needed to be done for us, we need a
good theological seminary in the South, where the ministry can be
educated among us. It is only an elevated Christian citizenship that
will save us, and make us what other people are; and we must have a
theological seminary to aid us toward that end. You have given us
colleges, normal schools, industrial training schools, and schools of
common branches, and we have now young men and young women filling all
the schools through the South. We can get good teachers for our schools
in the remotest places, in Arkansas, Texas and Mississippi, or anywhere
else. So it is not a question as to what kind of teachers we will have.
But the churches have not in their pulpits ministers well prepared to
preach the gospel of Christ. They have not kept up with the young people
in the work done by the schools. In the North, one of the pleasant
things we find wherever we go, is that in all your churches there is
something for the young people to do. You have Christian Endeavor
Societies, and various organizations by which the young people may be
reached. Therefore, you gather them in from the beginning and have them
trained so that they can take your places as soon as you are ready to
step out of the work. It is not so with our churches. Our ministers have
not advanced to that degree where they can take up such work. In these
little Congregational churches that have been planted, we have educated
ministers, who are able thus to work, especially among young people. We
do not have people at our hand as other churches have, but we are trying
to get hold of them. In Fisk University there were last year, I believe,
510 students, of whom, perhaps, there were 100 Congregationalists. So,
after all, it is Methodists and Baptists that you are educating there.
This is all right, because the great masses of the people are found in
those churches. If we had a Congregational Theological School we could
reach these people just as well through the pulpit as we reach them in
the schools.

I was asked to give a little of my personal experience. I dislike to do
this: but if narrating any of my personal experience will give an
insight into the work that the American Missionary Association is doing,
I will gladly consent. My story is the story of hundreds of young men in
the South. Only in the larger cities can we get a good English
education, except we go to schools established for us by this
Association. I went eight years to Fisk University. I have a brother
there now in the senior college class. This is his tenth year, and I
have a sister who is also in her tenth year there. It takes a long while
to get through. My father had no money to send me to school. In his
slavery days he had stolen a little bit of learning, and had learned how
to write and read and a little arithmetic. I was about four years old
when the stroke for freedom was made. My father began to teach me
arithmetic, and many a day in his shoemaker's shop, as I sat and kept
the fire going, he would teach me and carry me as far as he could; and
he put into me the idea of getting an education. At fifteen he told me I
might have my own time. At that age I had advanced far enough to pass
the examination of the district school, and, having passed, I made my
way to Fisk University. I had not known that there was such an
institution in the land, or such a thing as the Missionary Association;
but going once into an adjoining county, I happened to fall in with some
Christian young men from Fisk, and they told me about that school. I had
always had a great desire to be educated, and so I went down there. When
I arrived there, I thought it was a strange place. I was familiar with
white people, but I think I had never up to that time had one of them
shake hands with me. When I found what they were doing there, and that
it was an earnest Christian school, my whole soul was uplifted, and I
determined to seek for better things. I thought I was pretty well
educated, but when I found myself down stairs among those learning
grammar and arithmetic, and that there were nine years before me, I
concluded that after all I was not very well educated, but I set out to
go through that long course of study.

During all those years of study I taught school every summer. For nine
years I was not out of the school room a month in the year. I was either
a pupil or a teacher. Wherever I was teaching, I would try to set up a
little Fisk University of my own. You know that the school teacher who
goes out into these country places is everybody and everything. He is
law and gospel, and he must know everything--at least, he must not let
people know that he does not know everything. So I was not only school
teacher, but I organized a Sunday-school, and preached, also. Especially
in Mississippi I did that kind of work, where there was much need of it.
This is the way that hundreds of young men have gone through Fisk
University and other institutions. We get our education sometimes at
great cost, and at great hardships. Sometimes we break down under this
constant strain of teaching. Many a time in Mississippi swamps I have
waded up to my knees in water going to school, and many a time have I
taught lying sick on my back; but the money had to be made. This is the
way we get through, and not only the young men but the girls. There are
two things which it teaches us: It teaches us how to be men, and it
teaches us how to work. We are forced to do it for the money's sake, and
it is not only for the money's sake, because we are sure that these
young men and young ladies go out with a Christian desire to do good,
and a young man, whether he is a Christian or not, feels that he must do
Christian work when he is teaching in the summer. He is hardly
respectable if he does not do that sort of thing during his service as a
teacher. In that way the great masses of the people are being reached by
Christian students going out among them.

So it seems to me as though the problem were being slowly yet truly
solved, and by and by the Negroes will be lifted up on the same footing
with other people. That is the only thing we want. We are not fighting
for social equality, or this or that thing. No intelligent Negro has any
desire to put the South into the hands of the Negroes for rule. No man
who is intelligent could wish the government of the South to come into
the hands of any ignorant and inexperienced people, whether white or
black, and that is what we are as a mass. But we do want recognition, so
far as we have those qualities that would cause the same thing to be
granted to us if we were not Negroes. This is the only thing that we ask
for, and this is what is withheld from us. There are those even in the
South who are willing to give us this recognition, and little by little
they are getting over some of their prejudice and are inclined to
recognize us so far as we have a right to their respect. Of course there
are those who are determined to keep the Negro down; but these are
coming over slowly but surely, and by and by there will be in this land
no Negro problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


In our February number, in mentioning the special work of some of the
Woman's Organizations, we referred to the four teachers of the Woman's
Home Missionary Association. These have been assigned them from the
ranks of the American Missionary Association additional to their former
work in the Southern field. They having transferred to the American
Missionary Association their former work, have now eleven missionaries
under our auspices.

We also failed to mention in our February number the Woman's Union of
Iowa, which is rendering us so substantial aid in the support of our
Beach Institute at Savannah, Georgia.

And here comes yet another pledge--the Union of Kansas starting in with
three hundred dollars toward the support of a missionary. Nebraska has
also come forward with a pledge of a definite amount.

       *       *       *       *       *

The State Unions organized in the South have begun their growth in the
right direction. The Union of Louisiana shows its right to live by the
following words from its Treasurer: "I have just had the privilege of
sending off three postal orders, $8.00 to the A.M.A., $7.00 to the
A.H.M.S., and $3.00 to the W.B.M.I., which at least is a beginning. We
hope the little acorn planted last April may yet be a grand live oak."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following from one of the auxiliaries of the Union of Tennessee and
Kentucky is also cheering. "The inclosed $6.00 is an offering of our
Ladies' Missionary Society of Trinity Congregational Church to the
American Missionary Association, the first fruits, financially, of the
little organization. Be assured the small gift is accompanied with
large-hearted gratitude for the work of the Association in elevating the
colored people, and earnest prayers for the continued success of the
Association in its beneficent work in every field."

       *       *       *       *       *

MICHIGAN,--"We have we think, a model Missionary Society in our church.
We take up the study of our six great Societies and give two months to
each, just preceding our church collection for the same cause. We study
them as thoroughly as possible and our collections for the two months go
to the object of our study. November and December are A.M.A. months with
us. At our meeting this week we had reports from the Chicago meeting. We
always aim to have at least one leaflet to put into each family once a
month--on the study we are on--hoping in this way to gain the attention
of those not interested."

       *       *       *       *       *

A NOVEL DISH.


A barrel of clothing recently sent from Putney and Dummerston, Vermont,
received its first installment of gifts from a Christmas plum pudding,
which formed a part of the Christmas exercises. A wash-tub was covered
with brown paper to represent a pudding. At the proper time a young man
dressed to represent a cook, with white cap and apron, and wand of
office, entered the room followed by two boys, also in white caps and
aprons, and carrying a pudding dish. Placing this in the center of the
platform, the chief cook advanced to the front, and after appropriate
words of greeting and of explanation, the assistants passed down the
aisles and gathered the various ingredients, or "plums" which the
audience had brought. When ready it was started on its way to the South.
We venture to say it will last longer and do more good than any plum
pudding that ever was served.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR MANY-SIDED MISSIONARY WORK.


One of our efficient ladies, Principal of a large school embracing the
grades from primary to the high school and normal department, and in
which the scholastic standard is creditably maintained, writes as
follows:

"Our school is on the whole in good condition. The teachers are earnest,
efficient and united. The students are of a better average than ever
before. There has been a healthful religious interest all the year.
During the past two weeks there have been several conversions in every
room, (unless, perhaps, in the primary). Every room has had some
religious services conducted by the teachers. A few union services were
held, attended by those interested. These were mostly conducted by Miss
B. In Miss S.'s room the conversions are very hopeful young men and
women.

"The industrial classes of boys and girls were never so large before,
and among the girls the spirit of real work and helpfulness through work
seems to be developing true womanly character. In the tool-room there
are five classes of from eight to fourteen boys every day. A little
printing-press is set up, and one boy has begun to set type. The shop is
a busy place when fourteen boys are in it shoving their saws and planes,
running the lathes, carving or hammering, and they usually seem very
happy. We are looking with anxious longing for that new teacher
promised. The number of country students this year makes it imperative
if we reach these surrounding counties, as we want to do, but the new
teacher must come soon, or we must send away thirty-five or forty
scholars, nearly all from the country. This is written that you 'also
might know our affairs and how we do.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.
Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.B. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Osgood, 14 First Ave., Montpelier.
Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASSACHUSETTS AND RHODE ISLAND.

[1]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
Treasurer--Miss Ella A. Leland, 32 Congregational House, Boston.

[Footnote 1: For the purpose of exact information, we note that while
the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass, and R.I., it
has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Francis B. Cooley, Hartford.
Secretary--Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Cobb, 59 Bible House, New York City.


OHIO

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
Treasurer--Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Box 932, Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.B. Safford, Elkhart.
Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
Treasurer--Mrs. C. Evans, Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, 409 Orchard St., Chicago.
Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Lansing.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
Secretary--Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.C. Kealer, Beloit.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, Box 464, Minneapolis.
Secretary--Miss Gertude A. Keith, 1350, Nicollet Ave., Minneapolis.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisner, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdie.
Secretary--Mrs. T.M. Jeffris, Huron.
Treasurer--Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 1216 H. St., Lincoln.
Secretary--Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 No. Broad St., Fremont.
Treasurer--Mrs. D.E. Perry, Crete.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, 3006 Pine St., St. Louis.
Secretary--Mrs. E.P. Bronson, 3100 Chestnut St. St. Louis.
Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Presidents--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett, White Water, Colorado.
Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
  Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.L. Whipple, Cheyenne, Wyoming.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Elijah Cash, 927 Temple St., Los Angeles.
Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Box 426, Pasadena
Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st St., Oakland.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1389 Harrison St., Oakland.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.F. Waiting, Tougaloo.
Secretary--Miss Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo.
Treasurer--Miss S.L. Emerson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2612 Fifth Ave., Birmingham.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.J. Penney, Selma.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.
President--Miss M.F. Wells, Athens, Ala.
Secretary--Miss A.M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss E. Plimpton, Chapel Hill.
Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
Treasurer--Miss Lovey Mayo, Raleigh.

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1890.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People._

FROM Mr. DANIEL HAND, GUILFORD, CONN.

Income for February, 1890 ...$4,197 35

Income previously acknowledged ...1,792 50

-------

Total ...$5,989 85

========

       *       *       *       *       *

CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE. $241.98.

Augusta. Joel Spalding, to const. MRS. PHEBE MARTIN L.M. ...30.00

Augusta South Parish Ch. ...22.00

Bath. Central Ch. and Soc ...10.00

Belfast. Y.P.S.C.E., Bbl. and Box, 1.51, _for Freight, for Raleigh,
N.C._ ...1.51

Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. ...13.00

Bluehill. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch., 5; Cong. Ch., 2 ...7.00

Brownville. Sab. Sch. of Gong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...20.00

Castine. Misses Mary and Margaret J. Cushman ...2.50

Castine. Y.P.S.C.E., Bbl., 1.80, _for Freight, for Raleigh,
N.C._ ...1.80

Cumberland Center. Bbl. of C., 2, _for Freight, for Selma. Ala._ ...2.00

Edgecomb. Cong. Ch. ...6.84

Freeport. Daniel Lane ...3.00

Limerick. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...8.00

Limington. Cong. Ch. ...11.00

Monson. R.W. Emerson ...10.00

North Yarmouth. Y.P.S.C.E., by E.M. McIntire, Sec. ...3.00

Orland. "A Friend" ...3.00

Otisfield. Cong. Ch., Mrs. Susan Lovel, 5; Rev J. Loring, 3; Mrs. M.
Knight, 2; Mrs. Mary Jennings, 1; Mrs. Sarah P. Morton, 1 ...12.00

Portland. State St. Ch., "A Friend" ...50.00

Portland. Y.P.S.C.E., Williston Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...8.00

South Berwick. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Raleigh, N.C._

Waterford. First Cong. Ch. ...3.13

West Woolwich. Mrs. J.P. Trott ...2.50

Woodfords. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Raleigh, N.C._ ...1.70

Yarmouth. Cong. Ch., _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...10.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $469.77.

Amherst. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...20.00

Exeter. "A Friend," _for the Freedman_ ...30.00

Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...21.00

Conway. Second Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Dover. Dr. L.G. Hill, _for Library, Sherwood, Tenn._ ...15.00

Gilsum. Cong. Soc. ...8.75

Greenland. Cong. Ch. ...20.00

Greenville. Cong. Ch. ...13.00

Hollis. Rev. S.L. Gerould, _for Freight to Birmingham, Ala._ ...1.45

Jaffrey. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...18.41

Keene. Second Cong. Ch. ....15.65

Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. H.B. SAWYER
L.M. ...58.58

Manchester. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...30.00

Milford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...5.00

Nashua. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Miss Collins, _for Student Aid, Avery
Inst._ ...11.25

Nashua. Miss H.M. Swallow ...10.00

Nashua. Y.P.S.C.E. First Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for Charleston, S.C._

Newport. Cong. Ch. ...43.38

North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...13.00

Northumberland. _For Freight_ to McIntosh, Ga. ...2.00

Rochester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...25.00

Rindge. Cong. Soc. ...10.80

South Newmarket Miss H.L. Fitts, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...20.00

Stratham. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. GEORGE A. FOSS L.M. ...30.00

Swanzey. Cong. Soc. ...7.50

Tanmouth. Mrs. Amanda M. Dane, to const. HORACE A. PAGE L.M. ...30.00


VERMONT, $661.17.

Barnet. Cong. Ch., 49.99; Cong. Sab. Sch., 13.61; Alexander
Holmes, 20 ...83.60

Cambridge. Mrs. S.W. Safford, B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._; 2 _for
Freight_ ...2.00

Coventry. "Friends," B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._; 2 _for
Freight_ ...2.00

East Corinth. Cong. Ch. ...8.47

Essex Junction. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

Franklin. Cong. Aid Soc., Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Hartford. J.G. Stimson, for Cong. Ch. ...100.00

Manchester. W.H.M. Soc., _Freight to McIntosh, Ga._ ...1.62

Manchester. "A Friend" ...9.50

Montpelier. "Friends," 68.90 and B. of Goods, _for Meridian,
Miss._ ...68.90

North Craftsbury. _For Freight_ to McIntosh, Ga. ...3.00

Norwich. Mrs. B.B. Newton ...5.00

Saint Albans. Christian Endeavor Soc., _for Student Aid,
Fisk U._ ...50.00

Saint Johnsbury. Box of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._; 2 _for Freight_ ...2.00

Springfield. A. Woolson ...200.00

West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Westminster. Y.P.S.C.E., by Carrie S. Watkins, _for Indian M._ ...2.55

Williston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...7.00

Woodford. "Soc. of Christian Endeavor" ...1.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt., by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks,
Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

Jamaica. Sab. Sch. ...4.53

Pittsford. Sab. Sch. ...20.00

Saint Johnsbury. W.H.M.S. of North Ch. ...60.00

Saxton's River. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

-------- 89.53

--------

$640.17

ESTATE.

Jericho. Estate of Hosea Spaulding, by C.M. Spaulding, 10; A.C.
Spaulding, 5; Helen M. Percival, 3; Ernest J. Spaulding, 3 ...21.00

--------

$661.17


MASSACHUSETTS, $37,154.78.

Acton. Evan. Cong. Ch. ...7.50

Andover. Miss Lucia Merrill, _for Mobile, Ala._ ...8.00

Arlington. Mrs. M.J. Wiggin, Bbl. _for Tougaloo U._

Attleboro. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...5.00

Belchertown. Mrs. D.B. Bruce ...15.00

Billerica. Mrs. H.B. Stanton ...2.00

Boston. Jacob P. Bates, _for Student Aid, Girls' School, Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._ ...67.00

Mrs. Woodbridge Oldin, _for Miss Collins' Indian Work, Grand River,
Dak._ ...10.00

S.W. Merrill ...1.00

Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. Sew. Soc, _for Tougaloo U._ ...1.00

Mrs. E.H. Flint, _Christmas Gifts for Tougaloo U._

Winthrop Ch. Sew. Circle, Bbl., _for Tougaloo U._

Dorchester. Y.P.S.C.E. of Pilgrim Ch ...2.33

East Somerville. Y.L. Mission Circle of First Cong. Ch., _for
Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...20.00

Franklin St. Ch. ...4.38

Neponset. Y.L. Aid Soc., Box of Basted work, _for Sew. Dept., Talladega
C._

-------- 105.71

Brimfield. First Cong. Ch. ...6.25

Brockton. Mrs. B. Sanford, _for Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._ ...2.00

Buckland. Cong. Ch. ...14.41

Cambridge. Y.L.M. Soc. North Ave. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...17.50

Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch., 210.11; Ladies' Miss'y Soc., 30, to
const. MRS. CHARLES OLMSTEAD L.M. ...240.11

Campello. Cong. Ch., to const HORACE BAKER L.M., ad'l ...50.00

Chatham. Cong. Ch. ...6.12

Chester. W.S. Gamwell, _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._ ...1.00

Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...12.25

Dalton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Sch'p, Santee Indian Sch._ ...17.50

Dunstable. Cong. Ch. ...32.00

Douglass. Rev. James Wells, 5; Miss Wells' S.S. Class, 5; Pkg.
Patchwork, _for Tougaloo U._ ...10.00

Georgetown. Y.P.S.C.E. of Memorial Ch., 10; First Ch., 30c ...10.30

Grafton. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...4.00

Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...33.75

Greenwich. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...24.10

Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch. ...38.49

Holbrook. Sab. Sch. of Winthrop Ch., ad'l, _for Student Aid,
Fisk U._ ...38.00

Holliston. "Bible Christians" ...100.00

Holyoke. Woman's H.M. Soc. of First Ch., Box of C.; 5 for Freight, _for
Grand View, Tenn._ ...5.00

Hopedale. A.A. Westcott, _for Student Aid, Sherwood, Tenn._ ...5.00

Hopkinton. Mrs. Wing's S.S. Class, _for Mobile, Ala._ ...12.00

Hubbardston. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Work for Sew. Dept.,
_Talladega C._

Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. ...20.00

Lakeville. Woman's Home Miss'y Soc., _for Indian M._ ...25.50

Lancaster. Sab. Sch. of Evan. Ch. ...11.00

Lawrence. Trinity Sab. Sch., 10; Y.P.S.C.E. of South Cong.
Ch., 4 ...14.00

Lawrence. Ladles of Lawrence St. Ch., Bbl, Val. 107.30, by Mrs. S.J.
Quimby, Sec., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Leicester. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...1.50

Leominster. Mrs. Wm. Howland, 25; Cong. Ch., 5, _for Williamsburg
Academy, Ky._ ...30.00

Manchester. Cong. Ch. ...30.00

Maplewood. Ladies' Social Union, Bbl., _for Raleigh, N.C._

Marblehead. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...20.00

Medford. McCollom Mission Circle of Mystic Ch. ...25.00

Middleboro. "A Friend," _for Indians, Chinese and Freedmen_ ...3.00

Millis. Cong. Ch. ...15.00

Newtonville. Central Cong. Ch. ...106.13

Northampton. "C" ...100.00

North Brookfield. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch. ...5.25

North Woburn. "A Friend" ...5.00

Oxford. Sab. Sch of Cong. Ch. ...14.67

Phillipston. Mrs. Mary P. Estey ...5.00

Plymouth. Church of the Pilgrimage ...88.60

Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. ...120.00

Randolph. Collected by Mrs. J.C. Labaree, _for Woman's Work_ ...30.00

Randolph. Y.L.M. Soc., _Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._ ...3.40

Reading. Cong. Ch,. (2 of which special) ...20.00

Rockland. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._

Royalston. Ladies' Soc, Bbl. of Bedding, _for Girls' Hall, Greenwood,
N.C._

Salem. Benev. Soc. Crombie St. Cong. Ch., _for Wilmington,
N.C._ ...20.35

Sheffield. Y.P.S.C.E., Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...10.00

South Amherst. Cong. Ch. ...4.50

South Easton. Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._, (30 of which from Young Men's
Class, _for Student Aid_) ...68.68

South Sudbury. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and Bedding, _for New
Orleans, La._

Spencer. Cong. Ch. ...22.38

Spencer. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...5.00

Spencer. "Nickel Band," _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...10.00

Springfield. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., Class No. 16, Bbl., _for
Tougaloo U._

Springfield. G. & C. Merriam, one copy Webster's Unabridged Dictionary,
_for Grand View, Tenn._

Springfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C., _for Charleston, S.C._

Spring Hill. Y.P.S.C.E., by C.E. Hoxie ...6.00

Sunderland. Mrs. F.G. Abby, _Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._ ...2.00

Taunton. Young People's Union, Broadway Ch., _for Indian M._ ...25.00

Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...30.00

Upton. First Cong. Ch. ...14.47

Walpole. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Mountain Work_ ...6.26

Waltham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., (10 of which from Miss Childs' and Miss
Kidder's classes on True Blue Cards.) ...15.76

Webster. First Cong. Ch., Miss K. Goddard's S.S. Class, 10.25; Mrs.
Goddard, 2.40, _for Mountain Work_ ...12.65

Wellesley. Miss M.A. Stevens, 10; Cong. Ch., adl., 10 ...20.00

Wellesley. Wellesley College, Box of C., _for Savannah, Ga._

Westboro. Young Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for Woman's Work_ ...20.00

West Brookfield. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...15.15

West Brookfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Santee Agency,
Neb._ ...7.34

Westfield. First Cong. Ch., Box C. and Box Books, _for Grand View,
Tenn._

West Hawley. Y.P.S.C.E. by Carrie Atkins, Treas. ...1.76

West Medway. Second Cong. Ch. ...2.32

West Newton. "Pax," _for Atlanta U._ ...2.00

Woburn. Mrs. Susan T. Greenough ...5.00

Worcester. Union Ch., Albert Curtis, 100; Plymouth Ch., 56; Union Ch.,
23; Pilgrim Ch., 27.10; "Two Friends," 2, _for Williamsburg Academy,
Ky._ ...208.10

Worcester. Summer St. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...2.25

Worcester. Rev. T.W. Thompson, _for Freight to Sherwood, Tenn._ ...2.00

Worcester. Plymouth Ch., _Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._ ...1.60

Worcester. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch. of Central Ch., Box of Effects, _for
Marion, Ala._

Worcester. "A Friend" ...25.00

Woman's Home Missionary Association, by Ella A. Leland, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:

_For Salary of Teachers_ ...440.00

_For a Teacher_, 100; _For Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 51 ...151.00

Cambridge. Aux. of First Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...10.00

Newton. Mr. Cobb's Class, Eliot Ch., _for Sch'p, Santee Agency Indian
Sch., Neb._ ...6.25

-------- 607.25

Hampden County Benevolent Society, by Charles Marsh, Treas.:

Monson. ...29.56

South Hadley Falls. ...12.25

South Hadley Falls. _For Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N.C._ ...5.13

Springfield. North ...33.00

Springfield. Indian Orchard ...14.74

West Springfield. Park ...15.00

West Springfield. Mittineague ...14.63

-------- 124.31

--------

$2,813.17


ESTATES.

Framingham. Estate of Mrs. Mary F. Cutler, by George E. Cutler and Chas.
F. Cutler, Executors ...841.61

Greenfield. Estate of Ex-Gov. William B. Washburn, by W.N. Washburn and
F.G. Fessenden, Ex's ...30,000.00

Medfield. Estate of Mrs. Abigail Cummings, by E.A. Hildreth and S.B.
Hildreth, Executors, _for the education, instruction and improvement of
the Colored population of the South_ ...1,500.00

Woburn. Estate of Daniel Richardson, by William Beggs, Ex. ...2,000.00

--------

$37,154.78


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE

Alfred, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl., _for Selma, Ala._

North Bridgton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl., _for Tougaloo, Miss._

Exeter, N.H. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls., Val. 195, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Brockton, Mass. Mrs. B. Sanford, Bbl., _for Tougaloo, Miss._

Cambridgeport, Mass. Mrs. R.T. Howes, Broadcloth Suit, _for Minister,
Birmingham, Ala._

Newton, Mass. Eliot Ch., Mrs. M.T. Vincent, Box, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

West Newton, Mass. Miss Alice Williston, Box, _for McLeansville, N.C._

Yarmouthport, Mass. Ladies' Sewing Circle, Box, _for Raleigh, N.C._


RHODE ISLAND, $1,089.97.

Central Falls. "Mission Workers." Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...20.00

Little Compton. United Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Providence. Union Cong. Ch., (of which 57.20 _for Indian
Work_) ...817.11

Providence. James Coats ...100.00

Providence. Central Ch., 35; Union Ch., 25; Miss Emily Howard, 25;
Blackstone Chapel, 17; Plymouth Ch., 11.75; Riverside Ch., 7.11;
Beneficent Ch., Mr. Troup, 5; Phoenix Bap't Ch., 5, _for Williamsburg
Academy, Ky._ ...130.86

Providence. Y.P.S.C.E. of North Cong. Ch., _for Grand View,
Tenn._ ...10.00

Providence. W.H. Waite, Bbl. of Papers


CONNECTICUT, $13,301.19.

Ansonia. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch., _for Girls' Hall, Santee Agency,
Neb._ ...20.00

Bethel. Cong. Ch., 64.82; "Thanksgiving Offering," 5 ...69.82

Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch. ...146.31

Bridgeport Y.P.S.C.E., Park St. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...12.27

Bristol. Miss Nettleton's Class, Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
Sch'p_ ...14.00

Centerbrook and Ivoryton. Cong. Ch., ad'l, to const. MISS ISABEL
NORTHROP and N.D. MILLER L.M's ...49.27

Centerbrook and Ivoryton. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...18.00

Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga._ ...14.75

Columbia. "Friends," B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

East Hampton. Dea. S. Skinner, _for Talladega C._ ...10.00

East Hartford. "A Friend," to const. MISS HARRIET M. OLMSTED and MISS M.
ELLA PORTER L.M's ...60.00

Essex. First Cong. Ch. ...25.33

Farmington. Miss M.G. Jones, 2 Packages C., _for Tougaloo U._

Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. ELI T. DUDLEY L.M. ...30.00

Guilford. Wigwam Club, by Mary F. Munson, Bbl., Val., 39.84, _for Ramona
Sch., Santa Fe_

Hadlyme. J.W. Hungerford ...100.00

Hampton. "A Friend" ...5.00

Hartford. Mrs. Henry A. Perkins, for Perkin's Hall, _Santee Agency,
Neb., Indian M._ ...1,000.00

Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., _for Indian M. Santee
Agency, Neb._ ...100.00

Hartford. Windsor Av. Cong. Ch., 10.60; Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., Rev. Wm.
H. Moore, 10; Mrs. L.M. Hotchkiss, 4 ...24.60

Hartford. "Friends" in Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...3.00

Hebron. "A Friend" ...3.00

Ivoryton. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...17.50

Ivoryton. Miss Isabel Northrop and Sab. Sch. Class, _for Indian
M._ ...12.50

Kensington. Cong. Ch., 34.53, to const MRS. CORNELIUS W. DUNHAM L.M.;
William Upson, 10 ...44.53

Lebanon. Goshen Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...15.00

Ledyard. "A Friend" ...2.00

Lyme. First Cong. Ch. ...29.74

Mansfield. Geo. F. King ...1.00

Melrose. Mrs. Wm. H. Thompson ...10.00

Meriden. Mrs. G.W. Carter, Pkg. Patchwork, _for Tougaloo U._

Milford. Plymouth Ch. ...50.00

Middletown. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...35.00

New Haven. United Ch., 374.83; J.L. Ensign, 10 ...384.83

New Haven. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...17.50

New London. Second Cong. Ch. ...324.60

New London. Mrs. J.N. Harris, _for Indian M._ ...20.00

North Guilford. Cong. Ch. ...20 00

North Haven. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss E.G. Marihugh, Treas. ...15.00

Plainfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 25.70; Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong.
Ch., 9.69 ...35.39

Plainville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...10.00

Pomfret. Rev. C.P. Grosvenor, 2 Boxes of Books, _for Talladega C._

Putnam. Sab. Sch. or Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
U._ ...25.00

Ridgefield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...10.00

Sound Beach. A.P. Cobb ...4.50

South Norwalk. Mrs. E.S. Hall, _for Tougaloo U._ ...1.80

Stratford. "A.S.C." ...3.00

Thomaston. Cong. Ch., 10.57; Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch., 11.65 ...22.22

Trumbull. Cong. Ch. ...7.30

Washington. "N." ...10.00

Waterbury. First Cong. Ch. ...150.00

Wauregan. Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ ...8.00

West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...47.38

Westminster. Mrs. A.C. Greene's Sab. Sch. Class ...10.00

Wilton. Cong. Ch. ...60.00

Winchester. Cong. Ch. ...2.55

Windsor. Mrs. E.N. Loomis ...10.00

Windsor. Mrs. M.E. Pierson, _for Student Aid, Sherwood, Tenn._ ...10.00

Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch., _for Jewett Memorial Hall_ ...25.00

Winthrop. Mrs. Clarissa Rice, 2; Mrs. M.A. Jones, 1.50 ...3.50

Woodbury. Ladies' M. Soc., First Cong. Ch., (18 of which _for Student
Aid), for Williamsburg, Ky._ ...25.00

Woodstock. First Cong. Ch., ad'l, to const. MISS DAISY AMSDEN, MRS.
CAROLINE BOYDEN and ADELBERT LYON L.M's ...16.00

----. "Friends in Connecticut" _for Native Indian Missionary_ ...100.00

--------

$3,301.19


ESTATE.

New Britain. Estate of C.B. Erwin, by Henry E. Russell, Jr.,
Executor ...10,000.00

--------

$13,301.19


NEW YORK, $740.50.

Amsterdam. N.R. and S.L. Bell ...5.00

Brooklyn. Mrs. J.H. Adams, 50; The Misses Thurston, 50, _for Indian
M._ ...100.00

Brooklyn. Pilgrim Chapel, _for Indian Hospital_ ...25.88

Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch. ...6.50

Brooklyn. "Lilly Circle," Park Ch., Christmas Package, by Miss Edith
Leonard, _for Santee Indian Sch._

Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. ...43.50

Eldred. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

Ellington. Mrs. H.B. Rice ...5.00

Flushing. First Cong. Ch. ...51.42

Hamilton. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Holly. "Life Member" ...10.00

Jamestown. First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

LeRoy. Mrs. L.A. Parsons ...5.00

Millers's Place. Mrs. S.B. Jones ...1.00

Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

New York. S.T. Gordon ...100.00

New York. B. VanWagenen, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...25.00

New York. Mrs. Armour, Box Toys and Clothing, _for Troy, N.C._

Ovid. D.W. Kinne ...5.00

Paris. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...13.75

Perry Centre. L.M. Soc., _Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._ ...1.25

Phoenix. Kings' Daughters and Primary S.S. Class, Bbl. C. etc., _for
Talladega C._

Portland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...5.50

Sherburne. Miss E.A. Rexford, _for Mountain Work_ ...5.00

Smyrna. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., to const. DWIGHT L. SWEET L.M. ...50.00

Syracuse. Plymouth Ch. ...20.12

Walton. First Cong. Ch. ...101.58

Waterville. Mrs. John Haven, 20; Miss M.E. Barnes, 5 ...25.00

West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. ...36.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:

Homer. Band of Hope ...5.00

Lockport. Ladies' Aux., _for Sch'p, Talladega C._ ...30.00

Paris. Judd Mission Band ...6.00

Saratoga. Ladies' Soc., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...20.00

Geddes. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

-------- 67.00


NEW JERSEY, $23.88.

Montclair. L.H.M. Soc., Cong. Ch., Pkg. Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._

Newark. Christian Endeavor Soc. of Belleville Av. Cong. Ch. ...8.15

Upper Montclair. Sab. Sch. of Christian Union Ch. ...15.73

Vineland. Geo. W. Lewis. Bbl. of Papers


OHIO, $5,299.17.

Austinburg. W.M.S. and S.S. Classes, Cong. Ch., 10; Kings' Daughters, 2,
_for Student Aid, Marion, Ala._ ...12.00

Austinburg. Ladies' Aid Soc., Box of C., etc., _for Marion, Ala._

Chatham Center. Mrs. M.S. Clapp ...1.00

Cincinnati. "Friends," B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Cincinnati. Ladies of Central Ch., Box of C., _for Fisk U_

Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., 83.30; Jennings Av. Cong. Ch., 25;
"Pulpit Supply," 15; Rev. I.W. Metcalf, 10; Rev. W.F. McMillen, 10; Mrs.
Caroline A. Garlick, 2; Society of Christian Endeavor, by Jennie
Macdougall, Sec., 6.56 ...151.86

Columbus. C.E. Dunham, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...3.00

Columbus. Mrs. P.A. Crafts, Box of Books, _for McIntosh, Ga._

Columbus. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._

Hartford. Cong. Ch. ...15.65

Fremont. C.T. Rogers ...5.00

Jersey. Mrs. C.F. Slough ...4.50

Norfolk. "A Friend," _for Indian M._ ...5.00

Norwalk. First Cong. Ch. ...25.17

Pittsfield. Union Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work_ ...3.25

Simons. Miss Lizzie Clark, _for Mobile, Ala._ ...2.00

Springfield. Cong. Ch. ...9.00

Youngstown. J.D. Whitney ...1.00

Wakeman. Ladies of Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for Fisk U._

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Treasurer,
_for Woman's Work_:

Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., W.H.M.S. ...10.00

Cleveland. Y.P.S.C.E., First Ch. ...0.75

Columbus. Eastwood Ch, Mrs. P.A. Crafts, 30; E.T. Bronson, 5; P.L.
Alcott, 5, _for Miss Collins' Indian Work_ ...30.00

Edinburg. Branch of O.W.H.M.U., _for Mist Collins' Indian Work_ ...5.00

Harmar. Oak Grove Mission Band ...3.00

Hudson. L.H.M.S. ...7.50

Johnsonville. Home Land Circle ...2.24

Litchfield. L.M.S. ...5.00

North Bloomfield. Kings' Daughters ...10.00

Oberlin. Second Ch., Ladies' Soc. ...60.00

Oberlin. First Ch., Aid Soc., _for Miss Collins' Indian Work_ ...5.00

Salem. Mrs. D.A. Allen ...5.00

-------- 143.49

--------

$381.92


ESTATES.

Austinburg. Estate of Miss Elizabeth G. Austin, by Henry Fassett,
Adm'r. ...1,223.50

Mechanicstown. Estate of Mrs. Susan Manifold, by William Boyd,
Executor ...3,393.75

--------

$5,299.17


INDIANA, $2.00.

Sparta. John Hawkswell ...2.00


ILLINOIS, $930.94.

Alton. Chas. Phinney ...25.00

Aurora. First Cong. Ch. ...18.04

Batavia. Cong. Ch. ...30.40

Bartlett. Cong. Ch. ...7.00

Belvidere. Mrs. M.C. Foote, 5, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._; 3 _for
Woman's Bureau_ ...8.00

Champaign. Cong. Ch. ...9.84

Chicago. New England Cong. Ch., 106.79; "Hapland," 100; "Friend," 51.30;
W.H.M.U. of South Cong. Ch., 30 ...287.99

Chicago. First Cong. Ch., _for Fort Berthold, Indian M._ ...30.00

Chicago. Mrs. E.C. Hancock, Pkg. Christmas Gifts, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Chicago. Wm. Babbitt, Chest of Carpenters Tools, _for Austin, Texas_

Earlville. "J.A.D." ...25.00

Galena. Mrs. Ann Bean ...2.50

Geneseo. Cong. Ch. ...107.96

Hampton. Henry Clark ...5.00

Hyde Park. S.S. Class, Presb. Ch., by Miss Elsie Cole, _for Student Aid,
Marion, Ala._ ...1.50

Kewanee. Cong. Ch. ...32.44

Mendon. Mrs. J. Fowler ...40.00

Morrison. Robert Wallace, to const. MRS. SUSAN P. ROGERS and MRS.
WILLIAM H. WALLACE L.M'S ...100.00

Normal. Mrs. P.E. Leach ...5.00

Oak Park. Royal Legion Class, Box Literature, _for Marion, Ala._

Ottawa. Cong. Ch. ...45.47

Ottawa. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Mobile, Ala_. ...6.40

Peoria, Miss Rutherford's S.S. Class, _for Mobile, Ala._ ...12.00

Princeton, Mrs. P.B. Corss ...15.00

Rio. Sab. Sch., by Mrs. John T. Avery ...7.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Illinois, by Mrs. C.E. Maltby,
Treasurer, _for Woman's Work_:

Aurora. ----, _for Indian M._ ...15.00

Millburn. ...25.50

Morris. L.M. Soc. ...10.00

Port Byron. ...14.40

Rockford. First Ch. ...15.00

Rockford. First Ch., _for Indian M._ ... 21.00

South Chicago. ... 2.50

Toulon. ...6.00

-------- 109.40


MICHIGAN, $268.46

Agricultural College. Prof. R.C. Kedzie. ...10.00

Belding. J.W. Bushnell. ...10.00

Dowagiac. A. Benedict. ...10.00

Grand Rapids. First Cong. Ch. ...33.60

Grand Rapids. Young Ladies' Park. Miss. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for Santee
Indian M._ 20.00

Kalamazoo. T. Hudson, to const. PRES. C. A. BLANCHARD L.M., 50 _for
Student Aid, Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._, and 50 _for Hampton,
Va._ ...100.00

Lake Linden. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
C._ ...10.00

Milford, Mrs. Wm. A. Arms. ...5.00

Northville. D. Pomeroy. ...5.00

Saint Johns. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch., by P.E. Walsworth,
Sec. ...2.00

Union City. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. etc, _for Marion, Ala._

Vermontville. Cong. Ch. ...15.21

Whitehall. Cong. Ch., 10; Girls' Miss'y Soc., 5. ...15.00

Woman's Home Miss'y Union of Mich., _for Student Aid, Talladega
C._ ...5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work:_

Allendale. W.H. and F.M.S. ...5.00

Cadilas. W.H.M.S. ...3.00

Covert. W.M.S. ...7.00

Detroit. Ladies' Union, First Ch. ...10.00

Detroit. Y.L.M.C., Trumbull Av. Ch. ...2.65

-------- 27.65


WISCONSIN, $155.94

Berlin. Young Conquerors' Mission Band, _for Student Aid, Fisk
U._ ...3.86

Hartford. Mr. and Mrs. R. Freeman, 30. to const. ALTA E. WEEKS L.M.;
Cong. Ch., 20.32. ...50.32

LaCrosse. First Cong. Ch. ...40.00

Madison. First Cong. Ch., by W.H. Chandler. ...50.00

Stoughton. Miss. H. Sewell and Friends, Box Books, etc., _for Sherwood,
Tenn._

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work:_

Clinton. W.M.S. ...4.00

Madison. W.M.S. First Cong. Ch. ...7.76

-------- 11.76


IOWA. $242.45

Burlington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work._ ...10.00

Burlington. Mercy Lewis. ...1.00

DesMoines. Plymouth Cong. Ch., thro. Mrs. J.M. Otis, Clothing, _for
Talladega, Ala._

Fairfield. J.W. Burnett. ...25.00

Grinnell. Cong. Ch. ...108.32

Marion. Cong. Ch. ...9.50

Muscatine. "Two Friends". ...5.00

Fairfax. Cong. Sab. Sch. ...1.50

Gilbert Station. Cong. Ch. ...3.55

McGregor. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...5.00

McGregor. Ladies' Miss'y Circle, _for Freight to New Orleans,
La._ ...1.40

Waucoma. Miss'y Soc., by Mrs. Sarah. W. Beggs, Treas., _for Beach Inst.,
Savannah, Ga._ ...12.00

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work:_

Alden. L.M.S. ...1.55

Alden. Mrs. E. Rogers. ...2.00

Alden. Mrs. I.H. Utley. ...0.35

Big Rock. W.H.M.U. ...4.20

Dubuque. Y.P.B. Soc., _for Mrs. DeForest, for Student Aid, Talladega
C._ ...8.00

Grinnell. W.H.M.U. ...9.73

Grinnell. "A Friend". ...1.00

McGregor. W.M.S. ...9.73

Monticello. W.M.S. ...8.00

Red Oak. W.M.S. ...5.00

Stacyville. W.M.S. ...7.00

Toledo. L.M.S. 1.62

Wentworth. "A few young Ladies". ...2.00

-------- 60.18


MINNESOTA. $93.01

Glyndon. "Church at Glyndon," 6.25, Sab. Sch., 59c; Mrs. Martha Millard,
1. ...7.84

Hamilton. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Hastings. D.B. Truax. ...5.00

Minneapolis, Plymouth Ch., 53, Union Cong. Ch. 15.42. ...68.42

Minneapolis. Sab. Sch. Pilgrim Ch. Bbl., _for Tougaloo U._

Morristown. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Pelican Rapids. Miss'y Soc., Box of Work etc., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Saint Paul. Sab. Sch. Class, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...2.25


MISSOURI. $89.81

Saint Louis. First Trin. Cong. Ch., 79.56; Third Cong. Ch.,
10.72. ...89.81


KANSAS. $66.25

Council Grove. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Kirwin. Cong. Ch. ...8.25

Lawrence. Second Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Sabetha. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

Topeka. "Helping Hand," 25; Miss L. Storrs, 5; _for Meridian,
Miss._ ...30.00

Woman's Home Missionary Society of Kansas, by Mrs. F.J. Storrs,
President, _for Woman's Work:_

Topeka. Sab. Sch. of Central Ch. ...5.00


NEBRASKA. $50.42

Clarks. Y.P.S.C.E., by M.L. Thomas, Sec. _for Student Aid, Atlanta
U._ ...3.18

Crete. Mrs. F.L. Foss. ...5.00

Fairfield. Cong. Ch. ...11.63

Nebraska City. First Cong. Ch. ...8.61

Oxford. F.A. Wood. ...10.00

Rising City. E. Grubb. ...12.00


NORTH DAKOTA. $1.36

Wahpeton. Y.P. Soc. of Christian Endeavor, by R.T. Barber,
Treas. ...1.36


SOUTH DAKOTA. $52.97

Grand Forks. Plymouth Cong. Ch. ...40.00

South Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. S.E. Fifield,
Treasurer, _for Woman's Work_:

Bowdie ...1.50

Henry ...2.53

Yankton. Y.P.M.B. ...7.20

Yankton. W.M.S. ...1.74

-------- 12.97


UTAH, $2.00.

Salt Lake City. Burlington Y.P.S.C.E., by Emma M. Blodgett,
Treas. ...2.00


WASHINGTON, $5.00.

Sumner. E.D. Swezey ...5.00


CALIFORNIA, $75.00.

Los Angeles. Rev. E.H. Hildreth, to const. EDWARD T. HILDRETH
L.M. ...50.00

Santa Barbara. Emily Beckwith, 12.; Mrs. M.B. VanWinkle, 2 ...14.00

San Diego. Misses Mather ...10.00

Santa Rosa. John Schatz ...1.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $55.00.

District of Columbia. Soc. of C.E., Lincoln Mem. Ch. ...10.00

Washington. Genl. E. Whittlesey, 25; First Cong. Ch. "Two Ladies," 5
each, 10 ...35.00

Washington. Ministering League of First Cong. Ch. _for Marie Adlof Sch'p
Fund Tougaloo U._ ...10.00


MARYLAND, $45.00.

Agricultural College. W.H. Bishop, _for Tougaloo U._ ...45.00


VIRGINIA, $5.00.

Hampton. Miss Marsh, _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...5.00


KENTUCKY, $11.50.

Lexington. Miss Etta M. Hitchcock, _for Student Aid_, 1.50; _for Mission
Sab. Sch._, 5; A Friend, 5; _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._ ...11.50


TENNESSEE, $23.50.

Jonesboro. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Cleveland. Chas. N. Cooper, M.D. ...10.00

Knoxville. Ogden Brothers ... 0.50

Knoxville. "The Pine Forest Union" Y.P.S.C.E., by Maggie Howell,
Treas. ...3.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $8.50.

Chapel Hill. Mrs. C.E. Jones ...4.00

High Point. Cong. Ch. ...1.50

Nalls. Cong. Ch. ... 0.50

Salem. Cong. Ch. ...2.50


GEORGIA.

Atlanta. The New Home Sewing Machine Co., No. 4 New Home Sewing Machine,
_for Conn. Industrial Sch., Thomasville, Ga._


FLORIDA.

Saint Petersburg. Geo. Johnson, Box Oranges, "Kings' Daughters" Box
Toys, etc., _for Troy N.C._


ALABAMA, $15.34.

Athens. Y.P.S.C.E. of Trinity Sch. ...1.60

Birmingham. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...5.00

Kymulga. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...1.00

Talladega. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...7.74


LOUISIANA, $8.00.

Louisiana. Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. C.S. Shattuck,
Treasurer, _for Woman's Work_:

Hammond ...1.00

New Iberia. St. Paul's Ch., Aux. ...1.00

New Orleans, Straight U. ...5.00

New Orleans, Morris Brown Ch. ...1.00

-------- 8.00


TEXAS, $2.50

Dallas. Cong. Ch. ...2.50


CANADA, $5.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander ...5.00


JAPAN, $20.00.

Kyoto. Branch of the Church of Christ, by Sam'l C. Bartlett,
Treas. ...20.00

--------


Donations ...$11,937.50

Estates ...49,279.86

--------

$61,217.36

INCOME, $30.00.

Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...30.00


TUITION, $4,935.20.

Lexington, Ky. Tuition ...219.05

Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition ...6.10

Troy, N.C. Tuition ...21.90

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition ...202.00

Charleston, S.C. Tuition ...275.38

Greenwood, S.C. Tuition ...132.65

Crossville, Tenn. Tuition ...70.00

Jellico, Tenn. Tuition ...56.95

Jonesboro, Tenn. County Fund ...100.00

Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition ...3.00

Memphis, Tenn. Tuition ...512.90

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition ...628.68

Oakdale, Tenn. Pub. Sch. Fund ...117.00

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition ...27.45

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Public Fund ...22.00

Sherwood, Tenn. Public Fund ...25.00

Sherwood, Tenn. Tuition ...17.00

Macon, Ga. Tuition ...417.05

McIntosh, Ga. Tuition ...74.88

Savannah, Ga. Tuition ...240.00

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition ...86.70

Anniston, Ala. Tuition ...181.08

Athens, Ala. Tuition ...87.55

Marion, Ala. Tuition ...97.00

Mobile, Ala. Tuition ...221.75

Selma. Ala. Tuition ...102.15

New Orleans, La. Tuition ...488.00

Meridian, Miss. Tuition ...96.55

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition ...232.25

Austin, Texas. Tuition ...178.18

-------- 4,935.20

United States Government for the Education of Indians ...2,365.20

--------

Total for February ...$68,547.76 ========


SUMMARY.

Donations ...86,417.76

Estates ...80,534.63

--------

$166.952.39

Income ...3,688.31

Tuition ...17,747.37

United States Government for the education of Indians ...8,049.6

--------

Total from Oct. 1 to Feb. 28 ...$196,437.74


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for February ...$104.23

Previously acknowledged ...372.89

--------

Total ...$477.12


  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Bible House, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Advertisements.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER."

[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH PRICE 10 CENTS

For beauty of polish, saving of labor, freeness from dust, Durability
and cheapness, truly unrivalled in any country.

Caution.--Beware of worthless imitations under other names, Put up in
similar shape and color intended to deceive. Each Package of the genuine
bears our Trade Mark. Take no other.

MORSE BROS. Proprietors, Boston Ma.]

SOLD BY MERCHANTS IN CIVILIZED COUNTRIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DR. WARNER'S CAMELS HAIR HEALTH UNDERWEAR

FOR MEN WOMEN AND CHILDREN.]

A new Fabric for Underwear superior to Silk or Wool. A protection
against Colds.

Sold by leading Merchants. Catalogues sent on application.

WARNER BROS. 859 Broadway, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

$60 SALARY. $40 EXPENSES IN ADVANCE allowed each month. Steady
employment at home or traveling. No soliciting. Duties delivering and
making collections. No Postal Cards. Address with stamp, HAFER & CO.,
Piqna, O.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BURTON HOUSE,

PRIVATE BOARDING.

Summit St, Crescent City, FLA

Open al the Year. Charges Moderate.

D.W. BURTON. _Prop._

       *       *       *       *       *

INDELIBLE

[Illustration]

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

"Don't on any account omit to mark plainly all your sheets, pillow
cases, napkins and towels. Mark all of your own personal wardrobe which
has to be washed. If this were invariably done, a great deal of property
would be saved to owners, and a great deal of would be spared those who
'sort out' clean pieces."

KATE UPSON CLARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

MENEELY & COMPANY,

WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS,

For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes and Peals. For more than half a
century noted for superiority over all others.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOSEPH GILLOTT'S STEEL PENS

_GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION 1978._

Nos. 303-404-170-604.

THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Vol. 44,
No. 4, April, 1890, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY -- ***

***** This file should be named 15609.txt or 15609.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/6/0/15609/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
