The Project Gutenberg EBook of Winchester, by Sidney Heath

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Winchester

Author: Sidney Heath

Release Date: April 25, 2005 [EBook #15706]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WINCHESTER ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.





WINCHESTER




[Illustration: THE CLOSE GATE]




WINCHESTER


Described by Sidney Heath

Pictured by E.W. Haslehust

[Illustration]


BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED

LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY

1911

       *       *       *       *       *

_Advertisement_

+Beautiful England+

_Volumes Ready_

OXFORD

THE ENGLISH LAKES

CANTERBURY

SHAKESPEARE-LAND

THE THAMES

WINDSOR CASTLE

CAMBRIDGE

NORWICH AND THE BROADS

THE HEART OF WESSEX

THE PEAK DISTRICT

THE CORNISH RIVIERA

DICKENS-LAND

WINCHESTER

THE ISLE OF WIGHT

CHESTER AND THE DEE

YORK




_Uniform with this Series_

+Beautiful Ireland+

LEINSTER

ULSTER

MUNSTER

CONNAUGHT

       *       *       *       *       *

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

The Close Gate _Frontispiece_

The City Bridge

Winchester Cathedral from the Deanery Gardens

Wykeham's Chantry

The Butter Cross

Entrance to the Deanery

Winchester College: The Outer Gateway from "Arcadia"

The Cloisters, Winchester College

Ruins of Wolvesey Castle

Beaufort Tower and Ambulatory, St. Cross

St. Cross from the Meadows

The Brethren's Hall, St. Cross

Plan of Winchester Cathedral




[Illustration]

WINCHESTER


Few of our English cities are more strikingly situated than the once
royal city of Winchester, which lies on the slopes and along the bed of
a chalk valley watered by the River Itchen. The greater part of the
present city is situated on the right bank of the river, while the best
general view of it is justly considered to be that obtained by looking
across the Vale of Chilcomb, from the road to Portsmouth. Of the Itchen
valley, with its rich meadows and tranquil stream, William Cobbett was
an enthusiastic admirer. "There are few spots in England", he exclaims,
"more fertile, or more pleasant, none, I believe, more healthy. The
fertility of this vale and of the surrounding country is best proved by
the fact that, besides the town of Alresford, and that of Southampton,
there are seventeen villages, each having its parish church, upon its
borders. When we consider these things, we are not surprised that a spot
situated about halfway down this vale should have been chosen for the
building of a city, or that that city should have been for a great
number of years the place of residence for the kings of England."

To-day the beautiful river winds in and out of the ancient streets, and
among the meadow lands, much as it did when Cobbett penned his _Rural
Rides_, although many charming examples of domestic architecture, which
then graced what was probably the most attractive High Street in
England, have been demolished or restored beyond recognition. As it
flows through the city proper, the river is divided up into a number of
small streams abounding in trout; but after a brief course these
rivulets unite just below the city, from whence the waterway is said to
be navigable all the way to Southampton. The bridge at the foot of the
High Street marks the former limit of the navigability of the river, and
is the reputed site of the legend concerning St. Swithun and the old
woman to whom the saint restored her eggs.

Before the advent of the railway, that great destroyer of our ancient
waterways, the Itchen was crowded with barges making their way from the
maritime port to the inland city; for, like so many of our old British
settlements, the site of Winchester was determined by the natural
conditions of the land which could be utilized for the purposes of
defence. Although every lock on the Itchen is now in ruins or choked by
weeds, and the last of its fleet of brown-sailed barges is derelict,
this is essentially a city whose origin goes back to the days when those
who, coming cautiously up from Southampton Water, reached at length the
practical part of the valley, where they built their stronghold under
the shelter of the downs, yet within easy reach of the sea. It was by
means of barges that much of the stone was brought for the building of
the numerous churches and monastic buildings. This was brought from the
Binstead Quarries in the Isle of Wight, from the Purbeck Quarries in
Dorset, and possibly from Portland as well.

There is ample evidence that Winchester was a British city (Caer-Gwent),
and the Venta Belgarum of Roman days, when it was connected by roads
with the other Roman cities of Andover, Silchester, Porchester, and
Salisbury. With the taking of the town by the Saxons in 495 it became
known as Wintanceastre, and here, after the final subjection of the
Britons, the capital of Wessex was established. If the claim of
Canterbury to be the "Mother City" of the Anglo-Saxon race be granted,
few will deny to Winchester the honour of being her eldest and her
fairest daughter. A royal city was this when Birinus, the apostle of
Wessex, came hither in 634, on his way to the Oxfordshire Dorchester, to
baptize the King of the West Saxons; and in 679 the episcopal see was
established, a cathedral built, and a monastic house attached to it. It
was from Wintanceastre that Egbert sent forth the decree which gave the
name of Anglia to his kingdom; and here, by the tranquil waters of the
Itchen, Alfred (with his friend, adviser, and tutor, St. Swithun),
Athelstan, and Canute held their Courts, and directed their policies.

It was during the reign of Athelstan that the redoubtable Guy, Earl of
Warwick, returning to England in the garb of a palmer from a pilgrimage
to the Holy Land, found the Danes besieging Winchester in great force,
and King Athelstan unable to find a champion willing to meet the Danish
giant, Colbrand, in order to decide the issue by single combat. The
Earl, retaining his disguise as a palmer, begged the king to let him
appear as the English champion.

[Illustration: THE CITY BRIDGE]

This singular combat, which was to decide the fate of the city,
commenced by Guy breaking his spear on the giant's shield, and the Dane
cutting the head off the Earl's horse. Guy then fought on foot, and,
beating the club out of his opponent's hand, cut off his arm. So the
duel waged until night, when the Dane, faint from loss of blood, fell
to the ground, and his head was cut off by the English champion. Having
settled the affair to the honour of his country and his own
satisfaction, the Earl made himself known to the King, under an oath of
secrecy, and returned thanks in the cathedral for his victory. He then
retired to a hermitage beside the Avon, and passed the remainder of his
life in the cave which still bears his name, and probably contains his
bones.

Several modern antiquaries are very sceptical about the whole story, and
labour hard to prove that Guy was a mythical figure, and his deeds
nothing but legendary lore. There is always some truth in these old
legends, in spite of the frills and embellishments added by the later
chroniclers, and the history of our land would be poor reading indeed if
we banished the romantic legends merely because they are not confirmed
by such dry-as-dust evidence as alone will satisfy a certain section of
scientific compilers, whose minds can perceive neither truth nor beauty
underlying ancient legends and traditions. The fact that they cannot be
proved to have happened is more than half their charm, and our garden of
romance, with its beautiful flowers of chivalry, is infinitely better to
live with than the dry and parched fields given over to the cultivation
of nothing but facts.

The defeat of the Danish giant is said to have been achieved in a
meadow to the north of the city, named from that occurrence "Danemark
Mead"; and we are told also that the Dane's sword was to be seen in the
Cathedral treasury down to the reign of James I. Be this as it may, we
do know that in the eighth year of Edward I a writ of right was brought
by the King against the Abbot of Hyde, to recover land usurped in the
north suburb of the city, called "Denemarche", and judgment was given
for the crown.

The appearance of the city in Saxon days has been described thus by Dean
Kitchin: "The three Minsters, which filled up the south-eastern corner
of the city, were for long the finest group of churches and dwellings in
all England. Wolvesey Palace, at once the school, the court of justice,
and the royal dwelling place, formed the bulwark against the dreaded
invasions of the Dane; inwards from Wolvesey precincts came the strong
enclosure of St. Swithun's Convent, a second fortress, which protected
the church, and behind both, sheltered by their strong walls and by the
river and the marshlands to the north, were the growing buildings of the
Nuns' Minster, and the new Minster. And up the rising towards the west,
on either side of the ancient Roman road from the eastward gate of the
city, the houses of the citizens began to cluster into a street, with
here and there a stone-built dwelling, and the rest made of that 'wattle
and dab' construction, of which from time to time examples are still
laid bare in the city."

Although many historical persons flit across the scene throughout the
centuries, the personal associations of Winchester are dominated by the
outstanding figures of Alfred, St. Swithun, and the great clerical
craftsman, William of Wykeham, the builder of much of the cathedral, and
the founder of St. Mary's College, Winchester, and New College,
Oxford--the former of which, although of later foundation, was intended
as a stepping-stone for the latter.

With the Norman Conquest, and the rapid rise of Westminster, the days of
Winchester as the seat of government were numbered, although it was much
favoured by the early Norman kings, possibly owing to its proximity to
such hunting grounds as the New Forest Cranborne Chase (where King
John's hunting lodge still stands), and the Royal Warren of Purbeck.

William I had his great palace near the cathedral, and it was to
Winchester that the body of William Rufus was brought on a cart, after
his ill-fated death in the New Forest.

Then the Domesday Book--if not compiled at Winchester--was kept there
for many years, when it was called "The Book of Winton". In the seventh
year of Henry II a charge appears in the Pipe Roll for conveying the
"arca", in which the book was kept, from Winchester to London.

There is naturally much in the life-history of St. Swithun that is
incapable of proof. He was possibly born in the neighbourhood of
Winchester about the year 800. He became a monk of the old abbey, and
rose to be head of the community, when he gained the favour of King
Egbert, who entrusted him with the education of his son Ethelwolf. There
is an authentic charter granted by Egbert in 838, and bearing the
signatures of Elmstan, _episcopus_, and Swithunus, _diaconus_. On the
death of Elmstan, in 852, Swithun was appointed his successor in the
see, when, in addition to erecting several churches, and building a
stone bridge over the Itchen, he appears to have enlarged and beautified
the Saxon cathedral built by Kynewalch when Winchester became the seat
of a bishopric in 679. The site of this Saxon church is considered to
have been a little to the north of the present cathedral, which is a
Norman building commenced by Walkelin a few years after the Conquest.

St. Swithun is best known to-day in his capacity of weather prophet. In
his humility he is said to have desired to be buried outside the church,
so that the foot of the passer-by, and the rainwater from the eaves,
could fall upon his grave; and here his body lay for more than a
century. When his remains were eventually translated, a chapel was
erected over the site of his grave at the north-east corner of the
church, and faint traces of this building may still be seen. King Edgar
provided the richly jewelled shrine into which the relics of the saint
were translated by St. Ethelwold, on July 15, 980, when the relics of
Birinus were enshrined at the same time, although these had already been
translated from Dorchester to Winchester by Bishop Hedda as early as the
seventh century. The shrine attracted an immense number of pilgrims
until that of Becket at Canterbury rose into prominence. The skull of
St. Swithun is said to have been taken to Canterbury by St. Elphege in
the eleventh century, and an arm of this patron saint of Winchester was
one of the most treasured possessions of Peterborough. What remained of
these much-disturbed relics were re-translated by Bishop Walkelin from
the old to the new cathedral, but in 1241 the shrine was broken by the
vane of the tower falling through the roof.

At the Reformation the shrine was destroyed, as is recorded in the
commissioners' letter, dated September 21, 1538:--

     "About three o'clock this Saturday morning, we made an end of the
     shrine here at Winchester. There was no gold, nor ring, nor true
     stone about it, but all great counterfeits; but the silver alone
     will amount to 2000 marks."

The popular tradition regarding St. Swithun's Day, July 15, is to the
effect that, as it rains or is fair on this day, the ensuing forty days
will be either wet or dry.

     "St. Swithun's Day, if thou dost rain,
     For forty days it will remain:
     St. Swithun's Day, if thou be fair,
     For forty days 't will rain nae mair."

The tradition is said to be due to the saintly request being
disregarded, with the result that, when his remains were about to be
translated, a heavy rain burst forth, and continued without ceasing for
the forty succeeding days. This was interpreted as a divine warning, so
that, instead of disturbing the saintly bones, a chapel was erected over
them. As a matter of fact, Professor Earle and other authorities assure
us that the legend is fictitious, and that the translation was attended
by the utmost eclat and success, and blessed with fine weather.

[Illustration: WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL FROM THE DEANERY GARDENS]

Foreign pilgrims coming from Normandy and Brittany, on their way to the
shrine of St. Swithun, or to that of St. Thomas of Canterbury, would
land, many of them, at Southampton, and journey to Winchester, there
to await other bands of pilgrims bound for the great Kentish shrine.
This was the route taken by Henry II when he did penance before the tomb
of the murdered Becket, in July, 1174. Although clearly seen in the wold
of Surrey and the weald of Kent at the present time, it must be
confessed that but faint traces of the Pilgrims' Way remain in
Hampshire, although early chroniclers speak of an old road that led
direct from Winchester to Canterbury. The great concourse of pilgrims to
St. Swithun's shrine caused Bishop Lucy to enlarge much of the church,
and in the reign of the first Edward the building still known as the
Strangers' Hall was erected by the monks of St. Swithun for the poorer
class of pilgrims, who here found food and shelter for the night. On
their departure they repaired to the doors of the Prior's lodging--the
three beautiful arches of which now form the entrance to the
Deanery--where they were given alms and fragments of food to sustain
them on their journey.

The associations of Alfred with this ancient Wessex capital are many and
various. He founded the famous Abbey of Hyde, situated without the city
gates, known for long as the New Minster, and first removed from its
original site near the cathedral in the twelfth century. That Alfred's
remains were laid to rest somewhere within, or just without, the walls
is beyond question, although the exact spot has not yet been
definitely located. When the Benedictine monks of Hyde obtained a
charter from Henry I in 1110, giving them leave to erect a new convent
and church in the green meadows outside the north gate, they are said to
have taken to their new home the wonder-working shrine of St. Josse, the
silver cross given by Canute, and the bones of Alfred.

At the Reformation, Thomas Wriothesley wrote to Cromwell saying:--

     "We intend both at Hyde and St. Mary to sweep away all the rotten
     bones that be called relics; which we may not omit, lest it be
     thought we came more for the treasure than for the avoiding of th'
     abomination of idolatry".

So the resting-place of the noblest of English kings remains unknown;
but a passing antiquary is said to have carried off a stone marked with
the words, "AELFRED REX, DCCCLXXXI", and this stone may still be seen at
Corby Castle in Cumberland.

Of Hyde Abbey nothing but an old gateway near St. Bartholomew's Church,
and some slight fragments of wall, remain; but a considerable portion
was standing until the ruins were pulled down to provide the site for a
new Bridewell, which has vanished in its turn. The property has now come
into the hands of the Corporation, and scientific excavations have been
commenced. Strong hopes are entertained that Alfred's tomb may be
found, although the iconoclasts of the Reformation and the Magistrates
of later days have made the task a difficult, if not an impossible one.
In 1901 Alfred's thousandth anniversary was celebrated at Winchester,
and on September 20 of that year Lord Rosebery unveiled Hamo
Thorneycroft's magnificent bronze statue, standing in the Broadway, and
bearing on its granite pedestal the single word, eloquent in its
simplicity:--

     AELFRED.

Interesting and important as are the associations of Alfred and St.
Swithun with this ancient capital of Wessex, the _genius loci_ is
William of Wykeham, one of the most remarkable men the world has ever
produced. The more we study his life and character the more we are
amazed at the versatile nature of his splendid gifts. Born, like Wolsey,
the only other clerical architect with whom he can be compared, of
humble parents, in the sleepy little village of Wickham, in the autumn
of 1324, he early attracted the attention of Sir John Scures, the lord
of the manor of Wickham, and Constable of Winchester Castle. By Sir
John's influence he became a scholar at the Priory School, the "Great
Grammar School of Winchester", then situated just outside the west wall
of the priory enclosure. Taught by the brethren of St. Swithun's, he
was eventually recommended to Bishop Edington, who appears to have
appreciated the great talent for architecture shown by young Wykeham.
Edington himself was no mean builder, and he had already begun to
rebuild the west front of the cathedral, and to transform the nave from
the Norman to the Perpendicular style, a transformation that was to be
completed by Wykeham when he succeeded his old master in the episcopacy.

In Wykeham's twenty-third year Edward III came to Winchester, and he,
having heard of the clever young architect, wished to test his skill in
the warfare then being waged against Scotland and France, and
particularly in the new fortifications of Calais. On taking service with
the King, plain William Wykeham became Sir William de Wykeham, and as
Surveyor of Works he superintended such buildings as St. Stephen's
Chapel, Westminster, and the castles of Dover and Queensborough. In 1356
he was in charge of Windsor Castle, which, as his birthplace, Edward
wished to beautify by many additions. It has been said that the Round
Tower Wykeham built at Windsor made the fortune of its designer. We now
find Wykeham Warden of all the royal castles, and sub-dean of the church
of St. Martins-le-Grand, on the site of which is the General Post
Office; and as a public notary he was present at the signing of the
Treaty of Bretigny.

Possibly owing to the dearth of clergy caused by the Black Death,
Wykeham, after the laying-on of hands by his old master, Bishop
Edington, became an acolyte in the December of 1361, a sub-deacon in the
March following, and priest in the June of 1362. A few years later, when
Edington was laid to rest within his cathedral, a sharp controversy
arose between the King and the Pope as to who should succeed. The
differences, which need not be discussed here, being eventually settled
to the satisfaction of both parties, Wykeham was offered the vacant see,
when he said to the King:

     "Sire, I am unworthy, but wherein I am wanting myself, that will I
     supply by a brood of more scholars than all the prelates of England
     ever showed".

And how worthily he fulfilled his promise is a matter of history.

To quote the authors of _Historic Winchester_:

     "There was a great stir in the old city when the day of Wykeham's
     enthronement arrived. It was the 9th of July, and the town would be
     looking especially beautiful in its bower of trees; an outrider had
     announced the bishop before he entered the city, probably by the
     north gate, and either here or at the entrance to the close he was
     met by the Archdeacon of Northampton, William Athey by name, who
     was commissioned to enthrone him: having saluted, the Archdeacon
     alighted from his palfrey, which according to the custom at that
     time was with all its trappings taken possession of by this
     ecclesiastic.... The bishop's robing most probably took place at
     the priory close by, from whence the procession, forming in the
     cloisters under the direction of Hugo de Basyng, prior of St.
     Swithun's, would pass to the west door, where it would be joined by
     the heads of the other monasteries in and near Winchester--Thomas
     de Pechy, Abbot of Hyde, holding highest rank amongst them. Next
     would follow long lines of monks clad in their robes of brown,
     black, white, or grey, according to their order, and then many a
     layman, gathered in from the country round to honour both Church
     and State on this occasion. The great procession, gorgeous with
     embroidered cope and many a rich vestment, with episcopal staff and
     crozier both of prior and abbot carried aloft, must have formed an
     imposing spectacle as it filed up the long nave of the cathedral,
     thronged, doubtless, to overflowing by many citizens--for unusual
     interest would be evinced by Winchester in this enthronement of one
     long known to them, now Chancellor of England and certainly, next
     to the King and Archbishop, the greatest man in the country."

As bishop, Wykeham found plenty to do, apart from his ecclesiastical
duties, in repairing his various palaces, and in housing the
predecessors of his Winchester scholars in a house on St. Giles's Hill,
until such time as he could give them fitting buildings and a chapel of
their own. But before Wykeham could see his schemes take an
architectural form, he was to suffer the loss of royal favour owing to
the death of the Black Prince and the rise into power of his enemy, John
of Gaunt. The bishop was charged with the misappropriation of a small
sum of money, and, judgment being given against him, the temporalities
of the see of Winchester were seized, and he was forbidden to come
within twenty miles of the Court. He retired to Waverley Abbey, of which
some picturesque ruins remain, near Farnham; and although on the King's
jubilee pardon was granted to all offenders, a special exception was
made in the case of "Sire William de Wykeham".

[Illustration: WYKEHAM'S CHANTRY]

This was more than the heads of the Church could stand, especially as
the original charge was an unjust one; so at the ensuing meeting of
Convocation, Courtenay, then Bishop of London, declared boldly that
unless their favourite bishop was reinstated in office, no money would
be forthcoming from the clergy. In less than a month the pressing need
of funds caused the King to send a messenger to Waverley and beg Wykeham
to return to his house at Southwark. This was the first step, which,
however, did not mean an immediate return to the temporalities, as these
had been settled on the youthful heir apparent, Richard; but the people
took up Wykeham's cause, and on June 18, 1377, in the presence of the
little Richard, his uncle, and the King's council, Wykeham promised to
fit out three galleys for sea, in return for the temporalities of
Winchester. Two days later Edward III died, forsaken by his mistress,
Alice Perrers, and estranged from the one man who had served him so long
and so faithfully.

The architectural genius of Wykeham as exhibited at St. Mary's College
and the cathedral at Winchester, and at New College, Oxford, originally
founded as "St. Maries' College of Winchester at Oxenford", marks a very
decided epoch in the development of English architecture. His works, in
an architectural style found nowhere but in England, are the outcome of
a mind free from triviality, and full of common sense. His buildings are
admirably suited to their purpose, and at first sight they appear to be
so simple in design that it has been suggested that Wykeham cared more
for the constructive than the artistic side of building. It is true that
he considered sound construction and good proportions of greater
importance than a profusion of detail, yet such ornament as is found in
his work is highly effective and most carefully studied. To this
bishop-architect we undoubtedly owe much of the dignity and simplicity
which mark the Early Perpendicular buildings, qualities which make the
style such a contrast to the exuberance of that which immediately
preceded it, or the over-elaboration of the Tudor buildings that
followed it.

With few exceptions, practically the whole of Wykeham's work, both here
and at Oxford, remains much as he left it; so that, good bishop, wise
administrator, generous founder, and pioneer educationist though he was,
it is mainly as a munificent builder and architectural genius that his
fame has lived in the past, and will continue to live in the future.

Here for the moment we must leave the great prelate of Winchester and
begin our perambulation of the city that received him as a youth,
welcomed him as a bishop, mourned him when dead, and that still bears on
the long nave of its cathedral, and on its famous college, the impress
of his manly, robust, and essentially English mind.

By way of a footpath leading from the London and South-Western Railway
station, the upper part of the famous High Street can be reached,
although the thoroughfare now possesses but few features of interest
until we arrive at the old West Gate, a reminder, if such were needed,
that Winchester was a heavily fortified and strongly walled city. On the
right is Castle Hill, the site of the ancient castle wherein Stigand,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was imprisoned and Matilda besieged, and from
whose courtyard William Rufus set out on the hunting expedition to the
New Forest which was attended by such fatal consequences. All that now
remains of this stronghold is the fine old hall built by Henry III.

For some time this apartment was used as the County Hall, and here Judge
Jeffreys opened his Bloody Assize before proceeding to Dorchester,
Exeter, and Taunton. Alice Lisle was the widow of John Lisle, who had
been Master of St. Cross Hospital, and member for Winchester in the Long
Parliament. Although the men of Hampshire had taken no part in
Monmouth's Rebellion, many of the fugitives had fled thither, and two of
them, John Hickes, a Non-conformist divine, and Richard Nelthorpe, a
lawyer, found refuge in the house of Alice Lisle, where they were
eventually discovered. At her trial, Alice Lisle stated briefly that,
although she knew Hickes to be in trouble, she was quite ignorant of the
fact that he had participated in the rebellion. When the jury said they
doubted if the charge had been made out, Jeffreys was furious, and after
another long consultation they returned a verdict of "Guilty". The next
morning the judge pronounced sentence, and ordered the prisoner to be
_burned alive_ that same afternoon. When remonstrances had poured in
from all quarters, Jeffreys consented to the execution being postponed
for five days; and the sentence was eventually commuted from burning to
hanging. So the first victim of Monmouth's ill-fated rebellion was
hanged on a scaffold in the market-place of Winchester.

A striking object hanging at one end of the hall is the top of the
reputed Round Table of King Arthur, painted in radiating white and green
sections, with a portrait of the famous king inset, crowned and robed,
and the Tudor rose in the centre, while around the circumference are
the names of the knights in old black-letter characters. Doubtful though
it is that the table is the actual one that figures in the Arthurian
legends, yet it is certainly of great antiquity, and has been frequently
referred to by more than one writer of mediaeval days. It has been
conjectured that it may be nothing more than the wheel of fortune which
Henry III commanded to be made for the castle. In later years another
palace was started here by Charles II, the only portion that was
completed being now used as barracks.

Beyond the West Gate is an obelisk, set up in commemoration of a
visitation of the Plague in 1669, when the country people brought their
produce and left it outside the gate to be taken in by the city
dwellers, who deposited the money for the goods in bowls of vinegar,
whence it was abstracted by pincers, to avoid infection. The stone on
which the exchanges were made is incorporated in the base of the
obelisk.

The West Gate is the only one that remains of the principal entrances to
the city, as King's Gate, with the little church of St. Swithun perched
on top, was of secondary importance. This West Gate escaped the fate
that has overtaken so many of our old city gates owing to its having
been used for some time as a smoking room for the adjacent hotel. This
apartment above the crown of the gateway arch is, like that over the
West Gate of Canterbury, used for the purposes of a museum, wherein are
deposited such interesting relics as the Winchester bushel, cloth
measures, and ancient instruments of punishment. At one time the room
was used as a prison, and the walls are covered with names or marks made
by those who were incarcerated here.

The gate is of fourteenth-century date, the two panels with armorial
bearings seen on the western side of the archway being later insertions.
Through the gateway a delightful view is obtained of the picturesque
High Street, with many a high-pitched gable rising above the masses of
irregular architecture; while an ancient clock on a wooden bracket juts
out from the old Queen Anne Guildhall, which has a statue of Her Majesty
over the entrance, the Curfew Tower rising on one side of the building.
A new Guildhall of greater architectural pretensions has been erected in
the Broadway, the original one being now used as a shop.

[Illustration: THE BUTTER CROSS]

From the West Gate the High Street slopes down to the Itchen. On the
right stands the old Butter Cross, in rather a cramped position. Two
reasons have been given for its name: one, that during Lent, those
wishing to eat butter could do so by consuming it by the cross; the
other, and more probable, explanation is that here came farmers wishing
to dispose of their butter, which they exposed for sale on the steps
of the cross. The structure is of fifteenth-century date, but has been
much restored, the only original figure on it being that of St.
Amphibalus. Just beside the cross is the interesting little opening that
leads into the Close, and in which is the entrance to St. Lawrence
Church, of which nothing is visible from this point but the doorway, and
the tower rising above the surrounding houses. This church has been said
to be the Mother Church of the diocese of Winchester, an idea that may
have owed its origin to the fact that before proceeding to the Cathedral
to be enthroned the bishops designate enter this ancient church to robe
and "ring themselves in". Only the other day, May 6, 1911, Dr. Talbot
followed this old custom, and the people listened eagerly for the number
of rings, as these are supposed to denote the number of years the bishop
will be at the head of the diocese. It may be of interest to chronicle
that Dr. Talbot rang nine times.

Near the church at one time was an open space called the Square, where
were situated the Pillory and Whipping Post. The palace of William I is
said to have occupied this site, and St. Lawrence's Church may possibly
have been the private chapel of the royal residence. A fragment of
Norman masonry gives a certain amount of probability to the
supposition, while at the beginning of last century some workmen
excavating in Market Street came across the foundations of an ancient
tower, of great thickness and strength. The present arched and narrow
entrance from High Street leads to the fine avenue of limes that forms
the principal approach to the west front of the Cathedral, begun by
Edington _circa_ 1360, the severe simplicity of which has been much
criticized, Ruskin assailing it furiously in the _Stones of Venice_. On
the apex of the gable is a canopied niche containing a statue of
Wykeham.

The present edifice is thought to stand approximately on the site of the
earlier Saxon church restored by Ethelwold in 980, in which Queen Emma
underwent the "fiery ordeal" by walking blindfold and barefooted over
nine red-hot plough-shares, thus proving her innocence of the charges
brought against her, and furnishing her accusers with an example of what
female chastity is able to accomplish. The main portion of the structure
as seen to-day was begun by Bishop Walkelin about 1079, and completed
some fourteen years later. It is the longest of English churches,
measuring externally 566 feet, and internally 562-1/2 feet, being a few
feet longer than St. Alban's, which has the same plan; although we must
remember that when the nave of Winchester terminated at the west in two
large towers the whole mass was 40 feet longer than at present.

The vista of the whole block of masonry, with its stumpy tower and
heavily buttressed walls, conveys the idea of immense strength rather
than of gracefulness; while its situation at the bottom of a hill, and
near the bank of the river, is one of great charm.

It is when the nave is entered that the full beauty and vast proportions
of the Norman church are revealed, for this is in essence a Norman
building encased with Perpendicular details and additions. As Wykeham's
alterations were merely added to the original piers, the stateliness of
the whole remains. Full credit, of course, must be given to Wykeham for
the wonderful skill he showed in this work of transformation, and in
removing the heavy triforium, although the grandeur of the nave as a
whole is due to the combined work of Walkelin and Wykeham. This
alteration of styles in the nave was begun by Edington, continued by
Wykeham, and completed by his successors in the see--Cardinal Beaufort
and Bishop Waynflete--who built the stone vaulting of the roof. The
tower at the intersection of the transepts is the second of its kind,
the first, built by Walkelin, having fallen in 1107, owing, says
tradition, to the wicked Red King having been buried beneath it. Of its
rebuilding there are no records.

So many detailed architectural histories of the building have appeared
that its principal features must be familiar to every lover of our
national architecture. There are, however, one or two features about
this cathedral that should be noted. Apart from its great length, which
is greater than any church in the world, with the exception of St.
Peter's at Rome, it is remarkable for its parclose screens, with the
mortuary chests upon them; and for the beauty and number of its
chantries, in which it is richer than any other English cathedral. They
are said to have been saved from destruction during the Civil War by the
Parliamentary colonel, Fiennes, an old Wykehamist; and certain
historians describe the dramatic incident of the colonel standing with
drawn sword to protect the chantry of the founder of his Alma Mater from
the iconoclastic tendencies of his troopers. The chantries number seven,
and were built as chapels by bishops for their last resting-places.
Within these chantries are the tombs of Edington, Wykeham, Waynflete,
Beaufort, Gardiner, Langton, and Fox, all of whom were bishops of the
diocese. Fox's chantry was carefully restored by Corpus Christi College,
Oxford; and that of Waynflete by Magdalen College, as a mark of
reverence and esteem for the memory of their respective founders.

The first to be seen on entering the nave from the west is that of
Wykeham, whose faith in the solidity of Norman building was so great
that he did not hesitate to cut away more than a third of the two nave
pillars between which it is placed. Within the chapel, said to have been
built on the site of an altar to the Virgin, is the effigy of the
bishop-builder, with flesh and robes coloured "proper", as the heralds
say; and at his feet are the figures of his three favourite monks, to
whom he left an endowment for the celebration of three masses daily in
his chantry, while each was to receive one penny a day from the prior.
The effigy lies on an altar tomb, in episcopal attire, the head-pillow
supported by two angels. Five bays farther on is Edington's chantry, but
without effigy, as also are those of Fox and Langton. Of the seven
chantries those of Fox and Beaufort are usually considered the most
beautiful.

The proud Cardinal Beaufort, founder of the "Almshouse of Noble Poverty"
at St. Cross, is represented by Shakespeare as dying in despair:

     "Lord Cardinal, if thou think'st on Heaven's bliss
     Hold up thy hand: make signal of thy hope.
     He dies, and makes no sign!"

Dean Kitchin writes: "One cannot look at his effigy, as it lies in his
stately chantry, without noting the powerful and selfish characteristics
of his face, and especially the nose, large, curved, and money-loving.
The sums Beaufort had at his disposal were so large that he was the
Rothschild of his day. More than once he lent his royal masters enough
money to carry them through their expeditions."

The mortuary chests are certainly among the most interesting things
possessed by any English cathedral. They are supposed to contain the
bones of Kings Eadulph, Kinegils, Kenulf, Egbert, Canute, Rufus, Edmund,
Edred, Queen Emma, and Bishops Wina and Alwyn. They no doubt got much
mixed up when removed from the crypt by Henry de Blois, and again when
the chests were broken open by the Parliamentarians, so that a detailed
identification has been made impossible. It is now generally
acknowledged that the bones of Rufus are in one of these chests, and
that the so-called Rufus tomb in the retro-choir is the burial place of
some great ecclesiastic. Such at any rate is the opinion of Dean
Kitchin, who has done so much to elucidate the past history of the city
and its Cathedral.

When one of these boxes was taken recently out of its enclosing chest
and examined, it was found to have a roof something like a low gable,
which was decorated with painting about a century later than the time of
de Blois. On the outside appeared the words in Latin: "Here are together
the bones of King Kinegils and of Ethelwolf". Four of the Italian
chests that held the inner boxes were the gift of Bishop Fox. The
other chests have revealed five complete sets of human bones, and among
the remains in another were the bones of a female, possibly those of
Queen Emma.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO THE DEANERY]

The visitor will not fail to have pointed out to him by the
well-informed vergers the innumerable features of interest, such as the
Lady Chapel, the retro-choir, the Holy Hole where the relics were kept,
the black oak stalls of the choir, the fine pulpit given by Prior
Silkstede, and the magnificent screen begun by Beaufort and completed by
Fox. The monuments, apart from those contained in the chantries, are
many, and include one surmounted by a beautifully wrought cross-legged
effigy, which has not yet been identified. There are memorials or tombs
of James I and Charles I, by le Suer, who wrought the statue of the
latter at Charing Cross; Dr. Warton, Professor of Poetry at Oxford, and
headmaster of Winchester; Jane Austen; and William Unwin, the intimate
friend of Cowper. A flat stone, with an inscription by his
brother-in-law, Ken, marks the resting-place of Izaak Walton, "whose
book", a modern writer tells us, "makes the reader forget for the time
the cruelty of his sport".

The curiously carved font, whereon are depicted symbolical figures and
incidents from the legendary life of St. Nicholas of Myra, bears much
similarity to three others found in Hampshire--at St. Michaels',
Southampton; East Meon; and St. Mary Bourne. They are all of the same
era, and possibly the work of the same hand, being among the most
interesting of our Norman fonts. The material of which they are made has
never been settled, some authorities defining it as Tournai marble,
others as basalt, and yet others as nothing more than slate.

The roll of bishops is a remarkable one, and the see has had eleven who
were also Lord Chancellors, the last being Wolsey in 1529.

As we have seen, Winchester continued in favour with the reigning houses
long after it had ceased to be a royal residence. Here Henry I was
married to the Saxon Matilda, and here in the closing years of his life
the aged Wykeham married Henry IV and Joan of Navarre; and here, too,
came Philip of Spain and Henry VIII's sad daughter, Mary of England, to
be wedded before the high altar, the chair on which the royal bride sat
being still shown to visitors.

For the architectural student the plan of the cathedral is not the least
interesting feature of the building, for although it has an ambulatory
which is semicircular internally, the plan is in other respects rather
exceptional. It is what architects call a periapsidal plan, meaning that
its eastern termination contains a processional aisle or ambulatory,
designed mainly for the purpose of allowing a procession to pass round
the high altar without entering the presbytery. In the crypt of
Winchester Cathedral the plan of the early Norman church may be seen
_sui generis_. A rather exceptional feature is that the eastern
ambulatory is semicircular within but rectangular without, although the
long chapel that projects from this ambulatory has an apsidal, not a
rectangular, termination.

To the receptive mind all our ancient cathedrals, and a few of our
modern ones, possess a subtle atmosphere of their own, indescribable but
plainly felt, both within and without their walls. In such an atmosphere
we lose sight of the Winchester of to-day. It becomes ancient,
ecclesiastical, historical, learned, and romantic. Here we return in
imagination to the scenes of the Middle Ages, when love was attested by
chivalrous deeds of arms done in honour of bright eyes, and poetry
sounded its lyre in praise of him who had been most devoted to his
Church, most faithful to his mistress, and most loyal to his king. As a
whole, this Cathedral of Winchester is a vast building, simple almost to
a fault, yet one that possesses a solemn repose unspeakably restful to
mind and spirit--a sense of undisturbed harmony and refined yet massive
simplicity. Towards eventide the shadows of the turrets and pinnacles
creep, day by day, over the surrounding bands of greensward, their cool
greys advancing inch by inch until they reach the spacious pavements,
whereon they cast the symbols of our Christian faith in ruddy
trefoil-headed slants of glory.

Whatever else is omitted from the history of the Cathedral, mention must
be made of the valiant efforts that have been and are still being made
to preserve the stability of the structure. A few years ago the east end
showed signs of subsidence, and ominous cracks appeared in the north
transept, a part of the old Norman church. An examination of the fabric
proved that herculean tasks were essential to save this portion of the
edifice. It was agreed that only by extensive underpinning could the
work be accomplished. It has been very costly, and funds are most
urgently needed to complete the preservation, not only of the eastern
end, but of the whole Cathedral. The cradle of woodwork erected to give
temporary support to the eastern superstructure cost over a thousand
pounds to fix, and up to date many thousands of pounds have been spent
on the work. It was not until these temporary supports had been fixed
and excavations begun that the magnitude of the task was fully revealed.
The Cathedral was found to have been built on an old "water-bed" having
a foundation of peat, the distance between the ground level and the
firm gravel beneath the peat being 27 feet. The only hope of saving the
east end was to remove the peat and fill in the spaces with concrete and
cement. With the removal of the peat, however, there was so great an
influx of water that pumping was of no avail. Two of the best divers in
the kingdom were then procured, and by working on their backs and sides
in 15 feet of muddy water they succeeded in laying the concrete bed.
Owing to the same cause, the remainder of the structure will, sooner or
later, have to be treated in the same way, and the thorough restoration
of the west front cannot be long postponed. The difficulty of the work
is realized when we consider that it takes a whole month to underpin 4
feet of foundation. Owing to the cramped space and the darkness three
weeks are spent in excavation; after which the divers require a week to
place the concrete and cement in position. That so national a heritage
will be saved, for the delight of our own and the instruction of future
generations, must be the wish of all true lovers of the great building
achievements of the past.

The cathedral precincts are in excellent keeping with the repose and
beauty of the building to which they form the court, and are full of
historical memories. The palace of the Conqueror reached from Great
Minster Street to Market Street, from High Street to the Square; and
eastwards rose the "New Minster", and the Nuns' Abbey of St. Mary.

To-day the greater part of the Close, with the Deanery and the various
canonical residences, lies on the south side. Only a few slight
fragments remain of the cloisters, the destruction of which could not
have been considered possible by Wykeham. They were taken down by Bishop
Horne in the reign of Elizabeth. The short row of Norman arches seen
from the Close belonged to the old Chapter House, which is said to have
been pulled down for the sake of its lead. The Deanery was the ancient
house of the Priors, of which it contains many interesting memorials.
Here are the Great Hall, now subdivided, and the Hospitium, used as
stables. The Deanery entrance has three pointed arches, beneath which,
as we have stated, the poor pilgrims and other wayfarers received food
and alms. On his numerous visits to Winchester, Charles II used to lodge
at the Deanery, until Prebendary Ken (afterwards Bishop of Bath and
Wells) refused to allow Nell Gwynne to enter the house, with the result
that she had to content herself with an inferior residence outside the
precincts.

Of Wykeham's "College of St. Marie", or New College, Oxford, this is not
the place to speak, especially as it has already been dealt with in the
"Oxford" volume of this "Beautiful England" series. His other
"College of St. Mary", or, as it is commonly known, Winchester College,
has a history extending far beyond that of most of our great public
schools; and Winchester was celebrated for its educational institutions
in Saxon days.

[Illustration: WINCHESTER COLLEGE: THE OUTER GATEWAY FROM "ARCADIA"]

Wykeham's idea in founding these two colleges was one for which he had
no precedent before him, so that his design was to a large extent in the
nature of an experiment. His idea, of course, was to enable those who
proceeded from the Winchester to the Oxford College to receive a
systematic and continuous education. Where Wykeham led, others were not
long in following. Two of his successors in the see of Winchester,
Waynflete and Fox, gave to Oxford the beautiful colleges of Magdalen and
Corpus Christi respectively. Archbishop Chichele, one of Wykeham's first
scholars, built St. Bernard's College, now St. John Baptist's, which he
gave to the Cistercians before its completion; and later in life he
founded the College of All Souls, while in his native village of Higham
Ferrers, Northants, he built and endowed a school, bede-house, and
church, which are among some of the loveliest pieces of building we
possess. Henry VI made himself intimately acquainted with the works of
Wykeham, and copied them for his two colleges of Eton, and King's
College, Cambridge. Until Wykeham's time, schools had been under or
connected with monastic houses; now they were distinct foundations, with
priests still as masters, but priests secular and not religious. Wykeham
was, indeed, the pioneer of the public-school system, of which, with all
its shortcomings, England is so justly proud.

Each of the bishop's colleges took about six years in building, and that
at Oxford was the first to be finished. It must have been a proud day
for Winchester when, on March 28, 1393, the "seventy faithful boys",
headed by their master, came in procession from St. Giles's Hill, where
they had been temporarily housed, and, all chanting psalms, entered into
possession of their fair college.

The buildings have been but little altered since their founder's day,
and extend now, as then, on the south side of the Close, and along the
bank of the Itchen. They consist mainly of two quadrangles, in the first
of which, entered from College Street by a gateway, are the Warden's
house and other offices. Here is the brewhouse, quite unaltered; but the
Warden's house has absorbed the old bakehouse, slaughterhouse, and
butcher's room. Over the second archway are figures of the Virgin, with
Gabriel on her right, and Wykeham kneeling on her left. Here was a room
for the Warden, from which he could see all who entered or left the
college; and here also is the site of the old penthouse under which the
scholars used to perform their ablutions, and which they called "Moab".
The old Society comprised the Warden, ten Fellows, three Chaplains,
sixteen Queristers, and seventy scholars. The boys, the chaplains, and
the choristers lived within the inner quadrangle, the northern side of
which is formed by the chapel and the refectory. The original chapel,
with the exception of the beautiful fan-groining of its roof, was much
defaced in the seventeenth century, but was restored in the nineteenth,
when a new reredos was added. The refectory remains practically
untouched, and has a roof enriched with some beautiful carved woodwork,
the painted heads of kings and bishops, and some great mullioned
windows. Over the buttery is the audit-room, hung with ancient and rare
tapestries, and containing a large chest known as Wykeham's money box.
The original schoolroom was in the basement, and has long been put to
other uses. The chantry, the beautiful cloisters, and the chapel tower
were all built after the founder's death, but he provided a wooden bell
tower, which stood away from the chapel, so that the main building
should not be injured by the vibration of the bells. The remaining
portions are mostly modern, and the foundation has naturally been much
enlarged since Wykeham's day, the last addition being the gateway in
Kingsgate Street, erected as a memorial to the many Wykehamists who
fell in the South African War.

On the wall of a passage adjoining the kitchen is a singular painting,
supposed to be emblematical of a "trusty servant", compounded of a man,
a hog, a deer, and an ass. The explanatory words beneath it are
attributed to Dr. Christopher Jonson, headmaster from 1560 to 1571.

With the completion of Winchester College, Wykeham turned his attention
to the Cathedral, although he was then seventy years of age. He lived to
see his munificence bearing good fruit, and his foundations flourishing
in reputation and usefulness; so that when he lay down to die, on
September 27, 1404, in his palace of Bishops' Waltham, he could look
back to a long life spent in the service of his Maker. The funeral
procession moved slowly along the ten miles that separated palace from
Cathedral through crowds of people mourning his loss. At the Cathedral
door the prior met the procession, and the great bishop-builder was laid
to rest in the beautiful chantry he had himself prepared. Four days
before his death he made and signed his will, in which he bestowed gifts
and legacies with the liberality that was so marked a characteristic of
his life. That crowds of poor would attend his obsequies he was probably
aware, for to each poor person seeking a bounty he bequeathed fourpence,
"for the love of God and his soul's health". To the Cathedral, on
which he had expended so much of his genius, he left money for its
completion; and bequeathed to it many precious things, including a cross
of gold in which was a piece of the "Tree of the Lord". Henry IV was
forgiven a debt of five hundred pounds, and was to have a pair of
silver-gilt basins, ornamented with double roses, which were probably
given to Wykeham by Edward III, as a special mark of his favour. So we
take leave of this master builder and munificent bishop, whose motto
"Manners makyth man" is known the world over. The inscription on his
tomb tells us of his works, but Wykeham needs no inscription so long as
the stones of the Cathedral hold together, and his two fair colleges
raise their buttressed walls beside the waters of the Isis and the
Itchen.

[Illustration: THE CLOISTERS, WINCHESTER COLLEGE]

Returning to the Butter Cross, the Piazza adjoining reminds one of the
Butter Walk at Dartmouth, and the famous "Rows" of Chester. It was used
for many years as a market where the country folk brought their produce,
being then known as the "Penthouse". The mints established on the site
by Athelstan were noted for the excellence of the coinage made there. In
the Westgate Museum an old leaden box is shown which was discovered at
Beauworth by a shepherd. It was found to contain some six thousand
silver pennies of the coinage of William I and Rufus. In addition to its
famous mints Winchester was the chief trading centre of this part of
England during mediaeval days. A great woollen trade was carried on with
Flanders when the city became one of the "staple" towns, still
commemorated by "Staple Gardens", a narrow lane leading out of the north
side of High Street, where the great warehouse for the storage of wool
once stood. A little below the Queen Anne Guildhall, but on the opposite
side of the street, is St. John's Hospital; while another old lane
leading off from the main thoroughfare is Royal Oak Passage, at the
junction of which with the street is the ancient house known as
God-begot House, with some good timberwork and a fine gable. "Jewry"
Street recalls to our memory the early settlement of the Jews in
Winchester, for the citizens seem to have been more kindly disposed
towards this persecuted race than those of the majority of English
cities at an early period in their history. Richard of Devizes, in 1189,
called Winchester the "Jerusalem of the Jews", and, writing of the
massacre and plunder of the Jews in London and other cities, said:
"Winchester alone, the people being prudent and circumspect and the city
always acting mildly, spared its vermin". The Jews settled in Winchester
between the years 1090 and 1290, landing at Southampton and making
their way up the Itchen until they came in sight of the old capital of
the kingdom. Crossing the river, they entered the city by the East Gate,
and finally chose as their abiding-place a site near the north walls, in
a thoroughfare then known as "Scowrtenstrete", Shoemakers' Row. The
community soon could boast of a synagogue, and were the possessors of
several schools. At the bottom of the High Street are the Abbey Gardens,
so called from their being on the site of an abbey founded by Ealhswith,
King Alfred's queen, in which to spend the years of her widowhood. The
general plan of the gardens has probably been but little altered since
the days when the nuns paced their shady paths in pious meditation. An
ancient manuscript of prayers, used by the abbess in the ninth century,
is preserved in the British Museum. Ealhswith's son, Edward the Elder,
levied a toll from all merchandise passing under the City Bridge by
water, and beneath the East Gate by land, for the better support of the
abbey founded by his mother. Before the bridge stood the East Gate, and
crossing we are in that part of the city known as the "Soke". In the
"Liberty of the Soke" the bishop of the diocese had his court, presided
over by the bailiff as his deputy. Thus the bishop's jurisdiction was
entirely independent of that of the civic authorities. Wolvesey was his
palace, and within its walls, now ivy-clad and crumbling to decay, he
held his court, with three tithing men and a constable to assist him.
Here also was his exchequer, and here he imprisoned those who offended
against his laws. All that now remains of the once celebrated episcopal
palace of Wolvesey--said, with no authority, to have been so named from
the tribute of wolves' heads levied upon the Welsh by King Edgar--are a
few ruined walls, of sufficient extent to give one an idea of the
strength of the castle in its original state. At Wolvesey King Alfred
brought together the scholars who were to aid him in writing the
"Chronicles of the Time"; and on the outer walls he hung the bodies of
Danish pirates as a warning to those who made periodical raids up the
valley of the Itchen.

In the hands of Bishop de Blois the palace became of great importance,
and withstood a siege by David, King of Scotland, and Robert, Earl of
Gloucester. De Blois was one of those who assisted at the coronation of
Henry II, and pulled down the tower when the bishop was absent from the
diocese without the royal permission, on a visit to Clugny. Although
shorn of much of its former strength, the palace remained a fortress
until the fortifications of Winchester were reduced to a heap of ruins
by Cromwell.

[Illustration: RUINS OF WOLVESEY CASTLE]

Beyond the City Bridge rises St. Giles's Hill, named after Giles, one
of those numerous hermit saints who played so prominent a part in
establishing the Christian faith in these islands. The hill is deeply
grooved by a railway cutting; on it was held for many centuries a kind
of open market or annual fair, which attracted the wealthy merchants of
France, Flanders, and Italy. The fair generally lasted a fortnight,
during which time all other local business was suspended, the shops
closed, and the mayor handed over the keys of the city to the bishop,
who claimed large fees from the stall holders. Thirty marks were paid
for repairs needed at the Church of St. Swithun, and similar sums were
demanded by the abbeys. Bishop Walkelin was granted the tolls of the
fair for three days by William Rufus, his kinsman; but in the time of
Henry III the privilege was extended to sixteen days. The stalls were
arranged in long rows, and named according to the goods sold thereon, or
after the nationality of the vendors. Thus one row would be named the
Street of Caen, another that of Limoges, while the Drapery and Spicery
stalls were held by the monks of St. Swithun, who proved themselves
energetic traders at the great annual fair, which lasted until modern
times, and was removed in due course from St. Giles's Hill into the
city. Dean Kitchin writes: "As the city grew stronger and the fair
weaker, it slid down St. Giles's Hill and entered the town, where its
noisy ghost still holds revel once a year".

At the present day St. Giles's Hill is a pleasant spot from which to
view the venerable city. Down the valley, by the Itchen, rises the
Hospital and Church of St. Cross, a picturesque and peaceful group of
buildings viewed from any position, but particularly so taken in
conjunction with the ancient city and the fertile valley threaded by
numberless small streams. On the left side of the valley is St.
Catherine's Hill, a bold and outstanding spur crowned with a small belt
of trees surrounded by a circular earthwork. At one time a chapel
dedicated to St. Catherine capped the hill, and slight traces of the
building may yet be seen. Here is the interesting maze, said to have
been made by a Winchester College boy who was obliged to remain behind
during the holidays, but probably of a different origin, some
antiquaries holding the opinion that it is of great antiquity, and in
some way connected with ecclesiastical penance.

Looking citywards, one can see the towers of many churches rising above
the gables and chimneys of the houses. Near at hand are St. Peter's,
Cheeshill, and St. John's, the former an interesting little building
with a mixture of styles, among which the Norman and Early English
predominate, the windows being of a later period. The bell turret is
situated at the south-east corner of the building, which, as a whole,
gives a singular impression, due to the fact that it is nearly as broad
as it is long. St. John's Church is the most interesting in the city,
containing as it does a fine rood screen, with the rood-loft stairs
still existing in a turret of fifteenth-century date. Other features of
interest are the fourteenth-century Decorated screens that enclose the
chancel on each side, and an arched recess at the east end of the north
wall, containing an altar-tomb with quatrefoil panels supporting shields
on which are the symbols of the Passion. The tomb itself bears neither
inscription nor date.

Here also are a set of carved bench ends, a Perpendicular pulpit, and an
octagonal font.

Unfortunately, most of the other churches of Winchester have been either
rebuilt or so altered as to retain very little of their original
architecture. The Church of St. Maurice, rebuilt in 1841, has saved a
Norman doorway, fragments of a fine Decorated screen which now serve for
altar rails, and an ancient chest.

Like most of our cathedral cities, Winchester is well supplied with
charitable institutions, although the best known of them all, the famous
Hospital of St. Cross, is situated a mile away from the city proper. The
Hospital of St. John, within Winchester, is one of the oldest
foundations of the kind in the country, and a portion of the vaulted
kitchen remaining in the building may not unreasonably be supposed to
have formed part of the almshouse thought to have been founded on the
spot in A.D. 935 by St. Brinstan. The chapel connected with the charity
dates from the time of the third Henry, and contains a piece of
fourteenth-century carving depicting the nimbed head of the Saviour,
which is now built into a wall. Considerable doubt exists as to the
original founder and early re-founders of this hospital, and little is
known concerning it until the time of Edward II, when John Devenish
re-founded it. At that period it seems to have been for the "sole relief
of sick and lame soldiers, poor pilgrims, and necessitated wayfaring
men, to have their lodging and diet there for one night, or longer, as
their inability to travel may require". Many influential citizens left
money or property to this charity. In 1400 Mark le Faire, Mayor of
Winchester, bequeathed to it several houses, including the "great inn
called the George", and the "house under the penthouse where Mr. Hodgson
died". Richard Devenish, in the time of Henry VI, left a sum of money to
provide for a more frequent performance of divine service in the chapel;
but in the reign of Henry VIII these and other funds were confiscated,
although the building itself was subsequently restored to the
Corporation.

[Illustration: BEAUFORT TOWER AND AMBULATORY, ST. CROSS]

After the Reformation, Ralph Lambe re-founded the charity for six
poor and needy persons, who were to have six separate homes or chambers
within the hospital, each furnished with locks and keys. Each person was
to receive ten shillings quarterly, with a gown value ten shillings, and
ten shillings' worth of coal yearly. On the election of a new mayor each
was to receive two shillings, and any funds remaining were to be divided
among the inmates at the discretion of the mayor and aldermen of the
city. This institution is still a flourishing one, and the original
hall, standing to the west of the chapel, is let as a public
dining-hall.

Another old charity was that of St. Mary Magdalene, founded for lepers,
in 1173-88, by Bishop Toclyve, the inmates being known locally as "the
infirm people upon the hill", now Maun Hill. In early times lepers were
required to give up the whole of their personal goods, and one of the
questions asked by the official visitor to the Hospital of St. Mary
Magdalene was whether the goods of the deceased inmates went to the
works of the church after the settlement of debts. The funds of this
foundation were much tampered with at various times, and it lost some of
its property at the Reformation. One of its benefactors left to it four
flitches of bacon yearly, this being an important article of diet. The
original plan of the hospital was quadrangular: on two sides were the
inmates' rooms and the chapel, the remaining sides being occupied by the
Master's House and the common hall. The buildings were much damaged in
the time of Charles I by the troops stationed there, and again in the
reign of Charles II by the Dutch prisoners confined within the hospital.
The chapel was pulled down in 1788, and the materials were used for
building purposes, when the fine Early Norman doorway was used in the
Roman Catholic Church in St. Peter Street, where it may still be seen.
This was the west doorway of the ancient hospital chapel. The site is
now occupied by a hospital of another character, the isolation hospital,
but the old "lepers' well" can still be seen. The charity survives to
some extent in six cottages in Water Lane, built in 1788, wherein are
housed four men and four women.

In Symond's Street stands the picturesque "Christes Hospital", founded in
1586 by James Symonds. It is generally called the "Bluecoat" Hospital,
from the distinctive dress worn by the inmates. A scholastic institution
was attached to this charity for the education of four poor boys, chosen
by the mayor and corporation, who also elected their teacher. The latter
was not to be, in the terms of the founder, either a "Scotchman, an
Irishman, a Welshman, a foreigner, or a North-countryman", lest their
pronunciation of the English language should suffer.

From among the fertile meadows bordering the banks of the Itchen to the
south of Winchester rises the stately grey pile of St. Cross, standing
where it has stood for over seven and a half centuries, a witness alike
to the munificence of its founders, de Blois and Beaufort, and to the
skill of the mediaeval builders.

A good road leads from the city to the pleasing suburb in which the
hospital is situated, though a far pleasanter way is by one of the field
paths through the meadows.

Henry de Blois became bishop when only twenty-eight years old, and in
1136 he founded the hospital for the entire support of "thirteen poor
men, feeble and so reduced in strength that they can hardly or with
difficulty support themselves without another's aid"; and they were to
be supplied with "garments and beds suitable to their infirmities, good
wheate bread daily of the weight of 5 marks, and three dishes at dinner
and one at supper, suitable to the day, and drink of good stuff".

Besides this, he provided for a hundred poor men to be supplied daily
with dinner. Bishop Toclyve, de Blois's successor in the see, added to
the charity the feeding of yet another hundred poor men daily; and it
has been said, on somewhat slight evidence, that the poorer scholars of
Winchester College dined without fee in the "Hundred Men's Hall".

In 1137 the management of the institution was given over to the Knights
of St. John of Jerusalem; the cross still worn as a badge by the
Brethren is a link with the ancient Order, being the cross _potent_, or
Jerusalem cross, which was an insignia of the Kingdom of Jerusalem
established by the Crusaders.

[Illustration: ST. CROSS FROM THE MEADOWS]

Shortly after the death of de Blois a dispute arose between the
Hospitallers and the bishop, but after the lapse of many years the
management was restored to the latter, then Peter de Rupibus, who
appointed Alan de Soke as Master. In 1446, Cardinal Beaufort, Wykeham's
successor in the see, added a new foundation to St. Cross, to be called
"The Almshouse of Noble Poverty". De Blois's charity had been intended
to benefit the very needy; this of Beaufort's was designed for those who
had fallen upon evil days after a life of ease and comfort. There were
to be two priests, thirty-five brethren, and three sisters. The brethren
were to be of gentle birth, or old servants of the founder. The scheme,
however, was never completed, owing to the Wars of the Roses
intervening, with the result that the estates with which he had intended
to endow his almshouse were claimed by the Crown on the accession of the
House of York. So it came about that in 1486 Bishop Waynflete was
compelled to reduce the recipients of Beaufort's charity to one priest
and two brethren. Fortunately, St. Cross was spared at the
Reformation, and its endowments were not confiscated. The Vicar-General
reported that there were "certain things requiring reformation", and
that sturdy beggars were to be "driven away with staves"; also that the
Lord's Prayer and the Creed were to be taught in English, and that
relics and images were not to be brought out for the devotion of
pilgrims. In 1632 Archbishop Laud caused a strict enquiry to be made,
with the result that the Master, Dr. Lewis, reported that the fabric was
in a state of great dilapidation. This Master lost his post through his
loyalty to Church and King, and John Lisle, the regicide, became Master
of the Hospital until Cromwell made him a peer, when his place was
filled by John Cooke, the Solicitor-General who drew up the indictment
against Charles I. Both these regicides met with misfortune, for Cooke
was executed and Lisle assassinated, so that at the Restoration Dr.
Lewis was restored to the mastership. Between the years 1848 and 1853,
chancery suits, costing a large sum of money, resulted in an entirely
new scheme being drawn up, under which the two charities were treated as
separate foundations under one head. The differences of qualification
between the two sets of Brethren are carefully laid down, and a portion
of the income is used for the maintenance of fifty out-pensioners, the
modern equivalent for the "Hundred Poor Men" of mediaeval days. The
distinctive dresses of the Brethren are the same with regard to colour
and cut as those worn in the time of Henry VI, those worn by the
recipients of Beaufort's charity being of red cloth, with the badge, a
cardinal's hat and tassels on a silver plate, worn on the left breast.
The Brethren of the older institution, founded by de Blois, wear black
gowns, with the silver cross _potent_ pinned on the left breast. On the
death of a Brother the cross is placed on a red velvet cushion and laid
on his breast in the coffin; but before burial the cross is removed and
fastened by the Master on the breast of the Brother elected in place of
the deceased.

The Hospital buildings consist of an outer courtyard and gateway, to the
right of which are the kitchens, and on the left the old brewhouse and
remains of some of the earlier buildings. Immediately facing us is the
tower gateway, thoroughly restored, if not built originally, by Cardinal
Beaufort, under the groined archway of which is the porter's lodge,
where the "Wayfarers' Dole" is still distributed to all who apply at the
hatchway, an interesting and almost sole survival of the mediaeval
custom by which food and drink were offered to passers-by. The daily
dole at the present day consists of two gallons of ale and two loaves of
bread, divided into thirty-two portions. The apartment over the archway
is the Founder's room, wherein are stored all the ancient documents
relating to the foundation. Beaufort's arms appear in one of the
spandrels above the gateway arch, the corresponding spandrel exhibiting
the ancient regal arms of England. On this side of the entrance are
three niches, one of which contains a figure of the cardinal in a
kneeling posture. The vacant niche in the south front once held a statue
of the Virgin, which fell to the ground more than a century ago, and
nearly killed one of the Brethren in its descent.

Passing through this noble gateway, which, somehow or other, does not
look as old as we know it to be, we enter the great quadrangle, around
which the various buildings are grouped. On the eastern side is the
Infirmary, with the Ambulatory beneath it, a long, low cloister of
sixteenth-century date, which extends along the whole side to the
church. In one of the rooms above, a window opens into the church, where
there may once have been a gallery to enable the infirm to hear the
services. In 1763 Bishop Hoadley granted a license to the Master to pull
down the cloister and use the materials for other purposes, but
fortunately this was never done. On the opposite side of the quadrangle
are the houses of the Brethren. Each dwelling consists of two rooms and
a pantry, and has a garden attached.

The Brethren's Hall stands on the north side of the quadrangle, and is
a portion only of the old "Hundred Mennes Hall"; but enough is left to
enable one to form a good idea of the original apartment, which measured
36 feet by 24 feet, until a portion was cut off to provide rooms for the
Master, who is now lodged in a modern dwelling outside the gates. At the
east end of the hall is a table where the officials sat, those for the
Brethren being ranged along the sides. Some black-leather jacks,
candlesticks, salt-cellars, pewter dishes, and a dinner bell, all dating
from Beaufort's time, are still carefully preserved. At the opposite end
of the hall is a screen with the minstrels' gallery above, whence, on
high days and holidays, the Brethren were enlivened with music during
their feastings. The chief festivals of the year were All Saints' Day,
Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Twelfth Day, and Candlemas Day, on which
occasions the Brethren had "extraordinary commons, and on the eve of
which days they had a fire of charcoal in the Common Hall, and one jack
of six quarts and one pint of beer extraordinary, to drink together by
the fire. And on the said feast-day they had a fire at dinner, and
another at supper in the said hall, and they had a sirloin of beef
roasted, weighing forty-six pounds and a half, and three large
mince-pies, and plum broth, and three joints of mutton for their supper,
and six quarts and one pint of beer extraordinary at dinner, and six
quarts and one pint of beer after dinner, by the fireside; six quarts
and a pint at supper, and the like after supper." During Lent, each
brother had eight shillings paid to him instead of commons, and on Palm
Sunday the Brethren had a "green fish, of the value of three shillings
and fourpence, and their pot of milk pottage with three pounds of rice
boiled in it, and three pies with twenty-four herrings baked in them,
and six quarts and one pint of beer extraordinary". On Good Fridays they
had at dinner "in their pot of beer a cast of bread sliced, and three
pounds of honey, boiled together, which they call honey sop". Beneath
the hall is a fine vaulted cellar, of ample proportions, a worthy
resting-place for the stock of St. Cross ale.

[Illustration: THE BRETHREN'S HALL, ST. CROSS]

But, interesting as are all these portions of the Hospital of St. Cross,
it is the church which has the greatest attraction for architect and
antiquary alike, for it contains good examples of every style. From
Romanesque, through Norman and Early English, to Later Decorated, and to
Transition Norman, the church is considered to be the best example in
existence. This building, unfinished after nearly two hundred years, was
roofed with lead, in place of the thatch which originally covered it, by
William of Edyndon, the famous Wiltshireman who became Master of St.
Cross in the fourteenth century, and who restored the fabric from the
ruinous state in which he found it to a condition of beauty and
strength. The windows of the clerestory were erected by him; he
re-roofed the "Hundred Menne's Hall", and built a new chamber for the
Master.

On entering the church, through the north porch, one is struck by its
loftiness and dignity, the vaulting throughout being of stone, while
almost every ornamental feature of the Norman style can be seen.
Proceeding to the western end of the church, and looking down the nave,
the gradual development of its architecture can be well seen. The east
end is Norman, the bay next the transepts Transition Norman, while the
west end is Early English. The windows vary from Norman and Transition
Norman to Early English, while those of the clerestory are Decorated.
Mention must be made of the fine stone screens and tabernacle-work on
either side of the altar, the altar slab of Purbeck marble, the
triforium of intersecting arches in the choir, and the roof pendants.
The western portion of the church was built during the mastership of
Peter de Sancto Mario, and his fine canopied tomb is a striking object
on the north side of the nave. Interesting, too, are the beautiful
fourteenth-century tiles, some bearing the appropriate motto "Have
Mynde"; and a very human note is struck in the mason's marks, still to
be seen in various parts of the building, especially around the
staircase door in the south transept. What these signs actually mean is
unknown, but some authorities, notably Leader Scott in her work on
_Cathedral Builders_, trace them through the Comacine Guild to the Roman
_Collegia_.

In the south-east corner of the south transept, on the exterior of the
church, is a "triple-arch", which is thought to have been a doorway, and
may have led to the "clerken-house", the original habitation of the
seven choristers and their master, but which was pulled down by de
Cloune, Master of St. Cross in the fourteenth century, who also allowed
other parts of the fabric to fall into a state of great dilapidation.
Here also, on the south side of the quadrangle, stood the original
houses of Beaufort's foundation, which were not pulled down until 1789.

No groups of buildings are in their way more charming or more
impregnated with human associations than the famous episcopal foundation
of St. Cross--an asylum of peace and rest, comfort and repose, to those
who find shelter within its ancient walls, and a standing monument to
the memory of the pious Henry de Blois and the princely churchman,
Cardinal Beaufort. Winchester, like many an English city, would be shorn
of much of its interest were this benevolent institution to be removed.
The general air of peace and quietude, the grass-bordered walks, the
stately church, all contribute to convey an appeal which is almost
sacred in its simple eloquence. In the words of one who loved it well:
"No one can pass its threshold without feeling himself landed, as it
were, in another age. The ancient features of the building, the noble
gateway, the quadrangle, the common refectory, the cloister, and, rising
above all, the lofty and massive pile of the venerable church, the
uniform garb and reverend mien of the aged brethren, the common
provision for their declining years, the dole at the gatehouse, all lead
back our thoughts to days when men gave their best to God's honour, and
looked on what was done to His poor as done to Himself, and were as
lavish of architectural beauty on what modern habits might deem a
receptacle for beggars, as on the noblest of royal palaces. It seems a
place where no worldly thought, no pride, or passion, or irreverence
could enter; a spot where, as a modern writer has beautifully expressed
it, a good man, might he make his choice, would wish to die."

The country around this beautiful city by the Itchen is full of quiet
charm, for life's ever-changing drama has but one and the same
background. The actors come and go, but the stage remains much the same,
and the devotions, the meditations, and the acts of men who lived
centuries ago were set in the amphitheatre of the same green hills, and
took place beside the same winding river as those we gaze upon to-day.

[Illustration: PLAN OF WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL]

Literature, too, has worthy names here in Izaak Walton and Jane Austen,
both of whom lie buried in the cathedral; while the house at Winchester
in which the author of _Persuasion_ lived, for a brief period before
her death, stands beyond the college gate. Above the door is a wooden
tablet recording that here Jane Austen spent her last days, dying July
18, 1817. She had previously resided at Chawton for some eight years,
but her house in the village is now a Workmen's Club. At the same time,
Chawton is a pretty little spot, watered by land springs, known locally
as "lavants"; while some few miles away is Farrington, where Gilbert
White, of "Selborne" fame, was curate.

Other literary associations of the Winchester country are those
furnished by Hursley, where John Keble was vicar; by Otterbourne, the
home for many years of Charlotte Yonge; and by Eversley, where
Winchester's immortal son, Charles Kingsley, lies buried.

Each succeeding visit to Winchester can only strengthen one's love for
the city, and one's reverence for the Cathedral in its midst. Our
pilgrimage of Winchester the beautiful is over.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

_At the Villafield Press, Glasgow, Scotland_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Winchester, by Sidney Heath

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WINCHESTER ***

***** This file should be named 15706.txt or 15706.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/7/0/15706/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
