The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Melting of Molly, by Maria Thompson
Daviess, Illustrated by R. M. Crosby


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Melting of Molly


Author: Maria Thompson Daviess

Release Date: May 12, 2005  [eBook #15817]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MELTING OF MOLLY***


E-text prepared by David Garcia and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team from page images generously made available
by the Kentuckiana Digital Library (http://kdl.kyvl.org/)



Note: This version of _The Melting of Molly_ is the American novel
      publication and differs significantly from the British magazine
      publication, also in the Project Gutenberg library at
      http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/15818

      Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 15817-h.htm or 15817-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/1/15817/15817-h/15817-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/1/15817/15817-h.zip)

      Images of the original pages are available through the
      Kentuckiana Digital Library. See
      http://kdl.kyvl.org/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=kyetexts;cc=
      kyetexts;xc=1&idno=B92-194-30611104&view=toc





THE MELTING OF MOLLY

by

MARIA THOMPSON DAVIESS

  Author of
  Miss Selina Lue, The Road to Providence,
  Rose of Old Harpeth, etc., etc.

Illustrated by R. M. Crosby

Indianapolis
The Bobbs-Merrill Company
Publishers

1912







[Illustration: Melted]




              MOLLY CARTER AND I
              DEDICATE THIS BOOK
              TO OUR GOOD FRIEND
              CAROL KING JENNEY




LEAVES FROM THE BOOK OF MOLLY

  Leaf First
      THE BACHELOR'S-BUTTONS

  Leaf Second
      A LOVE-LETTER, LOADED

  Leaf Third
      MONUMENT OR TROUSSEAU?

  Leaf Fourth
      SCATTERED JAM

  Leaf Fifth
      BLUE ABSINTHE

  Leaf Sixth
      THE RESURRECTION RAZOO

  Leaf Seventh
      DASHED!

  Leaf Eighth
      MELTED





LEAF FIRST

THE BACHELOR'S-BUTTONS


Yes, I truly think that in all the world there is nothing so dead
as a young widow's deceased husband, and God ought to give His wisest
man-angel special charge concerning looking after her and the devil at
the same time. They both need it! I don't know how all this is going to
end and I wish my mind wasn't in a kind of tingle. However, I'll do the
best I can and not hold myself at all responsible for myself, and then
who will there be to blame?

There are a great many kinds of good-feeling in this world, from radiant
joy down to perfect bliss, but this spring I have got an attack of just
old-fashioned happiness that looks as if it might become chronic.

I am so happy that I planted my garden all crooked, my eyes upon the
clouds with the birds sailing against them, and when I became conscious
I found wicked flaunting poppies sprouted right up against the sweet
modest clover-pinks, while the whole paper of bachelor's-buttons was
sowed over everything--which I immediately began to dig right up again,
blushing furiously to myself over the trowel, and glad that I had caught
myself before they grew up to laugh in my face. However, I got that
laugh anyway, and I might just as well have left them, for Billy ran to
the gate and called Doctor John to come in and make Molly stop digging
up his buttons. Billy claims everything in this garden, and he thought
they would grow up into the kind of buttons you pop out of a gun.

"So you're digging up the bachelor-pops, Mrs. Molly?" the doctor asked
as he leaned over the gate. I went right on digging without looking up
at him. I couldn't look up because I was blushing still worse. Sometimes
I hate that man, and if he wasn't Billy's father I wouldn't neighbor
with him as I do. But somebody _has_ to look after Billy.

I believe it will be a real relief to write down how I feel about him
in his old book and I shall do it whenever I can't stand him any longer,
and if he gave the horrid, red leather thing to me to make me miserable,
he can't do it; not this spring! I wish I dared burn it up and forget
about it, but I don't! This record on the first page is enough to
_reduce_ me--to tears, and I wonder why it doesn't.

I weigh one hundred and sixty pounds, down in black and white, and it
is a tragedy! I don't believe that man at the grocery store is so very
reliable in his weights, though he had a very pleasant smile while he
was weighing me. Still I had better get some scales of my own, smiles
are so deceptive.

I am five feet three inches tall or short, whichever way one looks at
me. I thought I was taller, but I suppose I will have to believe my own
yardstick.

But as to my waist measure, I positively refuse to write that down, even
if I have promised Doctor John a dozen times over to do it, while I only
really left him to _suppose_ I would. It is bad enough to know that
your belt has to be reduced to twenty-three inches without putting down
how much it measures now in figures to insult yourself with. No, I
intend to have this for my happy spring.

Yes, I suppose it would have been lots better for my happiness if I had
kept quiet about it all, but at the time I thought I had to advise with
him over the matter. Now I'm sorry I did. That is one thing about being
a widow, you are accustomed to advising with a man, whether you want to
or not, and you can't get over the habit right away. Poor Mr. Carter
hasn't been dead much over a year and I must be missing him most
awfully, though just lately I can't remember not to forget about him a
great deal of the time. Now if he had been here--_horrors_!

Still, that letter was enough to upset anybody, and no wonder I ran
right across my garden, through Billy's hedge-hole and over into Doctor
John's office to tell him about it; but I ought not to have been
agitated enough to let him take the letter right out of my hand and read
it.

"So after ten years Al Bennett is coming back to pop his
bachelor's-buttons at you, Mrs. Molly?" he said in the deep drawling
voice he always uses when he makes fun of Billy and me and which never
fails to make us both mad. I didn't look at him directly, but I felt his
hand shake with the letter in it.

"Not ten, only _eight_! He went when I was seventeen," I answered
with dignity, wishing I dared be snappy at him; though I never am.

"And after eight years he wants to come back and find you squeezed into
a twenty-inch-waist, blue muslin rag you wore at parting? No wonder Al
didn't succeed at bank clerking, but had to make his hit at diplomacy
and the high arts. Some hit at that to be legationed at Saint James!
He's such a big gun that it is a pity he had to return to his native
heath and find even such a slight disappointment as a one-yard waist
measure around his--his--"

"Oh it's not, it's _not_ that much." I fairly gasped and I couldn't
help the tears coming into my eyes. I have never said much about it, but
nobody knows how it hurts me to be all this fat! Just writing it down in
a book mortifies me dreadfully. It's been coming on worse and worse
every year since I married. Poor Mr. Carter had a very good appetite and
I don't know why I should have felt that I had to eat so much every day
to keep him company; I wasn't always so considerate of him. Then he
didn't want me to dance any more because married women oughtn't, or ride
horseback either--no amusement left but himself and weekly
prayer-meetings, and--and--I just couldn't help the tears coming and
dripping as I thought about it all and that awful waist measure in
inches.

"Stop crying this minute, Molly," said Doctor John suddenly in the deep
voice he uses to Billy and me when we are really sick or stump-toed.
"You know I was only teasing you and I won't stand for--"

But I sobbed some more. I like him when his eyes come out from under his
bushy brows and are all tender and full of sorry for us.

"I can't help it," I gulped in my sleeve. "I did used to like Alfred
Bennett. My heart almost broke when he went away. I used to be beautiful
and slim, and now I feel as if my own fat ghost has come to haunt me all
my life. I am so ashamed! If a woman can't cry over her own dead beauty,
what can she cry over?" By this time I was really crying.

Then what happened to me was that Doctor John took me by the shoulders
and gave me one good shake and then made me look him right in the eyes
through the tears and all.

"You foolish child," he said in the deepest voice I almost ever heard
him use. "You are just a lovely, round, luscious peach, but if you will
be happier to have Al Bennett come and find you as slim as a string-bean
I can show you how to do it. Will you do just as I tell you?"

[Illustration: "Will you do just as I tell you?"]

"Yes, I will," I sniffed in a comforted voice. What woman wouldn't be
comforted by being called a "luscious peach". I looked out between my
fingers to see what more he was going to say, but he had turned to a
shelf and taken down two books.

"Now," he said in his most businesslike voice, as cool as a bucket of
water fresh from the spring, "it is no trouble at all to take off your
surplus avoirdupois at the rate of two and a half pounds a week if you
follow these directions. As I take it you are about twenty-five pounds
over your normal weight. It will take over two months to reduce you and
we will allow an extra month for further beautifying, so that when Mr.
Bennett arrives he will find the lady of his adoration in proper trim to
be adored. Yes, just be still until I copy these directions in this
little, red leather blank-book for you, and every day I want you to keep
an exact record of the conditions of which I make note. No, don't talk
while I make out these diet lists! I wish you would go across the hall
and see if you don't think we ought to get Bill a thinner set of
night-drawers. It seems to me he must be too warm in the ones he is
wearing."

When he speaks to me in that tone of voice I always do it. And I needed
Billy badly at that very moment. I took him out of his little cot by
Doctor John's big bed and sat down with him in my arms over by the
window through which the early moon came streaming. Billy is so little,
little not to have a mother to rock him all the times he needs it that I
take every opportunity to give it to him I find--when he's unconscious
and can't help himself. She died before she ever even saw him and I've
always tried to do what I could to make it up to him.

Poor Mr. Carter said when Billy cut his teeth that a neighbor's baby can
be worse than twins of your own. He didn't like children and the baby's
crying disturbed him, so many a night I walked Billy out in the garden
until daylight, while Mr. Carter and Doctor John both slept. Always his
little, warm, wilty body has comforted me for the emptiness of not
having a baby of my own. And he's very congenial, too, for he's slim and
flowery, pink and dimply, and as mannish as his father, in funny little
flashes.

"Git a stick to punch it, Molly," he was murmuring in his sleep. Then I
heard the doctor call me and I had to kiss him, put him back in his bed,
and go across the hall.

Doctor John was standing by the table with this horrid small book in his
hand and his mouth was set in a straight line and his eyes were deep
back under their brows. I hate him that way, too, and I would like to
get up so close to him that he couldn't _hit_ me or have a door
locked between us. It's strange how the thought of taking a beating from
a man can make a woman's heart jump. Mine jumped so it was hard to look
as meek as I felt best under the circumstances; but I looked it out from
under my lashes cautiously.

"There you are, Mrs. Molly," he said briskly as he handed me this book.
"Get weighed and measured and sized-up generally in the morning and
follow all the directions. Also make every record I have noted so that
I can have the proper data to help you as you go along--or rather down.
And if you will be faithful about it to me, or rather Al, I think we can
be sure of buttoning that blue muslin dress without even the aid of the
button-hook." His voice had the "if you can" note in it that always sets
me off.

"Had we better get the kiddie some thinner night-rigging?" he hastened
to ask as I was just about to explode. He knows the signs.

"Thank you, Doctor Moore! I hate the very ground you walk on and I'll
attend to those night-clothes myself to-morrow," I answered, and I
sailed out of that office and down the path toward my own house beyond
his hedge. But I carried this book tight in my hand and I made up my
mind that I would do it all if it killed me. I would show him I could be
_faithful_--to whom I would decide later on. But I hadn't read far
into this book when I committed myself to myself like that!

I don't know just how long I sat on the front steps all by myself bathed
in a perfect flood of moonlight and loneliness. It was not a bit of
comfort to hear Aunt Adeline snoring away in her room down the dark
hall. It takes the greatest congeniality to make a person's snoring a
pleasure to anybody and Aunt Adeline and I are not that way.

When poor Mr. Carter died, the next day she said: "Now, Mary, you are
entirely too young to live all your long years of widowhood alone, and
as I am in the same condition, I will rent my cottage and move right
up the street into your house to protect and console you." And she
did,--the moving and the protecting.

Mr. Henderson has been dead forty-two years. He only lived three months
after he married Aunt Adeline and her crepe veil is over a yard long
yet. Men are the dust under her feet, but she likes for Doctor John to
come over and sit on the porch with us because she can consult with him
about what Mr. Henderson really died of and talk with him about the sad
state of poor Mr. Carter's liver for a year before he died. I just go on
rocking Billy and singing hymns to him in such a way that I can't hear
the conversation. Mr. Carter's liver got on my nerves alive, and dead it
does worse. But it hurts when the doctor has to take the little
sleep-boy out of my arms to carry him home; though I like it when he
says under his breath, "Thank you, Molly."

And as I sat and thought how near he and I had been to each other in all
our troubles, I excused myself for running to him with that letter and I
acknowledged to myself that I had no right to get mad when he teased me,
for he had been kind and interested about helping me get thin by the
time Alfred came back to see me. I couldn't tell which I was blushing
all to myself about, the "luscious peach" he had called me or the
"lovely lily" Alfred had reminded me in his letter that I had been when
he left me.

Why don't people realize that a seventeen-year-old girl's heart is a
sensitive wind-flower that may be shattered by a breath? Mine shattered
when Alfred went away to find something he could do to make a living,
and Aunt Adeline gave the hard green stem to Mr. Carter when she married
me to him. Poor Mr. Carter!

No, I wasn't twenty, and this town was full of women who were aunts and
cousins and law-kin to me, and nobody did anything for me. They all said
with a sigh of relief, "It will be such a nice safe thing for you,
Molly." And they really didn't mean anything by tying up a gay, dancing,
frolicking, prancing colt of a girl with a terribly ponderous bridle.
But God didn't want to see me always trotting along slow and tired and
not caring what happened to me, even pounds and pounds of plumpness, so
he found use for Mr. Carter in some other place but this world, and I
feel that He is going to see me through whatever happens. If some of the
women in my missionary society knew how friendly I feel with God they
would put me out for contempt of court.

No, the town didn't mean anything by chastening my spirit with Mr.
Carter and they didn't consider him in the matter at all, poor man. Of
that I feel sure. Hillsboro is like that. It settled itself here in a
Tennessee valley a few hundreds of years ago and has been hatching and
clucking over its own small affairs ever since. All the houses set back
from the street with their wings spread out over their gardens, and
mothers here go on hovering even to the third and fourth generation.
Lots of times young, long-legged, frying-size boys scramble out of the
nests and go off to college and decide to grow up where their crow will
be heard by the world. Alfred was one of them.

And, too, occasionally some man comes along from the big world and
marries a plump little broiler and takes her away with him, but mostly
they stay and go to hovering life on a corner of the family estate.
That's what I did.

I was a poor, little, lost chick with frivolous tendencies and they
all clucked me over into this empty Carter nest which they considered
well-feathered for me. It gave them all a sensation when they found out
from the will just how well it was feathered. And it gave me one, too.
All that money would make me nervous if Mr. Carter hadn't made Doctor
John its guardian, though I sometimes feel that the responsibility of me
makes him treat me as if he were my step-grandfather-in-law. But all in
all, though stiff in its knees with aristocracy, Hillsboro is lovely and
loving; and couldn't inquisitiveness be called just real affection with
a kind of squint in its eye?

And there I sat on my front steps, being embraced in a perfume of
everybody's lilacs and peachblow and sweet syringa and affectionate
interest and moonlight, with a letter in my hand from the man whose two
photographs and many letters I had kept locked up in the garret for
years. Is it any wonder I tingled when he told me that he had never come
back because he couldn't have me and that now the minute he landed in
America he was going to lay his heart at my feet? I added his honors
to his prostrate heart myself and my own beat at the prospect. All the
eight years faded away and I was again back in the old garden down at
Aunt Adeline's cottage saying good-by, folded up in his arms. That's
the way my memory put the scene to me, but the word "folded" made me
remember that blue muslin dress again. I had promised to keep it and
wear it for him when he came back--and I couldn't forget that the blue
belt was just twenty-three inches and mine is--no, I _won't_ write
it. I had got that dress out of the old trunk not ten minutes after I
had read the letter and measured it.

No, nobody would blame me for running right across the garden to Doctor
John with such a real trouble as that! All of a sudden I hugged the
letter and the little book up close to my breast and laughed until the
tears ran down my cheeks.

Then before I went into the house I assembled my garden and had family
prayers with my flowers. I do that because they are all the family I've
got, and God knows that all His budding things need encouragement,
whether it is a widow or a snowball-bush. He'll give it to us!

And I'm praying again as I sit here and watch for the doctor's light to
go out. I hate to go to sleep and leave it burning, for he sits up so
late and he is so gaunt and thin and tired-looking most times. That's
what the last prayer is about, almost always,--sleep for him and no
night call!




LEAF SECOND

A LOVE-LETTER, LOADED


The very worst page in this red--red devil--I'm glad I've written it at
last--of a book is the fifth. It says:

"Breakfast--one slice of dry toast, one egg, fruit and a tablespoonful
of baked cereal, small cup of coffee, no sugar, no cream." And me with
two Jersey cows full of the richest cream in Hillsboro, Harpeth Valley,
out in my pasture!

"Dinner, one small lean chop, slice of toast, spinach, green beans and
lettuce salad. No dessert or sweet." The blue-grass in my yard is full
of fat little fryers and I wish I were a sheep if I have to eat lettuce
and spinach for grass. At least I'd have more than one chop inside me
then.

"Supper--slice of toast and an apple." Why the apple? Why supper at all?

Oh, I'm hungry, hungry until I cry in my sleep when I dream about a
muffin! I thought at first that getting out of bed before my eyes are
fairly open and turning myself into a circus actor by doing every kind
of overhand, foot, arm and leg contortion that the mind of cruel man
could invent to torture a human being with, would kill me before I had
been at it a week, but when I read on page sixteen that as soon as all
that horror was over I must jump right into the tub of cold water, I
kicked, metaphorically speaking. And I've been kicking ever since,
literally to keep from freezing.

[Illustration: She shrouds me for the agony]

But as cruel a death as freezing is, it doesn't compare to the tortures
of being melted. Judy administers it to me and her faithful heart is so
wrung with compassion that she perspires almost as much as I do. She
wrings a linen sheet out in a caldron of boiling water and shrouds me
in it for the agony--and then more and more blanket windings envelop me
until I am like the mummy of some Egyptian giantess. I have ice on the
back of my neck and my forehead, and murder for the whole world in my
heart. Once I got so discouraged at the idea of having all this hades
in this life that I mingled tears with the beads of perspiration that
rolled down my cheeks, and she snatched me out of those steaming
grave-clothes in less time than it takes to tell it, soused me in
a tub of cold water, fed me a chicken wing and a hot biscuit and the
information that I was "good-looking enough for _anybody_ to eat up
alive without all this foolishness," all in a very few seconds. Now I
have to beg her to help me and I heard her tell her nephew, who does the
gardening, that she felt like an undertaker with such goings-on. At any
rate, if it all kills me it won't be my fault if anybody has to lie in
saying that I was "beautiful in death".

But now that more than a month has passed, I really don't mind it so
much. I feel so good and strong and prancy all the time that I can't
keep from bubbling. I have to smile at myself.

Then another thing that helps is Billy and his ball. I never could
really play with him before, but now I can't help it. But an awful thing
happened about that yesterday. We were in the garden playing over by the
lilac bushes and Billy always beats me because when he runs to base he
throws himself down and slides along on the grass on his little stomach
as he sees the real players do over at the ball grounds. Then all of a
sudden, before I knew it, I just did the same thing, and we slid to the
flower pot we use as a base together, each on his own stomach. And what
did Billy do but begin right there on the grass the kind of a tussle we
always have in the big rocking-chair on the porch! Over and over we
rolled, Billy chuckling and squealing while I laughed myself all out of
breath. I'm glad I always would wear delicious petticoats, for there,
looking right over my front fence, I discovered Judge Benton Wade. I
wish I could write down how I felt, for I never had that sensation
before and I don't believe I'll ever have it again.

I have always thought that Judge Wade was really the most wonderful man
in Hillsboro, not because he is a judge so young in life that there is
only a white sprinkle in his lovely black hair that grows back off his
head like Napoleon's and Charles Wesley's, but because of his smile,
which you wait for so long that you glow all over when you get it. I
have seen him do it once or twice at his mother when he seats her in
their pew at church and once at little Mamie Johnson when she gave him a
flower through their fence as he passed by one day last week, but I
never thought I should have one all to myself. But there it was, a most
beautiful one, long and slow and distinctly mine--at least I didn't
think much of it was for Billie. I sat up and blushed as red all over as
I do when I first hit that tub of cold water.

[Illustration: I sat up and blushed red all over]

"I hope you'll forgive an intruder, Mrs. Carter, but how could a mortal
resist a peep into the garden of the gods if he spied the queen and her
faun at play?" he said in a voice as wonderful as the smile. By that
time I had reefed in my ruffles around my feet and pushed in all my
hairpins. Billy stood spread-legged as near in front of me as he could
get and said in the rudest possible tone of voice:

"Get away from my Molly, man!"

I never was so mortified in all my life and I scrambled to my feet and
came over to the fence to get between him and Billy.

"It's a lovely day, isn't it, Judge Wade?" I asked with the greatest
interest, which I didn't really feel, in the weather; but what could I
think of to say? A woman is apt to keep the image of a good many of the
grand men she sees passing around her in queer niches in her brain, and
when one steps out and speaks to her for the first time it is confusing.
Of course I have known the judge and his mother all my life, for she is
one of Aunt Adeline's best friends, but I had a feeling from the look in
his eyes that that very minute was the first time he had ever seen me.
It was lovely and I blushed some more as I put my hand up to my cheek so
I wouldn't have to look right at him.

"About the loveliest day that ever happened in Hillsboro," he said, and
there was still more of the delicious smile, "though I hadn't noticed it
so especially until--"

But I never knew what he had intended to say, for Billy suddenly swelled
up like a little turkey-cock and cut out with his switch at the judge.

"Git, man, git, and let my Molly alone!" he said, in a perfect
thundertone of voice; but I almost laughed, for it had such a sound in
it like Doctor John's at his most positive times with Billy and me.

"No, no, Billy, the judge is just looking over the fence at our flowers!
Don't you want to give him a rose?" I hurried to say as the smile died
out of Judge Wade's face and he looked at Billy intently.

"How like John Moore the youngster is," he said, and his voice was so
cold to Billy that it hurt me, and I was afraid Billy would notice it.
Coldness in people's voices always makes me feel just like ice-cream
tastes. But Billy's answer was still more rude.

"You better go, man, before I bring my father to sic our dog on you,"
he exploded, and before I could stop him his thin little legs went
trundling down the garden path toward home.

Then the judge and I both laughed. We couldn't help it. When two people
laugh straight into each other's eyes something feels dangerous and you
get closer together. The judge leaned farther over the fence and I went
a little nearer before I knew it.

"You don't need to keep a personal dog, do you, Mrs. Carter?" he asked,
with a twinkle that might have been a spark in his eyes, and just at
that moment another awful thing happened. Aunt Adeline came out on the
front porch and said in the most frozen tone of voice:

"Mary, I wish to speak to you in the house," and then walked back
through the front door without even looking in Judge Wade's direction,
though he had waved his hat with one of his mother's own smiles when he
had seen her before I did. One of my most impossible habits is, when
there is nothing else to do I laugh. I did it then and it saved the day,
for we both laughed into each others eyes a second time, and before we
realized it we were within whispering distance.

"No, I don't--don't--need any dog," I said softly, hardly glancing out
from under my lashes because I was afraid to risk looking straight at
him again so soon. I could fairly feel Aunt Adeline's eyes boring into
my back.

"It would take the hydra-headed monster of--may I bring my mother to
call on you and the--Mrs. Henderson?" he asked and poured the wonder
smile all over me. Again I almost caught my breath.

"I do wish you would, Aunt Adeline is so fond of Mrs. Wade!" I said in a
positive flutter that I hope he didn't see, but I am afraid he did, for
he hesitated as if he wanted to say something to calm me, then bowed
mercifully and went on down the street. He didn't put on the hat he had
held in his hand all the while he stood by the fence until he had looked
back and bowed again. Then I felt still more fluttered as I went into
the house, but I received the third cold plunge of the day when I
reached the front hall.

"Mary," said Aunt Adeline in a voice that sounded as if it had been
buried and never resurrected, "if you are going to continue in such an
unseemly course of conduct I hope you will remove your mourning, which
is an empty mockery and an insult to my own widowhood."

"Yes, Aunt Adeline, I'll go take it off this very minute," I heard
myself answer her airily to my own astonishment. I might have known that
if I ever got one of those smiles it would go to my head! Without
another word I sailed into my room and closed the door softly.

I wonder if God could have realized what a tender thing He was leaving
exposed to life in the garden of the world after He had finished making
a woman? Traditionally, we are created out of rose-leaves and star-dust
and the harmony of the winds, but we need a steel-chain netting to fend
us. Slowly I unbuttoned that black dress that symbolized the ending of
six years of the blackness of a married life, from which I had been
powerless to fend myself, and the rosy dimpling thing in snowy lingerie
with tags of blue ribbon that stood in front of my mirror was as
new-born as any other hour-old similar bundle of linen and lace in
Hillsboro, Tennessee. Fortunately, an old, year-before-last, white lawn
dress could be pulled from the top shelf of the closet in a hurry, and
the Molly that came out of that room was ready for life--and a lot of it
quick and fast.

And again, fortunately, Aunt Adeline had retired with a violent headache
and black Judy was carrying her in a hot water-bottle with a broad grin
on her face. Judy sees the world from the kitchen window and understands
everything. She had laid a large thick letter on the hall table where I
couldn't fail to see it.

I took possession of it and carried it to a bench in the garden that
backs up against the purple sprayed lilacs and is flanked by two rows of
tall purple and white iris that stand in line ready for a Virginia reel
with a delicate row of the poet's narcissus across the broad path. I
love my flowers. I love them swaying on their stems in the wind, and I
like to snatch them and crush the life out of them against my breast and
face. I have been to bed every night this spring with a bunch of cool
violets against my cheek and I feel that I am going to flirt with my
tall row of hollyhocks as soon as they are old enough to hold up their
heads and take notice. They always remind me of very stately gentlemen
and I have wondered if the fluffy little butter and eggs weren't shaking
their ruffles at them.

A real love-letter ought to be like a cream puff with a drop of dynamite
in it. Alfred's was that kind. I felt warm and happy down to my toes as
I read it and I turned around so old Lilac Bush couldn't peep over my
shoulder at what he said.

He wrote from Rome this time, where he had been sent on some sort of
diplomatic mission to the Vatican, and his letter about the Ancient City
on her seven hills was a prose-poem in itself. I was so interested that
I read on and on and forgot it was almost toast-apple time.

Of course, anybody that is anybody would be interested in Father Tiber
and the old Colosseum, but what made me forget the one slice of dry
toast and the apple was the way he seemed to be connecting me up with
all those wonderful old antiquities that had never even seen me. Because
of me he had felt and written that poem descriptive of old Tiber, and
the moonlight had lit up the Colosseum just because I was over here
lighting up Hillsboro, Tennessee, with Mr. Carter dead. Of course that
is not the way he put it all, but there is no place to really copy what
he did say down into this imp book and, anyway, that is the sentiment he
expressed, boiled down and sugared off.

That's just what I mean--love boiled down and sugared off is mighty apt
to get an explosive flavor, and one had better be careful with that kind
if one is timid; which I'm not. As I said, also, I am ready for a little
taste of life, so I read on without fear. And, to be fair, Alfred had
well boiled his own last paragraph. It snapped; and I jumped and gasped
both. I almost thought I didn't quite like it and was going to read it
over again to see, when there came a procession from over to Doctor
John's and I laid the bombshell down on the bench.

First came the red setter that is always first with Doctor John, and
then he came himself, leading Billy by the hand. It was Billy, but the
most subdued Billy I ever saw, and I held out my arms and started for
him.

"Wait a minute, please, Molly," said the doctor in the voice he always
uses when he's punishing Billy and me. "Bill came to apologize to you
for being rude to your--your guest. He told me all about it and I think
he's sorry. Tell Mrs. Carter you are sorry, son." When that man speaks
to me as if I were just any old body else, I hate him so it is a wonder
I don't show it more than I do. But there was nothing to say and I
looked at Billy and Billy looked at me.

Then suddenly he stretched out his little arms to me and the dimples
winked at me from all over his darling face.

"Molly, Molly," he said with a perfect rapture of chuckles in his voice,
"now you look just as pretty as you do when you go to bed; all whity all
over. You can kiss my kiss-spot a hundred times while I bear-hug you
for that nice not-black dress," and before any stern person could have
stopped us I was on my knees on the grass kissing my fill from the
"kiss-spot" on the back of his neck, while he hugged all the starch out
of the summer-before-last.

And Doctor John sat down on the bench quick and laughed out loud one of
the very few times I ever heard him do it. He was looking down at us,
but I didn't laugh up into _his_ eyes. I was afraid. I felt it was
safer to go on kissing the kiss-spot for the present, anyway.

"Bill," he said, with his voice dancing, "that's the most effective
apology I ever heard. You were sorry to some point."

Then suddenly Billy stiffened right in my arms and looked me straight in
the face and said in the doctor's own brisk tones, even with his cupid
mouth set in the same straight line:

"I say I'm sorry, Molly, but damn that man and I'll git him yet!"

What could we say? What could we do? We didn't try. I busied myself in
tying the string on Billy's blouse that had come untied in the bear-hug
and the doctor suddenly discovered the letter on the bench. I saw him
see it without looking in his direction at all.

"And how many pounds are we nearer the string-bean state of existence,
Mrs. Molly?" he asked me before I had finished tying the blouse, in the
nicest voice in the world, fairly crackling with friendship and good
humor and hateful things like that. Why I should have wanted him to huff
over that letter is more than I can say. But I did; and he didn't.

"Over twenty, and most of the time I am so hungry I could eat Aunt
Adeline. I dream about Billy, fried with cream gravy," I answered, as I
kissed again the back of the head that was beginning to nod down against
my breast. Long shadows lay across the garden and the white-headed old
snow-ball was signaling out of the dusk to a Dorothy Perkins down
the walk in a scandalous way. At best, spring is just the world's
match-making old chaperon and ought to be watched. I still sat on the
grass and I began to cuddle Billy's bare knees in the skirt of my dress
so the chigres couldn't get at them.

"But, Mrs. Molly, isn't it worth it all?" asked the doctor as he bent
over toward us and looked down with something wonderful and kind in his
eyes that seemed to rest on us like a benediction. "You have been just
as plucky as a girl can be and in only a little over two months you have
grown as lightfooted and hearty as a boy. _I_ think nothing could
be lovelier than you are right now, but you can get off those other few
pounds if you want to. You know, don't you, that I have known how hard
some of it was and I haven't been able to eat as much as I usually do
thinking how hungry you are? But isn't it all worth it? I think it is.
Alfred Bennett is a very great man and it is right that he should have a
very lovely wife to go out into the world with him. And as lovely as you
are I think it is wonderful of you to make all this sacrifice to be
still lovelier for him. I am glad I can help you and it has taught me
something to see how--how faithful a woman can be across years--and then
in this smaller thing! Now give me Bill and you get your apple and
toast. Don't forget to take your letter in out of the dew." I sat
perfectly still and held Billy tighter in my arms as I looked up at his
father, and then after I had thought as long as I could stand it, I
spoke right out at him as mad as hops and I don't to this minute know
why.

"Nobody in the world ever doubted that a woman could be faithful if she
had anything to be faithful to," I said as I let him take Billy out of
my arms at last. "Faithfulness is what a woman flowers, only it takes a
_man_ to pick his posy." With which I marched into the house and
left him standing with Billy in his arms, I hope dumfounded. I didn't
look back to see. I always leave that man's presence so mad I can never
look back at him. And wouldn't it make any woman rage to have a man pick
out another man for her to be faithful to when she hadn't made any
decision about it her own self?

I wonder just how old Judge Wade is? I believe I will make up with Aunt
Adeline enough before I go to bed to find out why he has never married.




LEAF THIRD

MONUMENT OR TROUSSEAU?


Men are very strange people. They are like those horrible sums in
algebra that you think about and worry about and cry about and try to
get help from other women about, and then, all of a sudden, X works
itself out into perfectly good sense. Not that I thought much about Mr.
Carter, poor man! When he wasn't right around I felt it best to forget
him as much as I could, but it seems hard for other women to let you
forget either your husband or theirs.

I know now that I really never got any older than the poor, foolish,
eighteen-years' child that Aunt Adeline married off "safe", all the time
I was the "refuge" sort of wife. I would sit and listen while the other
wives talked over the men in utter bewilderment and most times terror,
then I would force myself to a little more forgetting and poor Mr.
Carter must have suffered the consequences. But all that was a mild sort
of exasperation to what a widow has to go through with in the matter
of--of, well I think hazing is about the best name to give it.

"Molly Carter," said Mrs. Johnson just day before yesterday, after the
white-dress, Judge-Wade episode that Aunt Adeline had gone to all the
friends up and down the street to be consoled about, "if you haven't got
sense enough to appreciate your present blissful condition somebody
ought to operate on your mind."

I was tempted to say, "Why not my heart?" I was glad she didn't know
how good that heart did feel under my tucker when the boy brought that
basket of fish from Judge Wade's fishing trip Saturday. I have firmly
determined not to blush any more at the thought of that gorgeous man--at
least outwardly.

"Don't you think it is very--very lonely to be a widow, Mrs. Johnson?" I
asked timidly to see what she would say about Mr. Johnson, who is really
lovely, I think. He gives me the gentlest understanding smile when he
meets me on the street of late weeks.

"Lonely, _lonely_, Molly? You talk about the married state exactly
like an old maid. Don't do it--it's foolish, and you will get the lone
notion really fastened in your mind and let some fool man find out that
is how you feel. Then it will be all over with you. I have only one
regret, and it is that if I ever should be a widow Mr. Johnson wouldn't
be here to see how quickly I turned into an old maid, by the grace of
God." Mrs. Johnson sews by assassinating the cloth with the needle, and
as she talked she was mending the sleeve of one of Mr. Johnson's shirts.

"I think an old maid is just a woman who has never been in love with a
man who loves her. Lots of them have been married for years," I said,
just as innocently as the soft face of a pan of cream, and went on
darning one of Billy's socks.

"Well, be that as it may, they are the blessed members of the women
tribe," she answered, looking at me sharply. "Now I have often told
Mr. Johnson--" but here we were interrupted in what might have been the
rehearsal of a glorious scrap by the appearance of Aunt Bettie Pollard,
and with her came a long, tall, lovely vision of a woman in the most
wonderful close clingy dress and hat that you wanted to eat on sight.
I hated her instantly with the most intense adoration that made me want
to lie down at her feet, and also made me feel like I had gained all the
more than twenty pounds that I have slaved off me and doubled them on
again. I would have liked to lead her that minute into Doctor John's
office and just to have looked at him and said one word--"string-bean!"
Aunt Betty introduced her as Miss Chester from Washington.

"Oh, my dear Mrs. Carter, how glad I am to meet you!" she said as she
towered over me in a willowy way, and her voice was lovely and cool
almost to slimness. "I am the bearer of so many gracious messages that
I am anxious to deliver them safely to you. Not six weeks ago I left
Alfred Bennett in Paris and really--really his greetings to you almost
amounted to steamer luggage. He came down to Cherbourg to see me off,
and almost the last thing he said to me was, 'Now, don't fail to see
Mrs. Carter as soon as you get to Hillsboro; and the more you see of her
the more you'll enjoy your visit to Mrs. Pollard.' Isn't he the most
delightful of men?" She asked me the question, but she had the most
wonderful way of seeming to be talking to everybody at one time, so
Mrs. Johnson got in the first answer.

"Delightful, nothing! But Al Bennett is a man of sense not to marry
any of the string of women I suppose he's got following him!" she said.
Miss Chester looked at her in a mild kind of wonder, but she went on
murdering Mr. Johnson's shirt-sleeve with the needle without noticing
the glance at all.

"Well, well, honey, I don't know about that," said Aunt Bettie as she
fanned and rocked her great, big, darling, fat self in the strong rocker
I always kept in the breezy angle of the porch for her. "Al is not old
enough to have proved himself entirely, and from what I hear--" she
paused with the big hearty smile that she always wears when she begins
to tease or match-make, and she does them both most of her time.

But at whom do you suppose she looked? Not me! Miss Chester! That was
cold tub number two for that day, and I didn't react as quickly as I
might, but when I did I was in the proper glow all over. When I revived
and saw the lovely pale blush on her face I felt like a cabbage-rose
beside a tea-bud. I was glad Aunt Adeline came out on the porch just
then so I could go in and tell Judy to bring out the iced tea and cakes.
When I came from the kitchen I stepped into my room and took out one of
Alfred's letters from the desk drawer and opened it at random, as you do
the Bible when you want to decide things, and put my finger down on a
line with my eyes shut This was what it was:

  "--and all these years I have walked the world, blindfolded to its
  loveliness with the blackness that came to me when I found that you--"


I didn't read any more, but shoved it back in a hurry and went on out on
the porch, comforted in a way, but feeling some more in sympathy with
Mrs Johnson than I had before Aunt Bettie and her guest from Washington
had interrupted our algebraic demonstration on the man subject. You
can't always be sure of the right answer to X in any proposition of
life; that is, a woman can't!

And, furthermore, I didn't like that next hour much, just as a sample of
life, for instance. Aunt Bettie had got her joining-together humor well
started, and right there before my face she made a present of every nice
man in Hillsboro to that lovely, distinguished, strange girl who could
have slipped through a bucket hoop if she had tried hard. I had to sit
there, listen to the presentations, watch her drink two tall delicious
glasses of tea full of sugar and consume without fear three of Judy's
puffy cakes, while I crumbled mine in secret over the banisters and set
half the glass of tea out of sight behind the wistaria vine.

It was bad enough to hear Aunt Bettie just offer her Tom, who, if he is
her own son, is my favorite cousin, but I believe the worst minute I
almost ever faced was when she began on the judge, for I could see from
Aunt Adeline's shoulder beyond Miss Chester how she was enjoying that,
and she added another distinguished ancestor to his pedigree every time
Aunt Bettie paused for breath. I couldn't say a word about the fish and
Aunt Adeline wouldn't! I almost loved Mrs. Johnson when she bit off a
thread viciously and said, "Humph," as she rose to start the tea-party
home.

That night I did so many exercises that at last I sank exhausted in a
chair in front of my mirror and put my head down on my arms and cried
the real tears you cry when nobody is looking. I felt terribly old and
ugly and dowdy and--widowed. It couldn't have been jealousy, for I just
love that girl. I want most awfully to hug her very slimness and it
was more what she might think of poor dumpy me than what any man in
Hillsboro, Tennessee, or Paris, France, could possibly feel on the
subject that hurt so hard. But then, looking back on it, I am afraid
that jealousy sheds feathers every night so you won't know him in the
morning, for something made me sit up suddenly with a spark in my eyes
and reach out to the desk for my pencil and check-book. It took me more
than an hour to figure it all up, but I went to bed a happier, though
in prospects a poorer woman.

It is strange how spending a man's money makes you feel more congenial
with him and as I sat in the cars on my way to the city early the next
morning I felt nearer to Mr. Carter than I almost ever did, alive or
dead. After this I shall always appreciate and admire him for the way he
made money, since, for the first time in my life, I fully realized what
it could buy. And I bought things!

First I went to see Madam Courtier for corsets. I had heard about her
and I knew it meant a fortune. But that didn't matter! She came in and
looked at me for about five minutes without saying a word and then she
ran her hands down and down over me until I could feel the flesh just
crawling off of me. It was delicious!

Then she and two girls in puffs and rats came in and did things to a
corset they laced on me that I can't even write down, for I didn't
understand the process, but when I looked in that long glass I almost
dropped on the floor. I wasn't tight and I wasn't stiff and I
looked--I'm too modest to write how lovely I really looked to myself.
I was spellbound with delight.

[Illustration: I was spellbound with delight]

Next I signed the check for three of those wonders with my head so in
the clouds I didn't know what I was doing, but I came to with a jolt
when the prettiest girl began to get me into that black taffeta bag I
had worn down to the city. I must have shrunk the whole remaining pounds
I had felt obliged to lose for Alfred and Ruth Chester from the horror I
felt when I looked at myself. The girl was really sympathetic and said
with a smile that was true kindness: "Shall I call a taxi for madam and
have it take her to Klein's? They have wonderful gowns by Rene all ready
to be fitted at short notice. Really, madam's figure is such that it
commands a perfect costume now." Men do business well, but when women
enter the field they are geniuses at money extracting. I felt myself
already clothed perfectly when that girl said my figure "commanded" a
proper dress. Of course, Klein pays Madam Courtier a commission for the
customers she passes right on to him. The one for me must have looked to
her like a real estate transaction.

I spent three days at the great Klein store, only going to the hotel to
sleep and most of the time I forgot to eat. Madam Rene must have been
Madam Courtier's twin sister in youth, and Madam Telliers in the hat
department was the triplet to them both. When women have genius it
breaks out all over them like measles and they never recover from it;
those women had the confluent kind. But I know that old Rene really
liked me, for when I blushed and asked her if they had a good beauty
doctor in the store she held up her hands and shuddered.

"Never, Madam, never _pour vous_. _Ravissant, charmant_--it is
to fool. Nevair! _Jamais, jamais de la vie!_" I had to calm her
down and she kissed my hand when we parted.

I thought Klein was going to do the same thing or worse when I signed
the check which would be good for a house and lot and motor-car for him,
but he didn't. Only he got even with me by saying: "And I am delighted
that the trousseau is perfectly satisfactory to you, Mrs. Carter."

That was an awful shock and I hope I didn't show it as I murmured:
"Perfectly, thank you."

The word "trousseau" can be spoken in a woman's presence for many years
with no effect, but it is an awful shock when she first _really_
hears it. I felt funny all afternoon as I packed those trunks for the
five o'clock train.

Yes, the word "trousseau" ought to have a definite surname after it
always and that's why my loyalty dragged poor Mr. Carter out into the
light of my conscience. The thinking of him had a strange effect on me.
I had laid out the dream in dark gray-blue rajah, tailored almost beyond
endurance, to wear home on the train and had thrown the old black
taffeta bag across the chair to give to the hotel maid, but the decision
of the session between conscience and loyalty made me pack the precious
blue wonder and put on once more the black rags of remembrance in a kind
of panic of respect.

I would lots rather have bought poor Mr. Carter the monument I have been
planning for months to keep up conversation with Aunt Adeline, than wear
that dress again. I felt conscience reprove me once more with loyalty
looking on in disapproval as I buttoned the old thing up for the last
time, because I really ought to have stayed over a day to buy that
monument, but--to tell the truth I wanted to see Billy so desperately
that his "sleep-place" above my heart hurt as if it might have prickly
heat break out at any minute.

So I hurried and stuffed the gray-blue darling in the top tray, lapped
old black taffeta around my waist and belted it in with a black belt off
a new green linen I had made for morning walks, down to the drug store
on the public square, I suppose. That is about the only morning
dissipation in Hillsboro that I can think of, and it all depends on whom
you meet, how much of a dissipation it is.

The next thing that happens after you have done a noble deed is, you
either regard it as a reward of virtue or as a punishment for having
been foolish. I felt both ways when Judge Wade came down the car aisle,
looking so much grander than any other man in sight that I don't see how
they stand him ever. At that minute the noble black-taffeta deed felt
foolish, but at the next minute I thanked my lucky stars for it.

It is nice to watch for a person to catch sight of you if you feel sure
how they are going to take it and somehow in this case I felt sure. I
was not disappointed, for his smile broke his face up into a joy-laugh.
Off came his hat instantly so I could catch a glimpse of the fascinating
frost over his temples, and with a positive sigh of rapture he subsided
into the seat beside me. I turned with an echo smile all over me when
suddenly his face became grave and considerate, and he looked at me as
all the men in Hillsboro have been doing ever since poor Mr. Carter's
funeral.

"Mrs. Carter," he said very kindly, in a voice that pitched me out of
the car window and left me a mile behind on the track, all by myself,
"I wish I had known of your sad errand to town so I could have offered
you some assistance in your selection. You know we have just had our lot
in the cemetery finally arranged and I found the dealers in memorial
stones very confusing in their ideas and designs. Mrs. Henderson just
told my mother of your absence from home last night, and I could only
come down to the city for the day on important business or I would have
arranged to see you. I hope you found something that satisfied you."

What's a woman going to say when she has a tombstone thrown in her face
like that? I didn't say anything, but what I thought about Aunt Adeline
filled in a dreadful pause.

Perfectly dumb and quiet I sat for an awful space of time and wondered
just what I was going to do. Could a woman lie a monument into her suit
case? It was beyond me at that speaking and the Molly that is ready for
life quick, didn't want to. I shut my eyes, counted three to myself as I
do when I go over into the cold tub, and told him all about it. We both
got a satisfactory reaction and I never enjoyed myself so much as that
before.

I understand now why Judge Wade has had so many women martyr themselves
over him and live unhappily ever afterward, as everybody says Henrietta
Mason is doing. He's a very inspiring man and he fairly bristles with
fascinations. Some men are what you call taking and they take you if
they want you, while others are drawing and after you are drawn to them
they will consider the question of taking you. The judge is like that.

In the meantime it tingles me up to a very great degree to have a man
use his eyes on me as it is the privilege of only womankind to do, and I
feel that it will be good for his judgeship for me to let him "draw" me
at least a little way. I may get hurt, but I shall at least have an
interesting time of it. I started right then and got results, for he
stopped under the old lilac bush that leans over my side gate and kissed
my hand. Old Lilac shook a laugh of perfume all over us and I believe
signaled the event at the top of his bough to the white clump on the
other side of the garden. I'm glad Aunt Adeline isn't in the flower
fraternity or sorority. Suppose she had seen or heard!

And it didn't take many minutes for me to slip into old
summer-before-last--also for the last time inside of those buttons--and
run through the garden, my heart singing, "Billy, Billy," in a perfect
rapture of tune. I ran past the office door and found him in his cot
almost asleep and we had a bear reunion in the rocker by the window that
made us both breathless.

"What did you bring me, Molly?" he finally kissed under my right ear.

"A real base-ball and bat, lover, and an engine with five cars, a rake
and a spade and a hoe, two blow-guns that pop a new way and something
that squirts water and some other things. Will that be enough?" I hugged
him up anxiously, for sometimes he is hard to please and I might not
have got the very thing he wanted.

"Thank you, Molly, all them things is what I want, but you oughter brung
more'n that for three days not being here with me." Did any woman ever
have a more lovely lover than that? I don't know how long I should have
rocked him in the twilight if Doctor John's voice hadn't come across the
hall in command.

"Put him down now, Mrs. Molly, and come and say other how-do-you-does,"
he called softly.

It was a funny glad-to-see-him I felt as I came into the office where he
was standing over by the window looking out at my garden in its twilight
glow. I think it is wrong for a woman to let her imagination kiss a man
on the back of his neck even if she has known for some time that there
is a little drake-tail lock of hair there just like his own son's. I
gave him my hand and a good deal more of a smile and a blush than I
intended.

He very far from kissed the hand; he held it just long enough to turn me
around into the light and give me one long looking-over from head to
feet.

"Just where does that corset press you worst?" he asked in the tone of
voice he uses to say "poke out your tongue." So much of my Tennessee
shooting-blood rose to my face that it is a wonder it didn't drip; but I
was cold enough to have hit at forty paces if I had had a shooting-iron
in my hand. As it was the coldness was the only missile that I had, but
I used it to some effect.

"I am making a call on a friend, Doctor Moore, and not a consultation
visit to my physician," I said, looking into his face as though I had
never seen him before.

"I beg your pardon, Molly," he exclaimed and his face was redder than
mine and then it went white with mortification. I couldn't stand that.

"Don't do that way!" I exclaimed, and before I knew it I had taken
hold of his hand and had it in both of mine. "I know I look as if I
was shrunk or laced, but I'm not! I was going to tell you all about
it and show it to you. I'm really inches bigger in the right place and
just--just 'controlled', the woman called it, in the wrong place. Please
feel me and see," and I offered myself to him for examination in the
most regardless way. He's not at all like other people.

The blood came back into his face and he laughed as he gave me a little
shake that pushed me away from him. "Don't you ever scare me like that
again, child, or it might be serious," he said in the Billy-and-me tone
of voice that I like some, only--

"I never will," I said in a hurry; "I want you to ask me anything in the
world you want to and I'll always do it."

"Well, let me take you home through the garden then--and, yes, I believe
I'll stay to break a muffin with Mrs. Henderson. Don't you want to tell
me what a little girl like you did in a big city and--and read me part
of that London letter I saw the postman give Judy this afternoon?"

Again I ask myself the question why his friendliness to Alfred Bennett's
letters always makes me so instantly cross.




LEAF FOURTH

SCATTERED JAM


Sleep is one of the most delightful and undervalued amusements known
to the human race. I have never had enough yet and every second of time
that I'm not busy with something interesting I curl up on the bed and
go dream hunting--only I sleep too hard to do much catching. But this
torture book found that out on me and stopped it the very first thing on
page three. The command is to sleep as little as possible to keep the
nerves in a good condition,--"eight hours at the most and seven would
be better." What earthly good would a seven-hour nap do me? I want ten
hours to sleep and twelve if I get a good tired start. To see me stagger
out of my perfectly nice bed at six o'clock every morning now would
wring the sternest heart with compassion and admiration at my
faithfulness--to whom?

Yes, it was the day after poor Mr. Carter's funeral that Aunt Adeline
moved up here into my house and settled herself in the big south room
across the hall from mine. Her furniture weighs a ton each piece, and
Aunt Adeline is not light herself in disposition. The next morning when
I went in to breakfast she sat in the "vacant chair" in a way that made
me see that she was obviously trying to fill the vacancy. I am sorry she
worried herself about that. Anyway, it made me take a resolve. After
breakfast I went into the kitchen to speak to Judy.

"Judy," I said, looking past her head, "my health is not very good and
you can bring my breakfast to me in bed after this." Poor Mr. Carter
always wanted breakfast on the stroke of seven, and me at the same time,
though he rarely got me. Judy has two dead husbands and she likes a
ginger-colored barber down-town. Also her mother is our washerwoman
and influenced by Aunt Adeline. Judy understands everything I say to
her. After I had closed the door I heard a laugh that sounded like a
war-whoop, and I smiled to myself. But that was before my martyrdom to
this book had begun. I get up now!

But the day after I came from the city I lay in bed just as long as I
wanted to and ignored the thought of the exercises and deep breathing
and the icy unsympathetic tub. I couldn't even take very much interest
in the lonely egg on the lonely slice of dry toast. I was thinking about
things.

Hillsboro is a very peculiar little speck on the universe; even more
peculiar than being like a hen. It is one of the oldest towns in
Tennessee and the moss on it is so thick that it can't be scratched off
except in spots. But it has a lot of racehorse and distillery money in
it and when it gets poked up by anything unusual it takes a gulp of its
own alcoholic atmosphere and runs away on its own track at a two-five
gait, shedding moss as it goes. It hasn't had a real joy-race for a long
time and I felt that it needed it. I rolled over and laughed into my
pillow.

The subject of the conduct of widows is a serious one. Of all the things
old Tradition is most set about it is that, and what was decided to be
the proper thing a million years ago this town still dictates shall be
done, and spends a good deal of its time seeing its directions carried
out. For a year after the funeral they forget about the poor bereaved
and when they do remember her they speak to and of her in the same tones
of voice they used at the obsequies. Then sooner or later some neighbor
is sure to see some man walk home from church with her or hear some old
bachelor's voice on her front porch. Mr. Cain took Mrs. Caruther's
little Jessie up in his buggy and helped her out at her mother's gate
just before last Christmas, and if the poor widow hadn't acted quick the
town would have noticed them to death before he proposed to her. They
were married the day after New Year's and she lost lots of good friends
because she didn't give them more time to talk about it.

I don't intend to run any risk of losing my friends that way and I want
them to have all the good time they can get out of it. I'm going to
serve out mint-juleps of excitement until the dear old place is running
as it did when it was a two-year-old. Why get mad when people are
interested in you? It's a compliment after all and just gives them more
to think about. I remembered the two trunks across the hall and hugged
my knees up under by chin with pleasure at the thought of the town-talk
they contained.

Then just as I had got the first plan well-going and was deciding
whether to wear the mauve meteor or the white chiffon with the rosebud
embroidery as a first julep for my friends, a sweetness came in through
my window that took my breath away and I lay still with my hand over my
heart and listened. It was Billy singing right under my window, and I've
never heard him do it before in all his five years. It was the dearest
old-fashioned tune ever written and Billy sang the words as distinctly
as if he had been a boy chorister doing a difficult recitative. My heart
beat so it shook the lace on my breast like a breeze from heaven as he
took the high note and then let it go on the last few words.

  "If you love me, Molly, darling,
   Let your answer be a kiss!"


A confused recollection of having heard the words and tune sung by my
mother when I was at the rocking age myself brought the tears to my eyes
as I flew to the window and parted the curtains. If you heard a little
boy-angel singing at your casement wouldn't you expect a cherubim face
upturned with heaven-lights all over it? Billy's face was upturned as he
heard me draw the shade, but it was streaked like a wild Indian's with
decorations of brown mud and he held a long slimy fish-worm on the end
of a stick while he wiped his other grimy hand down the front of his
linen blouse.

[Illustration: I lifted him into my arms]

"Say, Molly, look at the snake I brunged you!" he exclaimed as he came
close under the sill, which is not high from the ground. "If you put
your face down to the mud and sing something to 'em they'll come outen
they holes. A doodle-bug comed, too, but I couldn't ketch 'em both. Lift
me up and I can put him in the water-glass on your table." He held up
one muddy paddie to me and promptly I lifted him up into my arms. From
the embrace in which he and the worm and I indulged my lace and dimity
came out much the worse.

"That was a lovely song you sang about 'Molly, darling', Billy," I said.
"Where did you hear it?"

"That's a good bug-song, Molly, and I bet I can git a lizard with it,
too, if I sing it right low." He began to squirm out of my arms toward
the table and the glass.

"Who taught it to you, sugar-sweet?" I persisted as I poured water in on
the squirming worm under his direction.

"Nobody taught it to me. Doc sings it to me when Tilly, nurse, nor you
ain't there to put me to bed. He don't know no good songs like _Roll,
Jordan, Roll_, or _Hot Times_ or _Twinkle_. I go to sleep quick 'cause
he makes me feel tired with his slow tune what's only good for bugs. Git
a hair-pin for me to poke him with, Molly, quick!"

I found the hair-pin and I don't know why my hand trembled as I handed
it to Billy. As soon as he got it he climbed out the window, glass, bug
and all, and I saw him and the red setter go down the garden walk
together in pursuit of the desired lizard, I suppose. I closed the
blinds and drew the curtains again and flung myself on my pillow.
Something warm and sweet seemed to be sweeping over me in great waves
and I felt young and close up to some sort of big world-good. It was
delicious and I don't know how long I would have stayed there just
feeling it if Judy hadn't brought in my letter.

He had written from London, and it was many pages of wonderful things
all flavored with me. He told me about Miss Chester and what good
friends they were, and how much he hoped she would be in Hillsboro when
he got here. He said that a great many of her dainty ways reminded him
of his "own slip of a girl", especially the turn of her head like a
"flower on its stem." At that I got right out of bed like a jack jumping
out of a box and looked at myself in the mirror.

There is one exercise here on page twenty that I hate worst of all. You
screw up your face tight until you look like a Christmas mask to get
your neck muscles taut and then wobble your head around like a new-born
baby until it swims. I did that one twenty extra times and all the
others in proportion to make up for those two hours in bed. Hereafter
I'll get up at the time directed on page three, or maybe earlier. It
frightens me to think that I've got only a few weeks more to turn from a
cabbage-rose into a lily. I won't let myself even think "luscious peach"
and "string-bean." If I do, I get warm and happy all over and let up on
myself. I try when I get hungry to think of myself in that blue muslin
dress.

I haven't been really willing before to write down in this torture
volume that I took that garment to the city with me and what Madam Rene
did to it--made it over into the loveliest thing I ever saw, only I
wouldn't let her alter the size one single inch. I'm honorable as all
women are at peculiar times. I think she understood, but she seemed not
to, and worked a miracle on it with ribbon and lace. I've put it away on
the top shelf of a closet, for it is torment to look at it.

You can just take any old recipe for a party and mix up a debut for a
girl, but it takes more time to concoct one for a widow, especially if
it is for yourself. I spent all the rest of the day doing almost nothing
and thinking until I felt lightheaded. Finally I had just about given up
any idea of a blaze and had decided to leak out in general society as
quietly as my clothes would let me, when a real conflagration was
lighted inside me.

If Tom Pollard wasn't my own first cousin I would have loved him
desperately, even if I am a week older than he. He was about the
only oasis in my marriage mirage, though I don't think anybody would
think of calling him at all green. He never stopped coming to see me
occasionally, and Mr. Carter liked him. He was the first man to notice
the white ruche I sewed in the neck of my old black taffeta four or five
months ago and he let me see that he noticed it out of the corner of his
eyes even right there in church, under Aunt Adeline's very elbow. He
makes love unconsciously and he flirts with his own mother. As soon as
I've made this widowhood hurdle--well, I'm going to spend a lot of time
buying tobacco with him in his Hup runabout, which sounds as if it was
named for himself.

And when that conflagration was lighted in me about my debut, Tom did
it. I was sitting peaceably on my own front steps, dressed in the
summer-before-last that Judy washes and irons every day while I'm
deciding how to hand out the first sip of my trousseau to the neighbors,
when Tom, in a dangerous blue-striped shirt, with a tie that melted into
it in tone, blew over my hedge and landed at my side. He kissed the lace
ruffle on my sleeve while I reproved him severely and settled down to
enjoy him. But I didn't have such an awfully good time as I generally do
with him. He was too full of another woman, and even a first cousin can
be an exasperation in that condition.

"Now, Mrs. Molly, truly did you ever see such a peach as she is?" he
demanded after I had expressed more than a dozen delighted opinions of
Miss Chester. His use of the word "peach" riled me and before I stopped
to think, I said: "She reminds me more of a string-bean."

"Now, Molly, don't be mean just because old Wade has got her out driving
behind the grays after kissing your hand under the lilacs yesterday,
which, praise be, nobody saw but little me! I'm not sore, why should you
be? Aren't you happy with me?"

I withered him with a look, or rather _tried_ to wither him, for
Tom is no Mimosa bud.

"The way that girl has started in to wake up this little old town
reminds me of the feeling you get under your belt seven minutes after
you've sipped an absinthe frappe for the first time--you are liable for
a good jag and don't know it," he continued enthusiastically. "Let's
don't let the folks know that they are off until I get everybody in a
full swing of buzz over my queen." I had never seen Tom so enthusiastic
over a girl before and I didn't like it. But I decided not to let him
know that, but to get to work putting out the Chester blaze in him and
starting one on my own account.

"That's just what I'm thinking about, Tom," I said with a smile that was
as sweet as I could make it, "and as she came with messages to me from
one of my best old friends I think I ought to do something to make her
have a good time. I was just planning a gorgeous dinner-party I want to
have for her when you came so suddenly. Do you think we could arrange it
for Tuesday evening?"

"Lord love us, Molly, don't knock the town down like that! Let 'em have
more than a week to get used to this white rag of a dress you've been
waving in their faces for the last few days. Go slow!"

"I've been going so slow for so many years that I've turned around and
I'm going fast backward," I said with a blush that I couldn't help.

"Help! Let my kinship protect me!" exclaimed Tom in alarm, and he
pretended to move an inch away from me.

"Yes," I said slowly and as I looked out of the corner of my eyes from
under the lashes that Tom himself had once told me were "too long and
black to be tidy," I saw that he was in a condition to get the full
shock. "If anybody wakes up this town it will be I," I said as I flung
down the gauntlet with a high head.

"Here, Molly, here are the keys of my office, and the spark-plug to the
Hup; you can cut off a lock of my hair, and if Judy has got a cake I'll
eat it out of your hands. Shall it be California or Nova Scotia? And I
prefer _my_ bride served in light gray tweed." Tom really is
adorable and I let him snuggle up just one cousinly second, then we both
laughed and began to plan what Tom was horrible enough to call the
resurrection razoo. But I kept that delicious rose-embroidered treasure
all to myself. I wanted him to meet it entirely unprepared.

I was glad we had both got over our excitement and were sitting
decorously at several inches' distance apart when the judge drew the
grays up to the gate and we both went down to the sidewalk to ask him
and the lovely long lady to come in. They couldn't; but we stood and
talked to them long enough for Mrs. Johnson to get a good look at us
from across the street and I was afraid I would find Aunt Adeline in a
faint when I went into the house.

Miss Chester was delightfully gracious about the dinner--I almost called
it the debut dinner--and the expression on the judge's face when he
accepted! I was glad she was sitting sidewise to him and couldn't see.
Some women like to make other women unhappy, but I think it is best for
you to keep them blissfully unconscious until you get what you want.
Anyway, I like that girl all over and I can't see that her neck is so
absolutely impossibly flowery. However, I think she might have been a
little more considerate about discussing Alfred's London triumph over
the Italian mission. As a punishment I let Tom put his arm around my
waist as we stood watching them drive off and then was sorry for the
left gray horse that shied and came in for a crack of the judge's
irritated whip.

Then I refused to let Tom come inside the gate and he went down the
street whistling, only when he got to the purple lilac he turned and
kissed his hand to me. That, Mrs. Johnson just couldn't stand and she
came across the street immediately and called me back to the gate.

"You are tempting Providence, Molly Carter," she exclaimed decidedly.
"Don't you know Tom Pollard is nothing but a fly-up-the-creek? As a
husband he'd chew the rope and run away like a puppy the first time your
back was turned. Besides being your cousin, he's younger than you. What
do you mean?"

"He's just a week younger, Mrs. Johnson, and I wouldn't tie him for
worlds, even if I married him," I said meekly. Somehow I like Mrs.
Johnson enough to be meek with her and it always brings her to a higher
point of excitement.

"Tie, nonsense; marrying is roping in with ball and chain, to my mind.
And a week between a man and a woman in their cradles gets to be fifteen
years between them and their graves. I'm going to make you the subject
of a silent prayer at the next missionary meeting, and I must go home
now to see that Sally cooks up a few of Mr. Johnson's crotchets for
supper." And she began to hurry away.

"I don't believe you'll be able to make it a 'silent' session about me,
Mrs. Johnson," I called after her, and she laughed back from her own
front gate. Marriage is the only worm in the bud of Mrs. Johnson's life,
and her laugh has a snap to it even if it is not very sugary sweet.

When I told Judy about the dinner-party and asked her to get the yellow
barber to come help her and her nephew wait on the table she grinned
such a wide grin that I was afraid of being swallowed. She understood
that Aunt Adeline wouldn't be interested in it until I had time to tell
her all about it. Anyway, she will be going over to Springfield on a
pilgrimage to see Mr. Henderson's sister next week. She doesn't know it
yet; but I do.

After that I spent all the rest of the evening in planning my
dinner-party and I had a most royal good time. I always have had lots
of company, but mostly the spend-the-day kind with relatives, or more
relatives to supper. That's what most entertaining in Hillsboro is like,
but, as I say, once in a while the old slow pacer wakes up.

I'll never forget my first real dinner-party, as the flower girl for
Caroline Evans' wedding, when she married the Chicago millionaire, from
which Hillsboro has never yet recovered. I was sixteen, felt dreadfully
naked without a tucker in my dress, and saw Alfred for the first time in
evening clothes--his first. I can hardly stand thinking about how he
looked even now. I haven't been to very many dinner-parties in my life,
but from this time on I mean to indulge in them often. Candle-light,
pretty women's shoulders, black coat sleeves, cut glass and flowers are
good ingredients for a joy-drink, and why not?

But when I got to planning about the gorgeous food I wanted to give them
all, I got into what I feel came near being a serious trouble. It was
writing down the recipe for the nesselrode pudding they make in my
family that undid me. Suddenly hunger rose up from nowhere and gripped
me by the throat, gnawed me all over like a bone, then shook me until I
was limp and unresisting. I must have astralized myself down to the
pantry, for when I became conscious I found myself in company with a
loaf of bread, a plate of butter and a huge jar of jam.

I sat down by the long table by the window and slowly prepared to enjoy
myself. I cut off four slices and buttered them to an equal thickness
and then more slowly put a long silver spoon into the jam. I even paused
to admire in Judy's mirror over the table the effect of the cascade of
lace that fell across my arm and lost itself in the blue shimmer of old
Rene's masterpiece of a negligee, then deep down I buried the spoon in
the purple sweetness. I had just lifted it high in the air when out of
the lilac-scented dark of the garden came a laugh.

[Illustration: "Why Molly, Molly, Molly!"]

"Why, Molly, Molly, Molly!" drawled that miserable man-doctor as he came
and leaned on the sill right close to my elbow. The spoon crashed on the
table and I turned and crashed into words.

"You are cruel, cruel, John Moore, and I hate you worse than I ever did
before, if that is possible. I'm hungry, hungry to death, and now you've
spoiled it all! Go away before I wet this nice crisp bread and jam with
tears into a mush I'll have to eat with a spoon. You don't know what it
is to want something sweet so bad you are willing to steal it--from
yourself!" I fairly blazed my eyes down into his and moved as far away
from him as the table would let me.

"Don't I, Molly?" he asked softly, after looking straight in my eyes for
a long minute that made me drop my head until the blue bow I had tied on
the end of my long plait almost got into the scattered jam. Even at such
a moment as that I felt how glad old Rene would have been to have given
such a nice man as the doctor a treat like that blue silk
chef-d'oeuvre of hers. I was glad myself.

"Don't I, Peaches?" he asked again in a still softer voice. Again I had
that sensation of being against something warm and great and good like
your own mother's breast and I don't know how I controlled it enough not
to--to--

"Well, have some jam then," I managed to say with a little laugh as I
turned away and picked up the silver spoon.

"Thank you, I will, all of it and the bread and butter, too," he
answered, in that detestable friendly tone of voice as he drew himself
up and sat in the window. "Hustle, Peaches, if you are going to feed me,
for I'm ravenous. It took Sam Benson's wife the longest time to have the
shortest baby I ever experienced and I haven't had any supper. You have;
so I don't mind taking it all away from you."

"Supper," I sniffed as I spread the jam on those lovely, lovely slices
of bread and thick butter that I had fixed for my own self. "That
apple-toast combination tires me so now that I forget it if I can." As I
handed him the first slice of drippy lusciousness I turned my head away.
He thought it was from the expression of that jam, but it was from his
eyes.

"Slice up the whole loaf, Peaches, and let's get on a jam jag! Come with
me just this once and forget--forget--" He didn't finish his sentence
and I'm glad. We neither of us said anything more as I fed him that
whole loaf. I found that the bite I took off of each piece I had ready
for him when he finished with the one he had in hand satisfied me as
nothing I had ever eaten in all my life before had done, while at the
same time my nibbles soothed his conscience about robbing me.

His teeth are big and strong and white and his jaws work like machinery.
He is the strongest man I ever saw, and his gauntness is all muscle.
What is that glow a woman gets from feeding a hungry man whom she likes
with her own hands; and why should I want to be certain that he kissed
the lace on my sleeve as it brushed his face when I reached across him
to catch an inquisitive rose that I saw peeping in the window at us?




LEAF FIFTH

BLUE ABSINTHE


"The juice of a lemon in two glasses of cold water, to be drunk
immediately on wakening!" Page eleven! I've handed myself that lemon
every morning now until I am sensitive with myself about it. If there
was ever anybody "on the water wagon" it's I, and I have to sit on the
front seat from dawn to dusk to get in the gallon of water I'm supposed
to consume in that time. Sometime I'm going to get mixed up and try to
drink my bath if I don't look out. I dreamed night before last that I
was taking a bath in a glass of ice-cream soda-water and trying to hide
from Doctor John behind the dab of ice-cream that seemed inadequate for
food or protection. I haven't had even one glass for two months and I
woke up in a cold perspiration of embarrassment and raging hunger.

I don't know what I'm going to do about this book and I've got myself
into trouble about writing things besides records in it. He looked at me
this morning as coolly as if I was just anybody and said:

"I would like to see that record now, Mrs. Molly. It seems to me you are
about as slim as you want to be. How did you tip the scales last time
you weighed, and have you noticed any trouble at all with your heart?"

"I weigh one hundred and thirty-four pounds and I've got to melt and
freeze and starve off that four," I answered, ignoring the heart
question and also the question of producing this book. Wonder what he
would do if I gave it to him to read just as it is?

"How about the heart?" he persisted, and I may have imagined the smile
in his eyes for his mouth was purely professional. Anyway, I lowered my
lashes down on to my cheeks and answered experimentally:

"Sometimes it hurts." Then a cyclone happened to me.

"Come here to me a minute!" he said quickly and he turned me around and
put his head down between my shoulders and held me so tight against his
ear that I could hardly breathe.

"Expand your chest three times and breathe as deep as you can," he
ordered from against my back buttons. I expanded and breathed--pretty
quickly at that.

[Illustration: "Breathe as deep as you can"]

"Now hold your breath as long as you can," he commanded, and it fitted
my mood exactly to do so.

"Can't find anything," he said at last, letting me go and looking
carefully at my face. His eyes were all anxiety; and I liked it. "When
does it hurt you and how?" he asked anxiously.

"Moonlight nights and lonesomely," I answered before I could stop
myself, and what happened then was worse than any cyclone. He got white
for a minute and just looked at me as if I was a bug stuck on a pin,
then gave a short little laugh and turned to the table.

"I didn't understand you were joking," he said quietly.

That maddened me and I would have done anything to make him think
I was not the foolish thing he evidently had classified me as being.
I snatched at my mind and shook out a mixture of truth and lies that
fooled even myself and gave them to him, looking straight in his face.
I would have cracked all the ten commandments to save myself from his
contempt.

"I'm not joking," I said jerkily; "I _am_ lonesome. And worse than
being lonesome, I'm scared. I ought to have stayed just the quiet relict
of Mr. Carter and gone on to church meetings with Aunt Adeline and let
myself be fat and respectable; but I haven't got the character. You
thought I went to town to buy a monument, and I didn't; I bought enough
clothes for two brides, and now I'm scared to wear 'em, and I don't know
what you'll think when you see my bank-book. Everybody is talking about
me and that dinner-party Tuesday night, and Aunt Adeline says she can't
live in a house of mourning so desecrated any longer; she's going back
to the cottage. Aunt Bettie Pollard says that if I want to get married
I ought to do it to Mr. Wilson Graves because of the seven children and
then everybody would be so relieved that they are taken care of that
they would forget that Mr. Carter hasn't been dead quite one year yet.
Mrs. Johnson says I ought to be declared a minor and put as a ward to
you. I can't help Judge Wade's sending me flowers and Tom's sitting on
my front steps night and day. I'm not strong enough to carry him away
and murder him. I am perfectly miserable and I'm--"

"Now that'll do, Molly, just hush for a half-minute and let me talk to
you," said Doctor John as he took my hand in his and drew me near him.
"No wonder your heart hurts if it has got all that load of trouble on it
and well just get a little of that 'scare' off. You put yourself in my
hands and you are to do just as I tell you, and I say--forget it! Come
with me while I make a call. It is a long drive and I'm--I'm lonesome
sometimes myself."

I saw the worst was over and I breathed freely again, but I had talked
so much truth in that fiction that I felt just as I said I did, which is
a slightly unnatural feeling for a woman. There was nothing for it but
to go with him, and I wanted to most awfully.

To my dying day I'll never forget that little house, way out on the Cane
Run Pike, he took me to in his shabby little car. Just two tiny rooms,
but they were clean and quiet and a girl with the sweetest face I ever
saw lay in the bed with her eyes bright with pride and a tiny, tiny
little bundle close beside her. The young farmer was red with
embarrassment and anxiety.

"She's all right to-day, but she worries because she don't think I can
tend to the baby right," he said; and he did look helpless. "Her mother
had to go home for two days, but is coming to-morrow. I dasn't undress
and wash the youngster myself. It won't hurt him to stay bundled up
until granny comes, will it, Doc?"

"Not a bit," answered Doctor John in his big comforting voice.

But I looked at the girl and I understood her. She wanted that baby
clean and fresh even if it was just five days old, and I felt all of a
sudden terribly capable. I picked up the bundle and went into the other
room with it where a kettle was boiling on the stove and a large bucket
by the door. I found things by just a glance from her, and the hour I
spent with that small baby was one of the most delicious of all my life.
I never was left entirely to myself with one before and I did all I
wanted to this one, guided by instinct and desire. He slept right
through and was the darlingest thing I ever saw when I laid him back on
the bed by her. I never looked in Doctor John's direction once, though
I felt him all the time.

But on the way home I gave myself the surprise of my life! Suddenly
I turned my face against his sleeve and cried as I never had before.
I felt safe, for it is a cliff road and he had to drive carefully.
However, he managed to press that one arm against my cheek in a way that
comforted me into stopping when I saw we were near town. I got out of
the car at the garage and walked away through the garden home without
looking in his direction at all. I never seem to be able to look at him
as I do at other people. We hadn't spoken two words since we had left
the little house in the woods with that happy-faced girl in it. He has
more sense than just a man.

It was almost dusk and I stopped in the garden a minute to pull the dirt
closer around some of the bachelor's-buttons that had "popped" the
ground some weeks ago. Thinking about them made me regain my spirits and
I went on in the house to be scolded for whatever Aunt Adeline had
thought up while I was gone to do it to me about. Judy told me with her
broadest grin that she had gone down to her sister-in-law's for supper
and I sat down on the steps with a sigh of relief.

Some days are like tin cocoanut graters that everybody uses to grate you
against and this was one for me. For an hour I sat and grated my own
self against Alfred's letter that had come in the morning. I realized
that I would just have to come to some sort of decision about what I was
going to do, for he wrote that he was to sail in a day or two, and ships
do travel so fast these days.

I love him and always have, of that I am sure. He offers me the most
wonderful life in the world and no woman could help being proud to
accept it. I am lonely, more lonely than I was even willing to confess
to Doctor John. I can't go on living this way any longer. Ruth Chester
has made me see that if I want Alfred it will be now or never
and--quick. I know now that she loves him, and she ought to have her
show if I don't want him. The way she idolizes and idealizes him is a
marvel of womanly stupidity.

Some women like to collect men's hearts and hide them away from other
women on cold storage and the helpless things can't help themselves.

I have contempt for that sort of butcher, and I love Ruth!

It's my duty to look the matter in the face before I look in
Alfred's--and _decide_. If not Alfred, what then?

First--no husband. That's out of the question! I'm not strong-minded
enough to crank my own motor-car and study woman's suffrage. I prefer
to suffer at the hands of some cruel man and trust to beguiling him into
doing just as I say. I like men, can't help it, and want one for my own.
I don't count poor Mr. Carter.

Second--if not Alfred, who? Judge Wade is so delightful that I flutter
at the thought, but his mother is Aunt Adeline's own best friend and
they have ideas in common. She is so religious that living with her
would be like having the sacrament for daily bread. Still, living with
him might have adventures. I never saw such eyes! The girl he wanted to
marry died of tuberculosis and he wears a locket with her in it yet. I'd
like to reward him for such faithfulness with a nice husky wife to wear
instead of the locket. But then Alfred's been faithful too! I look at
Ruth Chester and realize how faithful, and my heart melts to him in my
breast--my hips have almost all melted away, too, so I had better keep
the heart cold enough to handle if I want anything left at all for him
to come home to.

In some ways Tom Pollard is the most congenial man I ever knew. You have
to say "don't" to him all the time, but what woman doesn't like a little
impertinence once in a while? I flavor all Tom's dare-devil kisses with
kinship when I feed them to my conscience, and I truly try to make him
be serious about the important things in life like going to church with
his mother and working all day, even if he is rich. I wish he wasn't so
near kin to me! Now, there, I feel in Ruth Chester's way again! One of
the things that keeps the devil so busy is taking helpless widows to the
heights of knowledge and showing them kingdoms of men that girls never
dream even exist. If all women could have been born with widow-eyes,
things would run much more smoothly along the marriage and
giving-in-marriage line. And the poor men are most of them as ignorant
as girls about what to do.

I suppose I really would be doing a righteous thing to marry Mr. Graves,
and I would adore all those children to start with, but I know Billy
wouldn't get on with them at all. I can't even consider it on his
account, but I'll let the nice old chap come on for a few times more to
see me, for he really is interesting and we have suffered things in
common. Mrs. Graves lacked the kind of temperament poor Mr. Carter did.
I'd like to make it all up to him, but if Billy wouldn't be happy, that
settles it, and I don't know how good his boys are. I couldn't have
Billy corrupted.

And so, as there is nobody else exactly suitable in town, it all simmers
down to one or the other of these or Alfred. In my heart I knew that I
couldn't hesitate a minute--and in the flash of a second I
_decided_. Of course I love Alfred and I'll take him gladly and be
the wife he has waited for all these six lonely years. I'll make
everything up to him if I have to diet to keep thin for him the rest of
my life. I likely will have that very thing to do and I get weak at the
idea. Before I burn this book I'll have to copy it all out and be
chained to it for life. At the thought my heart dropped like a sinker to
my toes; but I hauled it up to its normal place with picturing to myself
how Alfred would look when he saw me in that old blue muslin done over
into a Rene wonder. However, old heart would show a strange propensity
for sinking down into my slippers without any reason at all. Tears were
even coming into my eyes when Tom suddenly came over the fence and
picked me and the heart up together and put us into an adventure of the
first water.

"Molly," he said in the most nonchalant manner imaginable, "we've got a
dandy, strolling, gipsy band up at the hotel; the dining-room floor is
all waxed and I'm asking for the first dance with the young and radiant
Mrs. Carter. Get into a glad rag and don't keep me waiting."

"Tom," I gasped!

"Oh, be a sport, Moll, and don't take water! You said you would wake up
this town, and now do it. It seems twenty instead of six years since I
had my arms around you to music and I'm not going to wait any longer.
Everybody is there and they can't all dance with Miss Chester."

That settled it--I couldn't let a visiting girl be danced to death. Of
course I had planned to make a dignified debut under my own roof, backed
up by the presence of ancestral and marital rosewood, silver and
mahogany, as a widow should, but _duty_ called me to de-weed myself
amidst the informality of an impromptu dance at the little town hotel.
And in the fifteen minutes Tom gave me I de-weeded to some purpose and
flowered out to still more. I never do anything by halves.

In that--that--trousseau old Rene had made me there was one, what she
called "simple" lingerie frock. And it looked just as simple as the
check it called for, a one and two ciphers back of it. It was of linen
as sheer as a cobweb, real lace and tiny delicious incrustations of
embroidery. It fitted in lines that melted into curves, had enticements
in the shape of a long sash and a dangerous breast-knot of shimmery
blue, the color of my eyes, and I looked new-born in it.

I'm glad that poor Mr. Carter was so stern with me about rats and things
in my hair, now that they are out of style, for I've got lots of my own
left in consequence of not wearing other peoples'. It clings and coils
to my head just any old way that looks as if I had spent an hour on it.
That made me able to be ready to go down to Tom in only ten minutes over
the time he gave me.

I stopped on next to the bottom step in the wide old hall and called Tom
to turn out the light for me, as Judy had gone.

I have turned out that light lots of times, but I felt it best to let
Tom see me in a full light when we were alone. It is well I did! At
first it stunned him,--and it is a compliment to any woman to stun Tom
Pollard. But Tom doesn't stay stunned long and I only succeeded in
suppressing him after he had landed two kisses on my shoulder, one on my
hair and one on the back of my neck.

"Molly," he said, standing off and looking at me with shining eyes, "you
are one lovely dream. Your shoulders are flushed velvet, your cheeks are
peaches under cream, your eyes are blue absinthe and your mouth a red
devil. Come on before I get drunk looking at you." I didn't know whether
I liked that or not and turned down the light quickly myself and went to
the gate hurriedly. Tom laughed and behaved himself.

[Illustration: "Molly, you are one lovely dream"]

Everybody in town was up to the hotel and everybody was nice to me,
girls and all. There is a bunch of lovely posy girls in this town and
they were all in full flower. Most of the men were college boys home for
vacation, and while they are a few years younger than me, I have been
friends with them for always and they know how I dance. I didn't even
get near enough to the wall to know it was there, though I was conscious
of Aunt Bettie and Mrs. Johnson sitting on it at one end of the room,
and every time I passed them I flirted with them until I won a smile
from them both. I wish I could be sure of hearing Mrs. Johnson tell Aunt
Adeline all about it.

And it was well I did come to save Ruth Chester from a dancing death,
for she is as light as a feather and sails on the air like thistle-down.
I felt sorry for Tom, for when he danced with me he could see her, and
when he danced with her I pouted at him, even over Judge Wade's arm. I
verily believe it was from being really rattled that he asked little Pet
Buford to dance with him--by mistake as it were. After that if Pet
breathed a single strain of music out of his arms I didn't see it. I
knew that gone expression on his face and it made me feel so lonesome
that I was more gracious to the judge than was exactly safe. He dances
just as magnificently as he exists in life and it is a kind of
ceremonial to do it with him. The boys all wore white flannels, and most
of the men, but the judge was as formally dressed as he would have been
in mid-winter, and I wondered if Alfred could be half as distinguished
to look at. I suppose my eyes must have been telling on me about how
grand I thought he was looking because he--well, I was rather relieved
when one of the boys took me out of his arms for a good, long, swinging
two-step.

And how I did enjoy it all, every single minute of it! My heart beat
time to the music as if it would never tire of doing so. Miss Chester
and I exchanged little laughs and scraps of conversation in between
times and I fell deeper and deeper in love with her. Every pound I have
melted and frozen and starved off me has brought me nearer to her and I
just _can't_ think about how I am going to hurt her in a few days
now. I put the thought from me and so let myself swing out into
thoughtlessness with one of the boys. And after that I really didn't
know with whom I was dancing, I began to get so intoxicated with it all.

I never heard musicians play better or get more of the spirit of dance
in their music than those did to-night. They had just given us the
most lovely swinging things, one after another, when suddenly they all
stopped and the leader drew his bow across his violin. Never in all my
life have I ever heard anything like the call of that waltz from that
gipsy's strings. It laughed you a signal and you felt yourself follow
the first strain.

Just then somebody happened to take me from whomever I was with and I
caught step and glided off the universe. The strongest arms that I had
felt that evening--or ever--held me and I didn't have to look up to see
who it was. I don't know why I knew but I did. I wasn't clasped so very
close to him or left to float by myself an inch; I was just a part of
him like the arms themselves or the hand that mine molded into. And
while that wonder-music teased and cajoled and mocked and rocked and
sobbed and throbbed, I laid my cheek against his coat sleeve and gave
myself away, I didn't care to whom.

Again that strange sense of some wonderful eternal good came to me and I
found myself humming Billy's little "soul to keep" prayer against the
doctor's sleeve to the tune of that magic waltz. I had never danced with
him before, of course, but I felt as if I had been doing it always, and
I melted in his arms as that baby had wilted to his mother out in the
cabin a few hours earlier and I don't see how such happiness as that
_could_ stop. But with a soft entreating wail the music came to an
end and there the doctor was, smiling down into my face with his
whimsical friendly smile that woke me up all over.

"Somebody has stolen a rose from the Carter garden and brought it to the
dance," he said with a laugh that was for me alone.

"No," I flashed back, "a string-bean." And with that I danced off again
with the judge, while the doctor disappeared through the door, and I
heard the chuck of his car as it whirled away. He had just stopped in
for a second to see the fun and God had given me that gipsy waltz with
him, because He knew I needed something like that in my life to keep for
always.

This has been a happy night, in which I betrothed myself to Alfred,
though he doesn't know it yet. I am going to take it as a sign that life
for us is going to be brilliant and gay and full of laughter and love.

I haven't had Billy in my arms to-day and I don't know how I shall ever
get myself to sleep if I let myself think about it. His sleep-place on
my breast aches. It is a comfort to think that the great big God
understands the women folk that He makes, even if they don't understand
themselves.




LEAF SIXTH

THE RESURRECTION RAZOO


Most parties are just bunches of selfish people who go off in the
corners and have good times all by themselves, but in Hillsboro,
Tennessee, it is not that way. Everybody that is not invited helps the
hostess get ready and have nice things for the others, and sometimes I
think they really have the best time of all.

This morning Aunt Bettie came up my front steps before breakfast with a
large basketful of things for my dinner and I wondered what I would have
collected to be served to those people by the time all my neighbors had
made their prize contributions. It took Aunt Bettie and Judy a half-hour
to unpack her things and set them in the refrigerator and on the pantry
shelves. One was a plump fruit-cake that had been keeping company in a
tight box with a sponge soaked in sherry for ever since New Year's. It
was ripe, or smelled so. It made me gnaw under my belt.

A little later Judy was exclaiming over a two-year-old ham that had been
simmered in port and larded with egg dressing, when Mrs. Johnson came in
and began to unpack her basket, which was mostly bottles of things she
said she used to "stick" food. The ginger-colored barber got the run of
them before the dinner was over and got badly stuck, so Judy says.
That's what made him make the mistake.

I had planned to have a lot of strange food and had ordered some things
up from a caterer in the city, but I telephoned the express man not to
deliver them until the next day, even if they did spoil. How could I use
soft shelled crabs when Mrs. Wade had sent me word that she was going to
bake some brook trout by a recipe of the judge's grandmother's? Mrs.
Hampton Buford had let me know about two fat little summer turkeys she
was going to stuff with corn-pone and green sage, and _fillet
mignon_ seemed foolish eating beside them. But when the little bit of
a baby pig, roasted whole with an apple in its mouth, looking too frisky
and innocent for worlds with his little baked tail curled up in the air,
arrived from Mrs. Caruthers Cain, I went out into the garden and laughed
at the idea of having spent money for lobsters, to be shipped alive and
to be served broiled in their own shells.

When I got back in the kitchen things were well under way, everything
smelling grand, and Aunt Bettie in full swing matching up my dinner
guests.

"Nobody in this town could suit me better than Pet Buford for a
daughter-in-law and I believe I'll have all the east rooms done over in
blue chintz for her. I think that would be the best thing to set off her
blue eyes and corn silk hair," she was saying as she cut orange peel
into strips.

"You've planned the refurnishing of that east wing to suit the style of
nearly every girl in Hillsboro since Tom put on long trousers, Bettie
Pollard, and they are just as they have been for fifteen years since you
did over the whole house," said Mrs. Johnson as she poured a wine-glass
half full from one bottle and added a tablespoonful from another.

"Well, I think he is really interested now from the way he danced most
of his time with her down at the hotel the other night, and I have hopes
I never had before. Now, Molly, do put him between you and her, sort of
cornered, so he can't even _see_ Ruth Chester. She is too old for
him." And Tom's mother looked at me over the orange peel as to a
confederate.

"Humph, I'd like to see you or Molly or any woman 'corner' Tom Pollard,"
said Mrs. Johnson with a wry smile as she tasted the concoction in the
wine-glass.

"I have to put him at the end of the table because he is my kinsman and
the only host I've got at present, Aunt Bettie," I said regretfully. I
always take every chance to rub in Tom's and my relationship on Aunt
Bettie, so she won't notice our flirtation.

"I'd put John Moore at the head of the table if I were you, Molly
Carter, because he's about the only man you've invited that has got any
sense left since you and that Chester girl took to visiting Hillsboro.
He's a host of steadiness in himself and the way he ignores all you
women, who would run after him if he would let you, shows what he is. He
has my full confidence," and as she delivered herself of this judgment
of Doctor John, Mrs. Johnson drove in all the corks tight and began to
pound spice.

"He's not out of the widower-woods yet, Caroline," said Aunt Bettie with
her most speculative smile. "I have about decided on him for Ruth since
the judge has taken to following Molly about as bad as Billy Moore does.
But don't you all say a word, for John's mighty timid, and I don't
believe, in spite of all these years, he's had a single notion yet. If
he had had he'd have tried a set-to with you, Molly, like all the rest
of the shy birds in town. He doesn't see a woman as anything but a
patient at the end of a spoon, and mighty kind and gentle he does the
dosing of them, too. Just the other day--dearie me, Judy, what has
boiled over now?" And in the excitement that ensued I escaped to the
garden.

Yes, Aunt Bettie is right about Doctor John; he doesn't see a woman, and
there is no way to make him. What she had said about it made me realize
that he had always been like that, and I told myself that there was no
reason in the world why my heart should beat in my slippers on that
account. Still I don't see why Ruth Chester should have her head
literally thrown against that stone wall and I wish Aunt Bettie
wouldn't. It seemed like a desecration even to try to match-make him and
it made me hot with indignation all over. I dug so fiercely at the roots
of my phlox with a trowel I had picked up that they groaned so loud I
could almost hear them. I felt as if I must operate on something. And it
was in this mood that Alfred's letter found me.

It had a surprise in it and I sat back on the grass and read it with my
heart beating like a trip-hammer. He had sailed the day he had posted it
and he was due to arrive in New York almost as soon as it did, just any
hour now I calculated in a flash. And "from New York immediately to
Hillsboro" he had written in words that fairly sung themselves off the
paper. I was frightened--so frightened that the letter shook in my
hands, and with only the thought of being sure that I might be alone for
a few minutes with it, I fled to the garret.

Surely no woman ever in all the world read such a letter as that, and no
wonder my breath almost failed me. It was a love-letter in which the
cold paper was transubstantiated into a heart that beat against mine and
I bowed my head over it as I wet it with tears. I knew then that I had
taken his coming back lightly; had fussed over it and been silly-proud
of it; while not _really_ caring at all. All that awful melting
away of my fatness seemed just a lack of confidence in his love for me;
he wouldn't have minded if I weighed five hundred, I felt sure. He loved
me--really, really, really; and I had sat and weighed him with a lot of
men who were nothing more than amused by my flightiness, or taken with
my beauty, and who wouldn't have known such love if it were shown to
them through a telescope.

[Illustration: His letters were all there and his photographs]

I reached into a trunk that stood right beside me and took out a box
that I hadn't looked into for years. His letters were all there and his
photographs that were as handsome as the young god of love himself.
I could hardly see them through my tears, but I knew that they were
dim in places with being cried over when I had put them away years ago
after Aunt Adeline decided that I was to be married. I kissed the poor
little-girl cry-spots; and with that a perfect flood of tears rose to my
eyes--but they didn't fall, for there, right in front of me, stood a
more woe-stricken human being than I could possibly be, if I judged by
appearances.

"Molly, Molly," gulped Billy, "I am so sick I'm going to die here on the
floor," and he sank into my arms.

"Oh, Billy, what is the matter?" I gasped and gave him a little
terrified shake.

"Mamie Johnson did it--poked her finger down her throat and mine, too,"
he wailed against my breast. "We was full of things folks gived us to
eat and couldn't eat no more. She said if we did that with our fingers
it would all come up and we would have room for some more then. She did
it and I'm going to die dead--dead!"

"No, no, lover; you'll be all right in a second. Stay quiet here in your
Molly's lap and you will be well in just a few minutes," I said with a
smile I hid in his yellow mop as I kissed the drake-tail kiss-spot.
"Where's Mamie?" I thought to ask with the greatest apprehension.

"In the garden eating cup-cake Judy baked hot for both of us. She didn't
frow up as much as I did--or maybe more." He answered, snuggling close
and much comforted.

"Don't ever, ever do that again, Billy," I said, giving him both a hug
and a shake. "It's piggy to eat more than you can hold and then still
want more. What would your father say?"

"Doc ain't no good and I don't care what he says," answered Billy with
spirit. "He don't play no more and he don't laugh no more and he don't
eat no more hardly, too. I ain't a-going to live in that house with him
more'n two days longer. I want to come over and sleep in your bed with
blue ribbons on the posts and have you to play with me, Molly."

"Don't say that, lover, ever again," I said as I bent over him. "Your
father is the best man in the world, and you must never, never leave
him."

"I bet I will, when I get big enough to kill a bear," answered Billy
decidedly. "Say, do you reckon Mamie saved even a little piece of that
cake? I 'spect I had better go see," and he slipped out of my arms and
was gone before I could hold him.

It _is_ a lonely house across the garden with the big and the tiny
man in it all by themselves! And tears, from another corner of my heart
entirely, rose to my eyes at the thought, but they, too, never fell, for
I heard Mrs. Johnson calling and I had to run down quick and see what
new delicacy had arrived for my party.

Uncle Thomas Pollard had sent me a quart bottle of his private stock
with the message to put the mint to soak just one hour and twenty
minutes before the men came. I made room for it beside the case of
champagne on the cellar shelf and wondered how they would stand it all.
We don't have champagne often in Hillsboro, and when we do nobody seems
to want to cut down on the juleps, consequently--well, nothing ever
really happens! However, it must have been the champagne that made Tom
act as he did. He was never like that before.

Somehow I didn't enjoy dressing to-night for my dinner as I did for the
dance, and when I was through I stood before the mirror and looked at
myself a long time. I was very tall and slim and--well, I suppose I
might say regal in that amethyst crepe with the soft rose-point, but I
looked to myself about the eyes as I had been doing for years when I put
on my Sunday clothes to go to church with Mr. Carter. He was always in a
hurry and I didn't care about looking at myself in the mirror anyway;
nobody else ever looked at me and what was the use? And to-night that
Rene triumph made me feel no different from one of Miss Hettie Primm's
conceptions that I had been wearing for ages with indifference and total
lack of style. I shrugged my shoulder almost out of the dress with what
I thought was sadness, though it felt a trifle like temper, too, and
went on down into the garden to see if any of my flowers had a cheer-up
message for me.

But it was a bored garden I stepped into just as the last purple flush
of day was being drunk down by the night. The tall white lilies laid
their heads over on my breast and went to sleep before I had said a word
to them, and the nasturtiums snarled around my feet until they got my
slippers stained with green. Only Billy's bachelor's-button stood up
stiff and sturdy, slightly flushed with imbibing the night dew, and
tipped me an impertinent wink. I felt cheered at the sight of them and
bent down to gather a bunch of them to wear, even if they did swear at
my amethyst draperies, when an amused smile that was done out loud came
from the path just behind me.

"Don't gather them all to-night, Mrs. Peaches," said Doctor John
teasingly, as he stooped beside me. "Leave a few for--for the others."
I waked up in a half-second and so did all those prying flowers, I felt
sure.

"I was just gathering them for place bouquets for--for the girls," I
said stupidly as I moved over a little nearer to him. Why it is that the
minute that man comes near me I get warm and comfortable and stupid, and
as young as Billy, and bubbly and sad and happy and cross is more than I
can say, but I do. I never possibly know how to answer any remark that
he may happen to make unless it is something that makes me lose my
temper. His next remark was the usual spark.

"Better give them the run of the garden--alone, Mrs. Molly. No show for
'em unless you do," he said laughingly, "or the buttons' either," he
added under his breath so I could just hear it. I wish Mrs. Johnson
could have heard how soft his voice lingered over that little
half-sentence. She is so experienced she could have told me if it
meant--but of course he isn't like other men!

There are lots of questions I'm going to ask Alfred after I'm married to
him--Mr. Carter didn't know anything about anything and I never cared to
ask him, but I wonder how you know when--

"Oh, you Molly," came a hail in Tom's voice from the gate, just as I was
making up my mind to try and think up something to wither the doctor
with, and he and Ruth Chester came up the front walk to meet us. I
wondered why I was having a party in my house when being alone in my
garden with just a neighbor was so much more fun, but I had to begin to
enjoy myself right off, for in a few minutes all the rest came.

I don't think I ever saw my house look so lovely before. Mrs. Johnson
had put all the flowers out of hers and Mrs. Cain's garden all over
everything and the table was a mass of soft pink roses that were
shedding perfume and nodding at one another in their most society
manner. There is no glimmer in the world like that which comes from
really old polished silver and rosewood and mahogany, and one's
great-great-grandmother's hand-woven linen feels like oriental silk
across one's knees.

Suddenly I felt very stately and grand-damey and responsible as I looked
at them all across the roses and sparkling glasses. They were lovely
women, all of them, and could such men be found anywhere else in the
world? When I left them all to go out into the big universe to meet the
distinctions that I knew my husband would have for me, would I sit at
salt with people who loved me like this? I saw Pet Buford say something
to Tom about me that I know was lovely from the way he smiled at me; and
the judge's eyes were a full cup for any woman to have offered her. Then
in a flash all the love-fragrance seemed to go to my head--Tom's mixing
of that julep had been skilful, too--and tears rose to my eyes, and
there I might have been crying at my own party if I hadn't felt a strong
warm hand laid on mine as it rested on my lap and Doctor John's kind
voice teased into my ears: "Steady, Mrs. Peaches, there's the loving-cup
to come yet," he whispered. I hated him, but held on to his thumb tight
for half a minute. He didn't know what the matter really was, but he
understood what I needed. He always does.

And after that everybody had a good time, the ginger barber and Judy as
much as anybody, and I could see Aunt Bettie and Mrs. Johnson peeping in
the pantry door, having the time of their lives, too.

That dinner was going like an airship on a high wind, when something
happened to tangle its tail feathers and I can hardly write it for
trembling yet. It was a simple little blue telegram, but it might have
been nitro-glycerin on a tear for the way it acted. It was for me, but
the ginger barber handed it to Tom and he opened it and, looking at me
over his full--after many times emptied--glass, he solemnly read it out
loud. It said:

  "Landed this noon. Have I your permission to come to Hillsboro
   immediately? Answer. Alfred."


It was dreadful! Nobody said a word and Tom laid the telegram right down
in his plate, where it immediately began to soak up the dressing of his
salad. He was so white and shaky that Pet looked at him in amazement,
and then I am sure she had the good sense to find his hand under the
cloth and hold it, for his shoulder hovered against hers and the color
came back to his face as he smiled down at her. I don't believe I'll
ever get the courage to look at Tom again until he marries Pet, which
he'll do now, I feel sure.

And as for the judge and Ruth Chester, I was glad they were sitting
beside each other, for I could avoid that side of the table with my eyes
until I had steadied myself a few seconds at least. The surprise made
the others I had been dining seem statues from the stone age, and only
Mr. Graves' fork failed to hang fire. His appetite is as strong as his
nerves and Delia Hawes looked at his composure with the relief plain in
her eyes. Henrietta's smile in the judge's direction was doubtful. But
they were not all my lovers and why that awful silence?

I couldn't say a word, and I am sure I don't know what I would have done
if it hadn't been for the doctor. He leaned forward and his deep eyes
came out in their wonderful way and seemed to collect every pair of eyes
at the table, even the most astounded, as he raised his glass. We all
held our breaths and waited for him to speak.

"No wonder we are all stricken dumb at Mrs. Carter's telegram," he said
in his deep voice that commands everybody and everything, even the
terrors of birth and death. "The whole town will be paralyzed at the
news that its most distinguished citizen is only going to give them two
days to get ready to receive him. I can see the panic the brass band
will have now getting the brass shined up, and I want to be the one to
tell Mayor Pollard myself, so as to suggest to him to have at least a
two-hour speech of welcome to hand out at the train. We'll make it one
'hot time' for him when he lands in the old town, and here's to him, God
bless him. Every glass high!" They all drank, and I suppose it helped
them. I wish I could have drained a quart, but I couldn't swallow a sip,
though I did a good stunt of pretending.

[Illustration: "Every glass high"]

The rest of this evening has paid me off for every sin I have ever
committed or am ever going to commit. Tom took Pet home early and I hope
they walked in the moonlight for hours. Tom is the kind of man that any
pretty girl who is loving enough in the moonlight could comfort for
anything. I'm not at all worried about him, but--

The hour I sat on my front steps and talked to Judge Wade must have
brought gray hairs to my head if it was daylight and I could see them.
Ruth Chester had said good-by with the loveliest haunted look in her
great dark eyes and I had felt as if I had killed something that was
alive and that I hadn't killed it enough. Doctor John had been called
from his coffee to a patient and had gone with just a friendly word of
good night, and the others had at last left the judge and me alone--also
in the moonlight, which I wished in my heart somebody would put out.

They say among the lawyers that it is a good thing that Benton Wade is
on the bench, for it is no use to try a case against him when he has the
handling of a jury. He just looks them in the face and tells them how to
vote. To-night he looked me in the face and told me how to marry, and
I'm not sure yet that I won't do as he says. Of course I'm in love with
Alfred, but if he wants me he had better get me away quick before the
judge makes all his arrangements. A woman loves to be courted with poems
and flowers and deference, but she's mighty apt to marry the man who
says, "Don't argue, but put on your bonnet and come with me." The fact
that it was too late to get into the clerk's office saved me to-night,
but in two days--

Oh, I'm crying, crying in my heart, which is worse than in my eyes, as I
sit and look across my garden, where the cold moon is hanging low over
the tall trees behind the doctor's house and his light in his room is
burning warm and bright. They are right; _he_ doesn't care if I am
going away for ever with Alfred. His quick toast to him and the lovely
warm look he poured over poor frightened me at his side, as he drank his
champagne, told me that once and for all. Still we have been so close
together over his baby and I have grown so dependent on him for so many
things that it cuts into me like a hot knife that he shouldn't care if
he lost me--even for a neighbor. I shouldn't mind not having _any_
husband if I could always live close by him and Billy like this, and if
I married Judge Wade I could at least have him for a family physician.
_No--I don't like that_! Of course I'm going with Alfred now that
an accident has made me announce the fact to the whole town before he
even knows it himself, but wherever I go that light in the room with
that lonely man is going to burn in my heart. Hope it will throw a glow
over Alfred!




LEAF SEVENTH

DASHED!


I do believe God gave that wise angel charge concerning me lest I get
dashed, but I just got dashed anyway, and its my own fault, not the
angel's. I have suffered this day until I want to lay my face down
against the hem of His garment and wait in the dust for Him to pick me
up. I shall never be able to do it myself, and how He's going to do it
I can't see, but He will.

That dinner-party last night was bad enough, but to-day's been worse.
I didn't sleep until long after daylight and then Judy came in before
eight o'clock with a letter for me that looked like a state document.
I felt in my trembly bones that it was some sort of summons affair from
Judge Wade; and it was. I looked into the first paragraph and then
decided that I had better get up and dress and have a cup of coffee and
a single egg before I tried to read it.

Incidental to my bath and dressing, I weighed and found that I had lost
all four of those last surplus pounds and two more in three days. Those
two extra pounds might be construed to prove love, but exactly on whom
I was utterly unprepared to say. I didn't even enjoy the thinness, but
took a kind of already-married look in my glass and tried to slip the
egg past my bored lips and get myself to chew it down. It was work; and
then I took up the judge's letter, which also was work and more of it.

He started in at the beginning of everything, that is at the beginning
of the tuberculosis girl and I cried over the pages of her as if she had
been my own sister. At the tenth page we buried her and took up Alfred
and I must say I saw a new Alfred in the judge's bouquet-strewn
appreciation of him, but I didn't want him as bad as I had the day
before when I read his own new and old letters, and cried over his old
photographs. I suppose that was the result of some of what the judge
manages the juries with. He'd be apt to use it on a woman and she
wouldn't find out about it until it was too late to be anything but mad.
Still when he began on me at page sixteen I felt a little better, though
I didn't know myself any better than I did Alfred when I got to page
twenty.

What I am, is just a poor foolish woman, who has a lot more heart than
she can manage with the amount of brains she got with it at birth. I'm
not any star in a rose-colored sky, and I don't want to inspire anybody;
it's too much of a job. I want to be a healthy happy woman and a wife to
a man who can inspire himself and manage me. I want to marry a thin man
and have from five to ten thin children, and when I get to be thirty I
want my husband to want me to be as fat as Aunt Bettie, but not let me.
An inspiration couldn't be fat and I'm always in danger from hot muffins
and chicken gravy. However, if I should undertake to be all the things
Judge Wade said in that letter he wanted me to be to him, I should soon
be skin and bones from mental and physical exercise. Still, he does
live in Hillsboro and I won't let myself know how my heart aches at the
thought of leaving my home--and other things. It's up in my throat and
I seem always to be swallowing it, the last few days.

All the men who write me letters seem to get themselves wound up into a
skyrocket and then let themselves explode in the last paragraph and it
always upsets my nerves. I was just about to begin to cry again over the
last words of the judge when the only bright spot in the day so far
suddenly happened. Pet Buford blew in with the pinkest cheeks and the
brightest eyes I had seen since I looked in the mirror the night of the
dance. She was in an awful hurry.

"Molly, dear," she said, with her words literally falling over
themselves, "Tom says you'll give us some of your dinner left-overs to
take for lunch in the Hup, for we are going way out to Wayne County to
see some awfully fine tobacco he has heard is there. I don't want to ask
mother, for she won't let me go; and his mother, if he asked her, will
begin to talk about us. Tom said come to you and you would understand
and fix it quick. He said kiss you for him and tell you he said 'Come on
in, the water's fine.' Isn't he a joke?" And we kissed and laughed and
packed a basket, and kissed and laughed again for good-by. I felt amused
and happy for a few minutes--and also deserted. It's a very good thing
for a woman's conceit to find out how many of her lovers are just
make-believes. I may have needed Tom's deflection.

Anyway, I don't know when I ever was so glad to see anybody as I was
when Mrs. Johnson came in the front door. A woman who has proved to her
own satisfaction that marriage is a failure is at times a great tonic to
other women. I needed a tonic badly this morning and I got it.

"Well, from all my long experience, Molly," she said as she seated
herself and began to hem a dish-towel with long steady stabs, "husbands
are just stick candy in different jars. They may look a little
different, but they all taste alike and you soon get tired of them. In
two months you won't know the difference in being married to Al Bennett
and Mr. Carter and you'll have to go on living with him maybe fifty
years. Luck doesn't strike twice in the same place and you can't count
on losing two husbands. Al's father was Mr. Johnson's first cousin and
had more crochets and worse. He had silent spells that lasted a week and
family prayers three times a day, though he got drunk twice a year for a
month at a time. Al looks very much like him."

"Mrs. Johnson," I said after a minute's silence, while I had decided
whether or not I had better tell her all about it. If a woman's in love
with her husband you can't trust her to keep a secret, but I decided to
try Mrs. Johnson. "I really am not engaged exactly to Alfred Bennett,
though I suppose he thinks so by now if he has got the answer to that
telegram. But--but something has made me--made me think about Judge
Wade--that is he--what do you think of him, Mrs. Johnson?" I concluded
in the most pitifully perplexed tone of voice.

"All alike, Molly; all as much alike as peas in a pod; all except John
Moore, who's the only exception in all the male tribe I ever met! His
marrying once was just accidental and must be forgiven him. She fell in
love with him while he was treating her for typhoid, when his back was
turned as it were, and it was God's own kindness in him that made him
marry her when he found out how it was with the poor thing. There's not
a woman in this town who could marry, that wouldn't marry him at the
drop of his hat--but, thank goodness, that hat will never drop and I'll
have one sensible man to comfort and doctor me down into my old age.
Now, just look at that! Mr. Johnson's come home here in the middle of
the morning and I'll have to get that old paper I hunted out of his desk
for him last night. I wonder how he came to forget it!" It's funny how
Mrs. Johnson always knows what Mr. Johnson wants before he knows himself
and gets it before he asks for it!

As she went out the gate the postman came in and at the sight of another
letter my heart again slunk off into my slippers, and my brain seemed
about to back up in a corner and refuse to work. In a flash it came to
me that men oughtn't to write letters to women very much--they really
don't plow deep enough, they just irritate the top soil. I took this
missive from Alfred, counted all the fifteen pages, put it out of sight
under a book, looked out the window and saw the ginger barber coming
dejectedly around to the side gate from the kitchen--I knew the scene he
had had with Judy, about the bottle encounters of the night before--saw
Mr. Johnson shooed off down the street by Mrs. Johnson; saw the doctor's
car go chucking hurriedly in the garage and then my spirit turned itself
to the wall and refused to be comforted. I tried my best, but failed to
respond to my own remonstrances with myself, and tears were slowly
gathering in a cloud of gloom when a blue gingham, rompers-clad sunbeam
burst into the room.

"Git your night-gown and your toothbresh quick, Molly, if you want to
pack 'em in my trunk!" he exclaimed with his eyes dancing and a curl
standing straight up on the top of his head, as it has a habit of doing
when he is most excited. "You can't take nothing but them 'cause I'm
going to put in a rope to tie the whale with when I ketch him, and
it'll take up all the rest of the room. Git 'em quick!"

"Yes, lover, I'll get them for you, but tell Molly where it is you are
going to sail off with her in that trunk of yours?" I asked, dropping
into the game as I have always done with him, no matter what game of my
own pressed when he called.

"On the ocean where the boats go 'cross and run right over a whale.
Don't you remember you showed me them pictures of spout whales in a
book, Molly? Doc says they comes right up by the ship and you can hear
'em shoot water and maybe a iceberg, too. Which do you want to ketch
most, Molly, a iceberg or a whale?" His eager eyes demanded instant
decision on my part of the nature of capture I preferred. My mind
quickly reverted to those two ponderous and intense epistles I had got
within the hour and I lay back in my chair and laughed until I felt
almost merry.

"The iceberg, Billy, every time," I said at last. "I just can't manage
whales, especially if they are ardent, which word means hot. I like
_icebergs_, or I think I should if I could catch one."

"I don't believe you could, Molly, but maybe Doc will let you put a rope
and a long hook in his trunk to try with if your clothes go into mine.
His is a heap the biggest anyway and Nurse Tilly said he oughter put my
things in his, but I cried and then he went up-stairs and got out that
little one for me. Come see 'em!"

"What do you mean, Billy?" I asked, while a sudden fear shot all over me
like lightning. "You're just playing go-away, aren't you?"

"No, I ain't playing, Molly!" he exclaimed excitedly. "Me and you and
Doc is a-going across the ocean for a long, long time away from here.
Doc ast me about it this morning and I told him all right and you could
come with us, if you was good. He said couldn't I go without you if you
was busy and couldn't come and I told him you would put things down and
come if I said so. Won't you, Molly? It won't be no fun without you and
you'd cry all by yourself with me gone." His little face was all drawn
up with anxiety and sympathy at my lonely estate with him out of it and
a cry rose up from my heart with a kind of primitive savagery at what I
felt was coming down upon me.

Without waiting to take him with me, or think, or do anything but feel
deadly savage anger, I hurried across the garden and into Doctor Moore's
office, where he was just laying off his gloves and dust coat.

"What do you mean, John Moore, by daring, daring to think you can go and
take Billy away from me?" I demanded looking at him with what must have
been such fear and madness in my face that he was startled as he came
close to the table against which I leaned. His face had grown white and
quiet at my attack and he waited to answer for a long horrible minute
that pulled me apart like one of those inquisition machines they used to
torture women with when they didn't know any better modern way to do it.

"I didn't know Bill would tell you so soon, Mrs. Molly," he said at last
gently, looking past me out of the window into the garden. "I was coming
over just as soon as I got back from this call to talk with you about
it, even if it did seem to intrude Bill's and my affairs into a day
that--that ought to be all yours to be--be happy in. But Bill, you see,
is no respecter of--of other people's happy days if he wants them in
his."

"Billy's happy days are mine and mine are his and he has the heart not
to leave me out even if you would have him!" I exclaimed, a sob
gathering in my heart at the thought that my little lover hadn't even
taken in a situation that would separate him from me across an ocean.

"Bill is too young to understand when he is--is being bereaved, Molly,"
he said and still he didn't look at me. "I have been appointed a
delegate to represent the State Medical Association at the Centennial
Congress in London the middle of next month--and somehow I--feel a bit
pulled lately and I thought I would take the little chap and have--have
a _wander-jahr._ You won't need him now, Mrs. Peaches, and I
couldn't go without him, could I?" The sadness in his voice would have
killed me if I hadn't let it madden me instead.

"Won't need Billy any more!" I exclaimed with a rage that made my voice
literally scorch past my lips. "Was there ever a minute in his life that
I haven't needed Billy? How dare you say such a thing to me? You are
cruel, cruel, and I have always known it, cold and cruel like all other
men who don't care how they wring the life blood out of women's hearts
and are willing to use their children to do it with. Even the law
doesn't help us poor helpless creatures and you can take our children
and go with them to the ends of the earth and leave us suffering. I have
gone on and believed that you were not like what the women say all men
are and that you cared whether you hurt people or not, but now I see
that you are just the same and you'll take my baby away if you want
to--and I can do nothing to prevent it--nothing in the wide world--I am
completely and absolutely helpless--you coward, you!"

When that awful word, the worst word that a woman can use to a man, left
my lips, a flame shot up into his eyes that I thought would burn me up,
but in a half-second it was extinguished by the strangest thing in the
world--for the situation--a perfect flood of mirth. He sat down in his
chair and shook all over with his head in his hands until I saw tears
creep through his fingers. I had calmed down so suddenly that I was
about to begin to cry in good earnest when he wiped his eyes and said
with a low laugh in his throat:

"The case is yours, Molly, settled out of court, and the
'possession-nine-points-of-the-law clause' works in some cases for a
woman against a man. Generally speaking, anyway, the pup belongs to the
man who can whistle him down and you can whistle Bill from me any day.
I'm just his father and what I think or want doesn't matter. You had
better take him and keep him!"

"I intend to." I answered haughtily, uncertain as to whether I had
better give in and be agreeable or stay prepared to cry in case there
was further argument. But suddenly a strange diffidence came into his
eyes and he looked away from me as he said in queer hesitating words:

"You see, Mrs. Molly, I thought from now on your life wouldn't have
exactly a place for Bill. Have you considered that you have trained him
to demand you all the time and all of you? How would you manage
Bill--and--and other claims?"

And if there is a contagious thing in this world it is embarrassment. I
never felt anything worse in all my life than the shame that swept over
me in a great hot wave when that look came into his eyes and made me
realize just exactly what I had been saying to him, about what, and how
I had said it. I stood perfectly still, shook all over like a leaf, and
wondered if I would ever be able to raise my eyes from the ground. A
dizzy nauseated feeling for myself rose up in me against myself and I
was just about to turn on my heels and leave him, I hoped for ever, when
he came over and laid his hand on my shoulder.

"Molly," he said in a voice that might have come down from heaven on
dove wings, "you can't for a moment feel or think that I don't realize
and appreciate what you have been to the motherless little chap, and for
life I am yours at command, as he is. I really thought it would be a
relief to you to have him taken away from you for just a little while
right now, and I still think it is best; but not unless you consent. You
shall have him back whenever you are ready for him, and at all times
both he and I are at your service to the whole of our kingdoms. Just
think the matter over, won't you, and decide what you want me to do?"

Something in me died for ever, I think, when he spoke to me like that.
He's not like other men and there aren't any other men on earth but him!
All the rest are just bugs or bats or something worse. And I'm not
anything myself. There's no excuse for my living and I wish I wasn't so
healthy and likely to go on doing it. It was all over and there was
nothing left for me to live for, and before I could stop myself I buried
my face in my hands.

"Billy asked me to go with him on this awful whale hunt!" I sobbed out
to comfort myself with the thought that somebody did care for me,
regardless of just how I was further embarrassing and complicating
myself in the affairs of the two men I had thought I owned and was now
finding out that I had to give up. I wish I had been looking at him, for
I felt him start, but he said in his big friendly voice that is so
much--and never enough for me.

"Well, why not you and Al come along and make it a family party, if that
is what suits Bill, the boss?"

If men would just buy good, sharp, kitchen knives and cut out women's
hearts in a businesslike way it would be so much kinder of them.
Why do they prefer to use dull weapons that mash the life out slowly?
Everything is at an end for me to-night and that blow did it. It was a
horrible cruel thing for him to say to me! I know now that I have been
in love with John Moore for longer than my honor lets me admit and that
I'll never love anybody else, and that also I have offered myself to him
served up in every known enticement and have had to be refused at least
twice a day for a year. A widow can't say she didn't understand what she
was doing, even to herself, but--My humiliation is complete and the
only thing that can make me ever hold up my head is to puzzle him by--by
_happily_ marrying Alfred Bennett--and quick!

Of course, he must suspect how I feel about him, for two people couldn't
both be so ignorant as not to see such an enormous thing as my love for
him is, and I was the blind one. But he must never, never know that I
ever realized it, for he is so good that it would distress him. I must
just go on in my foolish way with him until I can get away. I'll tell
him I'm sorry I was so indignant to-night and say that I think it will
be fine for him to take my Billy away from me with him. I must smile at
the idea of having my very soul amputated, insist that it is the only
thing to do, and pack up the little soul in a steamer trunk with the
smile. Just smile, that is all! Life demands smiles from a woman even if
she must crush their perfume from her own heart; and she generally has
them ready.

Oh, Molly, Molly, is it for this you came into the world, twice to give
yourself without love? What difference does it make that your arms are
strong and white if they can't clasp him to the softness and fragrance
of your breast? Why are your eyes blue pools of love if they are not for
his questioning and what are your rose lips for if they quench not his
thirst?

[Illustration: What are your rose lips for]

Yes, I know God is very tender with a woman and I think He understands,
so if she crept very close to Him and caught at His sleeve to steady
herself He would be kind to her until she could go on along her own
steep way. Please, God, never let him find out, for it would hurt him to
have hurt me!




LEAF EIGHT

MELTED


Some days are like the miracle flowers that open in the garden from
plants you didn't expect to bloom at all. I might have been born, lived
and died without having this one come into my life, and now that I have
had it I don't know how to write it, except in the crimson of blood, the
blue of flame, the gold of glory--and a tinge of light green would well
express the part I have played. But it is all over at last and--

Ruth Chester was the unfolding of the first hour-petal and I got a
glimpse of a heart of gold that I feel dumb with worship to think of.
She's God's own good woman and He made her in one of His holy hours. I
wish I could have borne her, or she me, and the tenderness of her arms
was a sacrament. We two women just stood aside with life's artifices and
concealments and let our own hearts do the talking.

She said she had come because she felt that if she talked with me I
might be better able to understand Alfred when he came and that she had
seen that the judge was very determined, and she thoroughly recognized
his force of character. We stopped there while I gave her the document
to read. I suppose it was dishonorable, but I needed her protection from
it. I'm glad she had the strength of mind to walk with a head high in
the air to Judy's range and burn it up. Anything might have happened if
she hadn't. And even now I feel that only my marriage vows will close up
the case for the judge--even yet he may--But when Ruth had got done
with Alfred, she had wiped Judge Wade's appreciation of him completely
off my mind and destroyed it in tender words that burned us both worse
than Judy's fire burned the letter. She did me an awfully good service.

"And so you see, you lovely woman you, do you not, that God has
made you for him as a tribute to his greatness and it is given to
you to fulfil a destiny?" She was so beautiful as she said it that
I had to turn my eyes away, but I felt as I did when those awful
'_let-not-man-put-asunder_'--from Mr. Carter--words were spoken
over me by Mr. Raines, the Methodist minister. It made me wild, and
before I knew it I had poured out the whole truth to her in a perfect
cataract of words. The truth always acts on women as some hitherto
untried drug, and you can never tell what the reaction is going to be.
In this case I was stricken dumb and found it hard to see.

"Oh, dear heart," she exclaimed as she reached out and drew me into her
lovely gracious arms, "then the privilege is all the more wonderful for
you, as you make some sacrifice to complete his life. Having suffered
this, you will be all the greater woman to understand him. I accept my
own sorrow at his hands willingly, as it gives me the larger sympathy
for his work, though he will no longer need my personal encouragement
as he has for years. In the light of his love this lesser feeling for
Doctor Moore will soon pass away and the accord between you will be
complete." This was more than I could stand and feeling less than a
worm, I turned my face into her breast and wailed. Now who would have
thought that girl could dance as she did?

By this time I was in such a solution of grief that I would soon have
had to be sopped up with a sponge if Pet hadn't run in bubbling over
like a lovely, white, linen-clad glass of Rhine wine and seltzer.
Happiness has a habit of not even acknowledging the presence of grief
and Pet didn't seem to see our red noses, crushed draperies and
generally damp atmosphere.

"Molly," she said with a deliciously young giggle, "Tom says for you to
send him ten dollars to spend getting the brass band half drunk before
the six o'clock train, on which your Mr. Bennett comes. He has spent
five dollars paying the negroes to polish up their instruments and clean
up the uniforms and it cost him twenty-five to bail the cornettist out
of jail for roost robbing, and it takes a whole gallon of whisky to get
any spirit into the drummer. He says tell you that as this is your
shindig you ought at least to pay the piper. Hurry up, he's waiting for
me, and here's the kiss he told me to put on your left ear!"

"I suppose you delivered that kiss straight from where he gave it to
you, Pettie, dear," I had the spirit to say as I went over to the desk
for my pocket-book.

"Why, Molly, you know me better than that!" she exclaimed from behind a
perfect rose cloud of blushes.

"I know Tom better than I do you," I answered as she fled with the ten
in her hand. I looked at Ruth Chester and we both laughed. It is true
that a broader sympathy is one of the by-products of sorrow, and a week
ago I might have resented Pet to a marked degree instead of giving her
the ten dollars and a blessing.

"I'm going quick, Molly, with that laugh between us," Ruth said as she
rose and took me into her arms again for just half a second, and before
I could stop her, she was gone.

She met Billy toiling up the front step with a long piece of rusty iron
gas-pipe, which took off an inch of paint as it bumped against the edge
of the porch. She bent down and kissed the back of his neck, which theft
was almost more than I could stand, and apparently more than Billy was
prepared to accept.

"Go way, girl," he said in his rudest manner; "don't you see I'm busy?"

I met him in the front hall just in time to prevent a hopeless scar on
my hardwood floor. He was hot, perspiring and panting, but full of
triumph.

"I found it, Molly, I found it!" he exclaimed as he let the heavy pipe
drop almost on the bare pink toes. "You can git a hammer and pound the
end sharp and bend it so no whale we ketch can git away for nothing. You
and Doc kin put it in your trunk 'cause it's too long for mine, and I
can carry Doc's shirts and things in mine. Git the hammer quick and I'll
help you fix it!" The pain in my breast was almost more than I could
bear.

"Lover," I said as I knelt down by him in the dim old hall and put my
arms around him as if to shield him from some blow I couldn't help being
aimed at him, "you wouldn't mind much, would you, if just this time your
Molly couldn't go with you? Your father is going to take good care of
you and--and maybe bring you back to me some day."

"Why, Molly," he said, flaring his astonished blue eyes at me, "'taint
me to be took care of! I ain't a-going to leave you here, for maybe a
bear to come out of a circus and eat you up, with me and Doc gone.
'Sides Doc ain't no good and maybe wouldn't help me hold the rope right
to keep the whale from gitting away. He don't know how to do like I tell
him like you do."

"Try him, lover, and maybe he will--will learn to--" I couldn't help the
tears that came to stop my words.

"Now you see, Molly, how you'd cry with that kiss-spot gone," he said
with an amused, manly, little tenderness in his voice that I had never
heard before, and he cuddled his lips against mine in almost the only
voluntary kiss he had given me since I had got him into his ridiculous
little trousers under his blouses. "You can have most a hundred kisses
every night if you don't say no more about not a-going and fix that
whale hook for me quick," he coaxed against my cheek.

Oh, little lover, little lover, you didn't know what you were saying
with your baby wisdom, and your rust-grimy, little paddie burned the
sleep-place on my breast like a terrible white heat from which I was
powerless to defend myself. You are mine, you are, you _are!_ You
are soul of my soul and heart of my heart and spirit of my spirit
and--and you ought to have been flesh of my flesh!

I don't know how I managed to answer Mrs. Johnson's call from my front
gate, but I sometimes think that women have a torture-proof clause in
their constitutions.

She and Aunt Bettie had just come up the street from Aunt Bettie's house
and the Pollard cook was following them with a large basket, in which
were packed the things Aunt Bettie was contributing to the entertainment
of the distinguished citizen. Mr. Johnson is Alfred's nearest kinsman in
Hillsboro, and, of course, he is to be their guest while he is in town.

"He'll be feeding his eyes on Molly, so he'll not even know he's eating
my Washington almond pudding with Thomas' old port in it," teased Aunt
Bettie with a laugh as I went across the street with them.

"There's going to be a regular epidemic of love in Hillsboro, I do
believe," she continued in her usual strain of sentimental speculation.
"I saw Mr. Graves talking to Delia Hawes in front of the store an hour
ago, as I came out from looking at the blue chintz to match Pet for the
west wing, and they were both so absorbed they didn't even see me. That
was what might have been called a conflagration dinner you gave the
other night, Molly, in more ways than one. I wish a spark had set off
Benton Wade and Henrietta, too. Maybe it did, but is just taking fire
slowly."

I think it would be a good thing just to let Aunt Bettie blindfold every
unmarried person in this town and marry them to the first person they
touch hands with. It would be fun for her and then we could have peace
and apparently as much happiness as we are going to have anyway. Mrs.
Johnson seemed to be in somewhat the same state of mind as I found
myself.

"Humph," she said as we went up the front steps, "I'll be glad when you
are married and settled, Molly Carter, so the rest of this town can
quiet down into peace once more, and I sincerely hope every woman under
fifty in Hillsboro who is already married will stay in that state until
she reaches that age. But I do believe if the law marched widows from
grave number one to altar number two they would get into trouble and
fuss along the road. But come on in, both of you, and help me get this
marriage feast ready, if I must! The day is going by on greased wheels
and I can't let Mr. Johnson's crotchets be neglected, Al Bennett or no
Al Bennett!"

And from then on for hours and hours I was strapped to a torture wheel
that turned and turned, minute after minute, as it ground spice and
sugar and bridal meats and me relentlessly into a great suffering pulp.
Could I ever in all my life have hungered for food and been able to get
it past the lump in my throat that grew larger with the seconds? And if
Alfred's pudding tasted of the salt of dead sea-fruit this evening, it
was from my surreptitious tears that dripped into it.

It was late, very late before Mrs. Johnson realized it and shooed me
home to get ready to go to the train along with the brass band and all
the other welcomes.

I hurried all I could, but for long minutes I stood in front of my
mirror and questioned myself. Could this slow, pale, dead-eyed, slim,
drooping girl be the rollicking child of a Molly who had looked out of
that mirror at me one short week ago? Where were the wings on her heels,
the glint in her curls, the laugh on her mouth and the devil in her
eyes?

Slowly at last I lifted the blue muslin, twenty-three-inch waist shroud
and let it slip over my head and fall slimly around me. I had fastened
the neck button and was fumbling the next one into the buttonhole when I
suddenly heard laughing excited voices coming up the side street that
ran just under my west window. Something told me that Alfred had come on
the five-down train instead of the six-up and I fairly reeled to the
window and peeped through the shutters.

They were all in a laughing group around him, with Tom as master of
ceremonies, and Ruth Chester was looking up into his face with an
expression I am glad I can never forget. It killed all my regrets on the
score of his future.

It took two good looks to take him all in and then I must have missed
some of him, for all in all, he was so large that he stretched your eyes
to behold him. He's grown seven feet tall, I don't know how many pounds
he weighs and I don't want anybody ever to tell me!

I had never thought enough about evolution to know whether I believed in
it and woman's suffrage, but I do now! I know that millions of years ago
a great, big, distinguished hippopotamus stepped out of the woods and
frightened one of my foremothers so that she turned tail and fled
through a thicket that almost tore her limb from limb, right into the
arms of her own mate. That's what I did! I caught that blue satin belt
together with one hand and ran through my garden right over a bed of
savage tiger-lilies and flung myself into John Moore's office, slammed
the door and backed up against it.

"He's come!" I gasped. "And I'm frightened to death, with nobody but you
to run to. Hide me quick! He's fat and I _hate_ him!" I was that
deadly cold you can get when fear runs into your very marrow and
congeals the blood in your arteries. "Quick, quick!" I panted.

He must have been as pale as I was, and for an eternity of a second he
looked at me, then suddenly heaven shone from his eyes and he opened his
arms to me with just one word.

"Here?"

I went.

He held me gently for a half-second, and then with a sob which I felt
rather than heard, he crushed me to him and stopped my breath with his
lips on mine. I understood things then that I never had before, and I
felt that wise guardian man-angel take his fingers from mine and leave
me safe at last. I raised my hand and pressed it against John's wet
lashes until he could let me speak and I was melted into his very breast
itself.

"Molly," he said when enough tenderness had come back into his arms to
let me breathe, "you have almost killed me!"

"You!" I exclaimed, crowding still closer, or at least trying to. "It's
not _you_; it's I that am killed, and you did it! I know you don't
really want me, but I can't help that I'd rather you'd do the suffering
with me than to do it myself away from you. I'm so hungry and thirsty
for you that--that I can't diet any longer!" I put the case the
strongest way I knew how and got a swooning, maddening, luscious result.

"Want you, Molly?" he almost sobbed, and I felt his heart pounding hard
next to my shoulder.

"Yes, want me!" I answered with more spirit than breath left in me. "I
refuse to believe you are as stupid as I am, and anybody with even an
ordinary amount of brains must have seen how hard I was fighting for
you. I feel sure I left no stone unturned. Some of them I can already
think back and see myself tugging at, and it makes me hot all over. I'm
foolish, and always was, so I'm to be excused for acting that awful way,
but you are to blame for _letting_ me do it. I'm going to be your
punishment for life for not having been stern and stopped me. You had
better stop me some now anyway, for if I go on loving you as I have been
for the last few minutes it will make you uncomfortable."

"Peaches," he said, after he had hushed me with another broken dose of
love, as large as he thought I could stand--I could have stood more!--"I
am never going to tell you how long I have loved you, but that day you
came to me all in a flutter with Al Bennett's letter in your hand it is
going to take you a lifetime to settle for. You were mine--and Bill's!
How _could_ you--but women don't understand!" I felt him shudder
in my arms as I held him close. I was repaid for all those tiresome
exercises I had taken by the strength to crush him against my breast
almost as hard as he crushed me. Our combined strength was terrific,
dangerous to life and ribs, but--heavenly!

"Don't women know, John?" I managed to ask softly in memory of a like
question he had put to me across that bread and jam with the rose
a-listening from the dark.

What brought me to consciousness was his fumbling with the buttons at
the waist of that blue muslin relict of a sentiment. I had fastened but
one, and the lace had got caught on his sleeve buttons.

"Please don't button me into his possession," I laughed under his chin.
"I'm still scared to death of him, and you haven't hid me yet!"

"Molly," he asked, this time with a heaven-laugh, "where could you be
more effectually hid from Al Bennett than in my arms?"

I spent ten minutes telling Billy what a hippopotamus really looks like
as I put him to bed, but later, much as I should have liked to, I
couldn't consume that horrible dinner, that I had helped prepare at the
Johnsons, in the shelter of John's arms, and I had to face Alfred. Ruth
Chester was there, and she faced him too.

A man that can't be happy with a woman who is willing to "fulfil his
destiny" doesn't deserve to be.

Then we came over here, and John had the most beautiful time persuading
Aunt Adeline how a good man like Mr. Carter would want his young widow
to be taken care of by being married to a safe friend of his instead of
being flighty and having folks wondering whom she would marry.

"You know yourself how hard a time a beautiful young widow has, Mrs.
Henderson," he said in the tone of voice that always makes his patients
glad to take his worst doses. He got his blessing and me--with a
warning.

A lovely night wind is blowing across my garden and bringing me
congratulations from all my flower family. Flowers are a part of love
and the wooing of it, and they understand. I am waiting for the light to
go out behind the tall trees over which the moon is stealthily sinking.
He promised me to put it out right away, and I'm watching the glow that
marks the place where my own two men creatures are going to rest, with
my heart in full song.

He needs rest, he is so very tired and worn. He confessed it as I stood
on the step above him to-night, after he had taken his own good night
from me out on the porch. When he explained to me how his agony over me
for all these months had kept him walking the floor night after night,
not knowing that I was waiting for the light to go out, I gave myself a
sweetness that I am going to say a prayer for the last thing before I
sleep. I took his head in my arms and pressed his cheek down against
Billy's sleep-place on my breast over my heart and put my lips to that
drake-tail kiss-spot that has tempted me for I won't say how long. Then
I fled--and so did he!

I had about decided to burn this book, because I shan't need it any
longer, for he says he and Billy and I are going to play so much golf
and tennis that I shall keep as thin as he wants me to be without any
more melting or freezing, or starving, but perhaps he would like to read
the little red devil. Do you suppose he would?



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MELTING OF MOLLY***


******* This file should be named 15817.txt or 15817.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/5/8/1/15817



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

