The Project Gutenberg EBook of American Missionary, Volume 44, No. 6,
June, 1890, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: American Missionary, Volume 44, No. 6, June, 1890

Author: Various

Release Date: June 11, 2005 [EBook #16036]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Erika
Q. Stokes and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





The American Missionary

June, 1890.
VOL. XLIV. NO. 6.




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  Removal

  Dr. Storrs on the Negro Problem

  Missionaries to Alaska

  In a Nutshell

  Higher Education of the Colored People

  Spring Conferences

  Mississippi Immigrants

  Notes from New England

  Music's Mission

  Items


THE SOUTH.

  Our School Work

  Our Church Work

  Revival at Wilmington, N.C.

  Ballard School, Macon, Ga.

  Dreary Picture of Place and People

  Report from Mountain Schools

  The King's Daughters Society


THE INDIANS.

  Our S'kokomish Mission


THE CHINESE.

  Jottings


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  Paragraphs--State Missionary Unions


OUR YOUNG FOLKS.

  Letter from a Teacher

  Woman's State Organizations


RECEIPTS.




NEW YORK:

Published By The American Missionary Association

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association.

President, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.

_Vice-Presidents._
  Rev. A.J.F. Behrends, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. Noble, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. Mears, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., Mo.

_Corresponding Secretaries._
  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. Beard, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. F.P. Woodbury, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Recording Secretary._
  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Treasurer._
  H.W. Hubbard, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Auditors._
  Peter McCartee.
  Chas. P. Peirce.

_Executive Committee._
  John H. Washburn, Chairman.
  Addison P. Foster, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._
    S.B. Halliday,
    Samuel Holmes,
    Samuel S. Marples,
    Charles L. Mead,
    Elbert B. Monroe.

  _For Two Years._
    J.E. Rankin,
    Wm. H. Ward,
    J.W. Cooper,
    John H. Washburn,
    Edmund L. Champlin.

  _For One Year._
    Lyman Abbott,
    Chas. A. Hull,
    Clinton B. Fisk,
    Addison P. Foster,
    Albert J. Lyman.

_District Secretaries._
  Rev. C.J. Ryder, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. J.E. Roy, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._
  Rev. C.W. Hiatt, _64 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, Ohio._

_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._
  Rev. Chas. W. Shelton.

_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._
  Miss D.E. Emerson, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be sent
to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please send
early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former address
and the new address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers
may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Vol. XLIV.
  June, 1890.
  No. 6.

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMOVAL.


The Rooms of the American Missionary Association are now in the Bible
House, New York City. Correspondents will please address us accordingly.

Visitors will find our Rooms on the sixth floor of the Bible House,
corner Ninth Street and Fourth Avenue; entrance by elevator on Ninth
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. STORRS, ON THE NEGRO PROBLEM.


Not long since Rev. R.S. Storrs, D.D., preached a sermon in his own
pulpit, presenting the claims of the American Missionary Association for
the annual collection in its behalf from the Church of the Pilgrims,
Brooklyn, N.Y. This sermon appeared in print in one of the daily papers,
and attracted the attention of a benevolent gentleman deeply interested in
the Christian education of the colored people, who was so impressed with
the great value of the address, that he has furnished the Association with
the means to print a large edition for general circulation. This we have
done, and we presume that already, many of our readers have had the
opportunity of reading this eminently wise and timely utterance on one of
America's greatest problems. Should any one desire an extra copy, we will
gladly furnish it on application.

Although the discourse has had large circulation, we cannot resist the
temptation to extract a few of its forcible utterances on some very
important points.

     Permanent popular liberties have their only sure foundation in
     sound moral conditions practically universal. We must secure
     these among those to whom we have given the ballot, and who are
     to be henceforth citizens with ourselves. Otherwise, we are
     building our splendid political house on the edges of the
     pestilential swamp from which fatal miasmatic odors are rising
     all the time. Yes, we are building our house on piles driven into
     the thick ooze and mud of the pestilential swamp itself. We are
     building our cities, which we think are so splendid, and which
     are so in fact, as men built Herculaneum and Pompeii, on a shore
     which ever and anon trembled with earthquake, over which was hung
     the black flag of Vesuvius, and down upon which rolled, in time,
     the lava floods that burned and buried them.

     We have got to meet this immense problem, which is not far off,
     but right at hand; which is not a problem of theory, or of
     distant history, but of practice and fact; and which concerns
     not the well-being alone, but the very life of the nation. Noble
     men and women at the South are engaged in it already, with all
     their hearts; and we must help, mightily! It would be the
     craziest folly of the age for us to be indifferent to it.

     Some men may say, perhaps, "But this is a work that cannot be
     done. It is too radical and vast to be hopefully attempted."
     Nonsense! There is no work for the kingdom of God and the glory
     of His name, which cannot be done! With the Gospel in our hand,
     we can do everything.

     There has been a good beginning made already. This Society, to
     which we are to contribute to-day, the American Missionary
     Association, has four established colleges, three of which are
     entirely supported by itself, have been founded by it and are
     carried on by it; and the fourth very largely so. It has
     multitudes of high schools, normal schools and primary schools.

     First of all, we want men trained, and women too, in the
     knowledge of the truth as it is in Christ, and then to have them
     teaching others. And that is precisely the line along which the
     Society to which we are to contribute to-day, as we have done
     gladly and largely heretofore, is carrying its incessant
     operation.

     Now I affirm absolutely that if ever there was a work of God on
     earth, this is his work! If there was ever anything to which the
     American Christian people are called, they are called to this. If
     there was ever a great opportunity before the Christian church,
     here it is.

     Ah, my friends, don't say "It is too great a work." It is going
     to be done! You and I may do or may not do our part in it. It is
     going to be done!


       *       *       *       *       *

MISSIONARIES TO ALASKA.


As announced in the last number of the MISSIONARY, we have appointed
two men as missionary teachers for the new station to be opened at
Point Prince of Wales, Alaska. The names of these brethren are H.R.
Thornton, of Hampden Sydney, Virginia, and W.T. Lopp, of Valley City,
Indiana. The credentials furnished by these young men are very
satisfactory, and they enter upon the field with the full realization
of its difficulties and even dangers, and yet, cheerfully trusting
themselves to the hand of God, are ready to go forward with undaunted
faith. We bespeak for them the prayers of God's people. It is expected
that they will leave home about the middle of May and sail from San
Francisco June 1st. Dr. Sheldon Jackson and Dr. Pond will aid them in
providing materials for the building and the necessary outfit. They
will, therefore, be well provided for, though long months must elapse
before they can again have communication with the civilized world.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN A NUTSHELL.

_WHICH IS THE WISER WAY?_


There are some people who seem to see only the ignorance and vice of
the Negro, and the inveterate race-prejudice against him; or at least
they appear to be so occupied in dilating upon these hindrances that
they have no time to devote to their removal, and, so far as their
influence goes, they discourage others from doing anything.

On the other hand there are those who, while they see all these
difficulties, only find in them the strongest incentives to the most
earnest efforts to relieve the Negro from them. Which of these two
classes is the wiser?

Some persons propose as the solution of the race problem,
disfranchisement; and they point to the bad legislation of the blacks
in South Carolina and Louisiana a quarter of a century ago, when
scarcely any of them could read, and almost none owned property. On the
other hand, there are those that are industriously trying to educate
the blacks and inspiring them to the acquisition of property, and not
in vain. More than two millions of the blacks can now read, and more
than two hundred million dollars' worth of property is now owned by
them. They are thus being prepared to vote wisely.

Which of these two classes of persons is solving this problem to the
best purpose?

There are other persons, in Congress and out, urging the deportation of
the blacks to Africa, a thing impossible to be done, and, if possible,
it would be harmful to those that were sent, as well as useless to
benighted Africa. On the other hand, there are those who are training
the colored people of this country in education, industrial habits and
stable Christian character, thus preparing them as missionaries to
Africa.

Which of these two classes has the wiser theory?

       *       *       *       *       *

HIGHER EDUCATION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.


The eagerness of our colored population for education is strikingly
shown in the reports given on another page from our institutions in the
South--reports of over-crowded rooms, and students dismissed by scores,
and even hundreds, for want of accommodations.

We call special attention to the report from Fisk University, in
reference to the higher grades of education. It will be seen that, even
in that place, a relatively small number are in the higher classes, and
yet there is a sufficient number of these to indicate that some of the
pupils are seeking what is absolutely essential to the race, to wit,
that some should have the best education attainable.

While it is true of this race as of all others, that the masses can
receive only primary training in letters and in industry, there must be
some of their number who can be leaders in thought and influence. No
race can make progress without such leaders, who can command the line
of march. There must be the inspiration that comes from the success of
the leaders. Hooker's men did not ascend Lookout Mountain in a steady
line. There were some far ahead of others, cheering and encouraging
those following at greater or less distances, till at length the whole
array stood on the brow, and thus won their position.

The warfare is different, but human nature is the same. The Negroes are
no more of equal capacity than white men, and there is just the same
call for differences in their attainments in scholarship and in general
influence. And if those advanced in scholarship shall have Christian
character as well as education, it will render their leadership all the
more safe for their people and the nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPRING CONFERENCES AND CHURCH WORK.


Five of our Conferences in the South have held their spring meetings.
The reports we have had from them indicate that they were of unusual
interest. Almost without exception they are pronounced to have been
the best ever held. The high character of the sermons, addresses and
discussions shows that these ministers are fit leaders of the people.
Their reports of the progress of the work among the churches is
encouraging. On another page of the MISSIONARY will be found some brief
sketches of revival scenes and of individual experience and effort.
This branch of the work of the Association deserves and will receive
increased attention and assistance.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISSISSIPPI IMMIGRANTS.


We alluded in a recent number of the MISSIONARY to the attractive
advertisements of railroad and immigrant companies in the South, and we
expressed the fear that many colored people might find the change to be
disappointing. But the process goes on, and the rich bottom-lands in
the State of Mississippi are attracting many hundreds and thousands of
new settlers. Perhaps there is no better place to which they can go,
for there are no better lands in the South. The great point is whether
these people shall be herded together in rude homes, tilling the soil
without skill, and rearing their children in ignorance and vice. It is
the part of Christian wisdom and the duty of the Christian churches of
this land to see that the people in this densely-packed and fertile
region shall be promptly met with the means of Christian education. Our
school at Tougaloo should be enabled to meet in some degree the
opportunity it has to prepare and furnish preachers and teachers for
this growing population; and schools and churches should be multiplied
to meet the emergency.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY C.J. RYDER.


Nothing stimulates to good deeds more effectively than good deeds
themselves. I copy the following notice, which was circulated on a
neatly printed sheet among the members of a certain church in Boston:

     The "Felice" circle of "King's Daughters" will hold a sale for
     the benefit of the Williamsburg Academy, established for the
     education of the "Mountain Whites" in Kentucky, on Friday,
     March 21, from 8 to 10 P.M., and on Saturday, March 22, from 3
     to 10 P.M., at Miss Maxwell's, 37 Allen Street, Boston.
     Admission 10 cents.

The enthusiastic leader of this circle of "King's Daughters" thought
that possibly she might raise $30 and so constitute one of their number
a Life Member of the American Missionary Association. Imagine our
surprise and delight when, as the result of this effort, $125 were
brought in, as their splendid offering to this work!

Take another fact of unusual interest in the religious life in New
England. Five leading pastors here in Boston chose a particular
Sabbath, upon which they would each preach upon the Negro Problem.
Several sermons were reported at length in our daily journals, and
aroused much interest and comment. One found its way down into the
South, and was commented upon by a Southern editor in true Southern
style. Hard words were used with the recklessness that characterizes
Southern editors, and often Northern as well. The funny thing about it
was, that two gentlemen of the same name, who are both ministers and
reside in Boston, were confused in this comment. The one, who had
recently been South, but who did not preach the sermon, was read a
severe lecture, because after partaking of the hospitality of the
Southern people, he had spoken in so severe terms of them. It was an
amusing blunder, but illustrates the fact that more and more even the
Southern editor is coming to feel the importance of Northern criticism.
It is a very hopeful sign. It is sometimes said that time will settle
these monstrous inequalities that prevail in the South, but time never
settles anything. Mischievous forces only increase in power, the longer
they are permitted to operate. There must be set in operation
beneficent forces, in order to make the element of time useful.
Agitation is needed, patriotic, prayerful agitation, and such united
effort as was made in these Boston pulpits, helps in this agitation.

The new book which comes from the pen of G.W. Cable, under the title
of "The Negro Question," puts old truth in a new dress, and renders it
more attractive and presentable. If any man has the right to write
upon this "Negro Question," it is Mr. Cable. If I had to prepare a
liturgy for the Congregational churches, I would put in it the
following petition: "From the superficial views and misleading
statements of tourists through the South, or those who reside in a
single locality, good Lord, deliver us!" Mr. Cable is not of either of
these classes. He speaks from an intimate acquaintance with, and a
long residence in, the South; better than this, he is familiar with
the whole territory, and not with a single locality simply. This
little book ought to be in the hands of every conscientious student of
this Southern problem. Take a single quotation:

"To be governed merely by instincts is pure savagery. All civilization
is the result of subordinating instinct to reason, and to the
necessities of peace, amity and righteousness. To surrender to
instinct, would destroy all civilization in three days. If, then, the
color-line is the result of natural instincts, the commonest daily
needs of the merest civilization require that we should ask ourselves,
is it better or worse to repress or cherish this instinct, and this
color-line?" There are forces at work, regenerative and ennobling, that
will lead the Southern white people to be ashamed of their attitude
toward the Negroes, and not the least of these are the life and works
of Mr. Cable.

A letter came into my hand, when I was in the South, which is not only
a commentary, but also throws a ray of sunlight where there is much
darkness. It was a letter from an old mistress to her former slave. He
is now a successful business man in Chattanooga. This earnest,
Christian woman, rising above her prejudices, wrote her former slave a
cordial invitation to visit her in her home. Her husband, his old
master, had died in the Confederate service. She had seen her servants
taken away from her through the success of the Union armies. Her
property had been depleted, and her fertile plantation overrun by the
loyal troops. It must have been with great sadness and a bitter heart,
that she looked out upon this ruin, wrought as she believed, throughout
the invading of the sacred soil of Virginia. But in these years that
have passed, this bitterness has largely gone, and this sweet,
Christian letter comes to her former slave. The ex-slave told me with
tears in his eyes that he paid her this visit, and that she welcomed
him, not to the Negro quarters, nor to the kitchen-chamber, but to her
best guest-chamber, and said: "I want you to feel that you are welcome
to the best hospitality of my home." "And she treated me almost as
tenderly as she would one of her own sons," said the colored man. And
so light is coming, little by little.

Dr. Haygood expresses a regret that the white women of the South are so
slow to appreciate the importance of the moral elevation of the
Negroes, and so slow to join hands with their Northern sisters in his
education. But such facts as this kind, Christian letter furnishes,
lead us to hope and to believe that better times are coming, and that
the Southern Christians, interested as they are in the Negro in Africa,
will, little by little, appreciate and minister more and more to the
terrible need of the Negro in South Carolina and Alabama.


       *       *       *       *       *

MUSIC'S MISSION.

BY REV. E.N. ANDREWS, HARTFORD, WIS.


Suggested by the following words by Rev. B.A. Imes in the May
MISSIONARY:

     "The Mozart Society at Fisk treated us to an excellent
     rendering of Haydn's great oratorio, 'The Creation.' Many came
     over from the city (Nashville),--whites from the "best
     families," all crowding in, listening, wondering, enjoying!
     How the music of those well-tuned instruments and voices
     caught us up and carried us away! Color-line melted and faded
     out. How we wished the politicians all might have been brought
     under that magic spell of solos and choruses!"


          O Music, with thy wand celestial, touch
          The hearts of men, and by thy alchemy
          Divine, resolve, remelt, aye, e'en recast
          The thought and very being! Selfish man,
          So filled with prejudice and hate hath need,
          O heavenly messenger, of all thy aid.

          And as thy votaries in anthems sing
          With the immortal Haydn, and do praise
          Creative Wisdom, Who, of one blood made
          All Nations for to dwell on earth in love,
          Then let celestial fires descend and burn
          Complete, the offering of the lips, and purge
          The dross of caste and hate from every soul!

          This do, for Satan hath his spectrum set
          Before the door of human hearts and cast
          Upon the screen the separated lines
          Of black and red and yellow--white forsooth,
          While these should mingle in that glorious Sun
          That shines alike on all, impartially.

          Then come, O Music, re-resolve the lines,
          These color-lines, and let the sun's pure ray
          Beam forth in unobstructed light and love,
          Transmuting, by his touch, these human hearts,
          Till they shall mirror forth the Golden Rule.

       *       *       *       *       *

ITEMS.


Everywhere the colored contestants in Civil Service examinations
succeed admirably in their work. In March just past, there was a
competitive examination held in the Custom House at Newark, N.J., for
clerkships. Out of forty-three contestants, Mr. J.N. Vandewall, a well
known young colored man, stood No. 1, 96 per cent. There was only one
other colored contestant, Mr. G.W. Harris. He stood fifth, with an
average of 86 per cent.

Mr. A.C. Garner, our colored representative in the Chicago Theological
Seminary, passed an excellent examination last week, and received
praise not only from his Professors but from his student friends as
well. Out of a class of forty, he was one of seven chosen by the
Professor of Elocution to represent the class in oratory at the closing
exercises held last week.

During the recent illness of one of our teachers in the South, the
pastor of the Church called every Sunday for volunteers as watchers
during the week. There was always a ready response from the church
members. The teacher relates that before leaving him in the morning,
these watchers would almost invariably kneel down by his bedside and
offer up earnest, fervent prayers for his recovery. He was impressed
with the simple faith and trust in God of these colored Christians,
their belief in prayer and the contrast between them and an equal
number of white brethren under the same circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTH.


OUR SCHOOL WORK.

PROGRESS--OVER-CROWDING.


From Wilmington, N.C.--Instead of sixty pupils as a year or two ago,
we now have over ninety, and next year the number will be fully one
hundred or more, if we have room. The classes are very large.

From Grand View, Tenn.--The classes are full and the accommodations
inadequate. The school numbers one hundred and eleven. It is necessary
to crowd four boys into each room of the Boys' Hall. Four boys are
boarding themselves in a shackly log building at the foot of the hill.
Their grit is admirable.

From Tougaloo, Miss.--Both the dormitories are crowded. The Ladies'
Hall is supposed to accommodate seventy-five girls. One hundred and six
are crowded into it to-day. We have turned away nearly one hundred more
because we had not room for them. Every indication is that the crowd of
applicants will be greater next year than ever. Already applications
are coming in. The American Missionary Association has the lead in
Mississippi to-day.

From Marion, Ala.--We need another grade established. Our primary has
numbered nearly or quite one hundred pupils. The average attendance has
been large and the school-room over-crowded. Three grades are now
virtually working in the primary department. We may look for a large
increase of attendance in all grades next year.

From Florence, Ala.--We need a building if the school is to be
continued. We are now inconveniently crowded, one hundred and sixty
children in a 20 x 40 room, with all the teaching to be done in the same.
To fail in giving us a building will certainly narrow our usefulness in
this field. Our school is constantly increasing in popularity. We can
safely count on an enrollment of over two hundred next year, with
someplace to accommodate them.

From Meridian, Miss.--The work of the school is hindered by lack of
room. We have enrolled this year two hundred and thirty two pupils, and
many have been turned off because we could not seat them. We opened in
December of 1888 with twenty-eight pupils. A school for more advanced
pupils is needed in this part of Mississippi. We have thirty young
people in school who come from the five adjoining counties. They are
boarding in good families and I have every reason to believe that they
have used their time and opportunities well; most of them are this
summer to teach.

From Straight University, N.O.--It has been a golden year for Straight
University. Financially it has been our best year. A larger proportion
of students able to pay came to us. We want to grow, and have every
opportunity to do so save that our quarters are too small. We have
turned away during the year probably two hundred applicants, many of
them for the boarding department. We have had to put cots in nearly all
the rooms, packing them too full for comfort, as it was very hard to
say No! to young people who came hundreds of miles and begged tearfully
for admission. The school has grown during the last eight years from
two hundred to six hundred, and only is not one thousand because we had
no room for them. Our graduates are filling important positions all
over the South. Several are Superintendents in Texas, Kansas,
Mississippi and Louisiana. One holds an important office in Honduras;
others are doing good work in Cuba and Mexico. Eight are filling
important positions in this city. We have no trouble in getting
positions for our young people. Indeed, we cannot supply as fast as
demanded. Often as many as twenty are called for when we have none to
send.

From Fisk University, Nashville.--The evidence of progress in the
educational department of the University is found in the very marked
increase of numbers in the first year of our normal course and of our
college preparatory department. Last year there were fifteen in the
first year of the latter department; this year there are thirty-one.
Last year there were thirteen in the first year of the normal
department; this year there are thirty-one. Last year there were in the
normal, college, preparatory and college departments, one hundred and
forty-five students; this year there are one hundred and seventy-six.
At the coming Commencement, we expect to graduate twelve young men, and
from the normal ten young women and one young man; making a total of
twenty-three. This is a little more than one-sixth of the entire number
of present graduates from these departments.

From a Teacher in the Tennessee Mountains:--Let me tell you of the
general interest manifest in several of the counties west and north of
us in attending this school. One of our students visited many cabins
over the mountains during his vacation, and found that school
advantages were very scarce and poor. He found poverty and ignorance of
the world and of books. Some of the people are still using the old-time
method of kindling their fires by flint and steel instead of matches.
He met many young people who were thirsting for books and schools, also
numbers who had struggled up through the darkness to become teachers in
the neighborhoods. These almost invariably wish to come to our school,
and say they shall be here as soon as their schools close. Many are too
poor to come. This is true of a large number of young girls, who would
come if they could work for their board or in any possible way pay for
it. Whoever will provide funds to meet the expenses of these neglected
girls, and place them at our school, and prepare them for the future
duties of life, will be doing an angelic work, and in the end will do
the greatest good that can be done to this people. Very much of the
money spent for this mountain people will be the same as thrown away,
if this effort is not made to educate the girls.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR CHURCH WORK.


A letter from Rev. F.R. Sims of the Medway Congregational Church,
McIntosh, Ga., reports that seventy persons have been added to that
church on confession of faith, within the last four months.

From Knoxville, Tenn.:--Our attendance at preaching services has been
large and attentive. On the second Sabbath of March the members and
friends made special efforts for collection and raised $30. There has
been a happy increase in the Sunday-school and the prayer meetings.

From Dudley, North Carolina;--It gives me much pleasure to write you
that the Lord has abundantly blessed us in our work at this point.

For three weeks a revival, with much success, has been going on in my
church, the Lord has been with us disturbing the slumber of the
sleeping Christians and bringing sinners unto repentance. We have ten
converts and ten more seeking the Lord. We are all very much encouraged
and are now looking forward for a brighter and more encouraging future.

From Macon, Ga.--At our last communion we baptized and received four
into our fellowship on confession of faith. They were all young people
who are in school and full of promise. Others are expected to unite
with us next month. There have been seventeen additions to the church
in the last eleven months. There has been some real progress made by
the church in all directions. I find in our church meetings a much more
gentle spirit between the members than when I first came here, and I
feel that this outward improvement is due to inward spiritual growth. I
can see this growth in the prayers and testimonies of the weekly prayer
meetings.

       *       *       *       *       *

REVIVAL AT WILMINGTON, N.C.

PROFESSOR GEORGE A. WOODARD.


The revival which took place in this church the latter part of the
winter was, in some respects, a model one.

At the close of one of the Wednesday evening prayer meetings, our
pastor spoke to us with the view of ascertaining if the church were
ready for special work; then he appointed another prayer meeting for
Friday night. With faith, and resting upon the promises of God, the
work was begun the next week. At first the attendance was small; but,
as the meetings continued, the interest increased, and it became
necessary to move into the large hall of the school.

It was evident throughout that God was in the work and that the Holy
Spirit was striving mightily with sinners. A deep, quiet emotion
pervaded the meetings, in strong contrast with the revivals held in
many of the colored churches of the city, where the excitement becomes
intense, and the confusion great. Their meetings are often continued
until long after midnight, in a crowded, unventilated room, whereas
ours never closed later than ten o'clock.

As a result of our revival, although other revivals were going on
amongst the colored people at the same time, upwards of forty were born
into the Kingdom, for some of whom, many, many prayers had been offered
up; and all was done in answer to prayer. Among these were several
cases of interest, two of which I will mention. One is that of an
intelligent young man employed by the leading dentist of the city, for
whom he does the mechanical work, which previously had to be sent
North. Although of excellent character, he was a skeptic, reading the
writings of Ingersoll, Paine, and others. For years, our teachers had
taken a special interest in him laboring with him and praying for him,
that he might come into the light He was induced to attend these
meetings, and was finally led to believe that these things are so and
to accept of the Saviour. He has gone earnestly to work to bring in
other young men, teaches in the Sunday-school and is ready for any
Christian work.

The other is that of a brawny brick mason, a great sinner, who, while
earning excellent wages, often failed to bring home sufficient to feed
and clothe his children; and when remonstrated with by his wife, would
answer; "They are your children, you take care of them." All is changed
now. He gets up early Sunday mornings, assists in getting the children
ready for church, where the family, all neatly dressed, can be seen
regularly every Sunday; and in the prayer meeting his voice is usually
heard.

As a further result of this revival, the church has been greatly
quickened, the members have been brought closer together in brotherly
love, and God has given a fresh outpouring of his spirit.

On Easter morning, when a special communion service was held,
twenty-nine of the new converts were received into our church, amidst
the most touching and impressive services. But the revival has not
stopped with the special meetings. After every Sunday evening service,
an after-meeting has been held, in which several have been led to give
their hearts to God. All of these meetings have been marked by the
earnestness with which the church has labored for the salvation of
those who were yet without, and more fervent prayers never ascended to
the throne of grace.

       *       *       *       *       *

FACTS ABOUT BALLARD SCHOOL, MACON, GA.


The opening of the New Year saw manifestations of the Holy Spirit in
our midst, and during the week of prayer there appeared to be a deep
interest among the pupils. Our prayers seemed to take a new meaning,
and we felt that they were about to be answered.

Nothing but God's Spirit could have laid the burden of souls upon so
many hearts at once, or have bidden us speak to different ones, while
our movements were almost unknown to one another.

In the meetings that were held in the different rooms, and those
conducted in the High School, which were attended by some of the pupils
from other grades, a large number expressed a desire to become
Christians; and there were about sixty who gave their hearts to Christ.
We rejoice greatly over the work of the Spirit, and have the assurance
that "there is joy in the presence of the angels of God."

The study of the Bible is an important feature in the school work. One
hour each week is set apart for it. A visitor, passing from the lower
grades up, on Friday afternoon, would find Bible work going on in every
room. The work of the little ones is largely memorizing. The older ones
have a systematic course. The outlines of Bible history are first
carefully studied, then the more important events and characters in
detail. Work in map-drawing is done in connection with all the lessons.

A short time ago, a middle-aged woman applied for admission to our
school. She had been teaching for several years, but wanted to prepare
herself for the teachers' examination by taking a short course of
study. She was permitted to try the sixth grade examination and failed;
then the fifth with like results; finally she was placed in the fourth
grade, where it was discovered that she did not know the multiplication
tables, and evidently had never heard of division. Her knowledge of
spelling would not exceed that of an average third grade pupil, and she
is called one of the best colored teachers in the county from which she
came.

In the Industrial Department nearly two hundred and fifty girls sew
from a half hour to an hour every day. Excellent work is being done and
they are very much interested, some of them begging for the privilege
of sewing at other times than those designated for that purpose. The
industrial teacher finds difficulty in keeping the supply of work equal
to the demand.

Friends have kindly sent us donations of work, and much more will be
acceptable. Sheets, pillow cases, underclothing or patchwork, basted
ready for sewing, will be very thankfully received. The work in the
sewing classes includes patchwork, the making of dresses, all kinds of
other garments, and quilting.--_From the Ballard Record._

       *       *       *       *       *

A DREARY PICTURE OF PLACE AND PEOPLE.

BY AN A.M.A. WORKER.


The country is low and flat, with here and there a small elevation on
which is a house or log cabin. For miles and miles the country is
dreary and monotonous. The swamps have a funereal aspect as one looks
upon the live-oak and cypress, hung with long Spanish moss swaying to
and fro in the gentle breeze.

Back in these pine woods are hundreds who have never seen the railroad,
a boat, carriage, or even a mail-bag. Sometimes a few will go to the
little obscure station on Saturdays and stand gazing at the train as it
goes thundering by, and many comical remarks are made, as: "Dat am de
train 'pon which no darkies nor crackers kin ride; dat am all de heben
dat dem buckra want and am gwine ter git."

Most of the people own their homes, which are poorly constructed of
pine poles with clapboards to cover the cracks, through which the
dampness and cold winds make it uncomfortable for the occupants, who
are seated before a clay chimney and a great lightwood fire. Very few
of the houses have any windows. A lightwood torch furnishes the light
by day and by night. Some of them are improving each year, but the most
of them are satisfied with a roof, and a few acres under cultivation.

The country people seem to be naturally religious, as they are all
church members, are so from childhood, and are great believers in the
"sperit," which must be the evil one. They are not denominational in
the sense in which enlightened people are. The church which allows the
greatest number of privileges, and the minister who will just be
preacher and make the most noise and have the greatest number of "big
meetings," are the most popular. They have a burial service, and
several months or a year after, they have a funeral service, which is
always a big time.

Caesar is considered the best preacher that has ever been in ----. He
comes once a month, and cannot read a chapter; "nor need you expect me
to get the one-thousandth part of the ingrejience out of this text," is
his introduction to every sermon, but he can get up steam enough to be
heard half a mile. One of the preachers wanting to be known as a
licentiate, said in meeting: "I want you to know that I am a licentious
preacher,"--which is the truth.

Our work has done an amount of good, even among those outside, and our
schools and the two churches have done more good in the country than
all other work combined. The recent fanaticism in the county did not
get one believer from our church.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPORT FROM MOUNTAIN SCHOOLS.


Our year's work is rapidly drawing to an end. The older scholars are
doing well and are remaining with us through the year. They certainly
are gaining in this direction. They become very restless as soon as it
is "put in crap time." They sigh for the fields and "shovel plow," and
often look from the school-room windows with a longing for the log
cabin and the ground surrounding it. In many cases we have to be
_very_ persuasive to have them remain, yet they seem thankful for
the advice and remain. The older scholars seem to manifest an earnest
ambition to obtain situations through the summer, so that they may
procure clothing and help pay their tuition. We try as far as possible
to obtain situations for our girls. The better class of the people will
come to us for help, feeling that our girls have been educated in the
home and kitchen.

In our temperance meeting last Friday, I asked the question, "What
would you do if you were forced to take whiskey?" A little girl rose
and said, "My father asked me to take some and said 'you must.' I said,
'I can't. God would not be pleased.' He said, 'Well, I 'lows how you're
'bout right." What a happy girl she was. She knows if she will keep on
refusing, he will give up strong drink. Our greatest hope is in the
children.

A poor woman had some articles of clothing to take home with her. I
offered to wrap her parcel in newspaper. She said, "If you don't care,
I would like to have that ar paper." She never has a piece except what
is given her by some kind person. She utterly refused to have the
parcel wrapped. The people use the papers to keep the cold out. I have
seen pieces of paper four inches square and parts of letters pasted on
the boards. We save all the papers we receive, and have assisted in
making many poor homes comfortable.

There is a good Sunday-school in a neighboring town. The people listen
very attentively, and seem to be thankful for the Sunday-school and
church services. The average attendance for the last five Sundays has
been forty-two. The thought of leaving this school during the summer is
a _cross_. There are fathers and mothers who are present every
Sabbath. The children show the need of a good school.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM MISS M.A. BYE.


Our Christian Endeavor Society interests me very much, as I have given
more time and thought to that than to anything else outside of school
work. It has increased in numbers, and the members have for the most
part gained a great deal in interest and courage, and this term quite
a number of associate members have become Christians. We are working
now to send a delegate to the St. Louis Convention, and I anticipate
great pleasure in watching the effect upon our delegate of the
enthusiasm of the Convention and the sight of the city, and think it
will be worth the year's work to be with him, for we hope to send one
of the boarding boys.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE KING'S DAUGHTERS SOCIETY.


About a year ago, ten or fifteen girls might have been seen sitting in
their teacher's room, at Tougaloo University, while she spoke to them
of forming a society. The members of this society, she said, were to do
all the good they could in every way they could.

Now, of course, we want a name for our society. If we are going to do
all the good we can, we are worthy to be called followers of Christ,
and as he is a King, we call ourselves "King's Daughters." When our
society began, we had but eight or ten members, but at almost every
meeting there was some one who wanted to join. The meetings were
carried on every Sunday evening, and some one of the members was
appointed to lead the next meeting. During the week we try in every way
to do something definite to please our King; to go to no place in which
we would be ashamed to have our King see us, and to keep no company
with which we would be ashamed to have him see us. Our society
continued to grow and prosper, and finally the young men concluded to
organize a King's Sons Society. During the summer the two societies
held joint meetings. New members were continually joining. As the
meetings were new to us when we first began, they were not as
interesting as they grew to be at a later date; but generally the time
was all occupied. Some one would read a portion of Scripture and offer
prayer, after which a story would be read or told by one of the
members, who had prepared it during the week. Then we would tell how we
had kept our pledge, or in what way we had been helped by being King's
Daughters. Sometimes, when we had broken our pledge, we would leave off
our badge for a week.

The first Sunday in every month we have what we call our consecration
meeting. The President calls the roll and each one answers by giving a
verse of Scripture, or her experience as a King's Daughter. The third
Sunday in every month we elect the officers who are to serve during the
next month. These consist of President, Vice-President, Secretary, a
sick committee, whose business it is to visit and help any who are
sick, and a committee on invitation, whose business it is to find out
who would like to join our society. They report the names at the next
meeting. Sometimes we have a question-box into which we put questions
regarding the society. These are written on small slips of paper and
read by one of the members. If they are directed to a particular one,
that person answers them; but if not, any one in the Society answers
them.

During the school year of 1888, we made a box of clothing to send to
the Indian mission school in Dakota. We would meet every Saturday
evening and sew until we had made enough to fill our box. Whenever one
of us finished a piece we would write our name and pin it on. One of
our girls wanted to sew a little on every article, so as to have her
name on all of them. Well, when we had finished our box of presents, we
each wrote a letter and put into it. We intended to make this a
Christmas present, but severe snow-storms prevented it from reaching
its destination in time. They received it about a month after
Christmas, and the things were divided among the Indian girls. Some of
them wrote to us, thanking us for the presents which they had received.
After our society grew to about twenty or thirty, we were divided into
tens. Each ten had a name given it, such as the Truthful Ten, the Judge
Not Ten, the Do Without Ten and the Polite Ten. Most of us find it
hardest to be Judge Not Tens and Truthful Tens.--_From the Tougaloo
Quarterly._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIANS


OUR S'KOKOMISH MISSION.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY J.E. ROY.


The S'kokomish Reservation is at the extreme southwestern corner of the
Puget Sound, where the S'kokomish River empties in, and is three miles
square, with five thousand acres, embracing rich bottom land and
mountain timber land, the river and the sound furnishing the best means
of transportation to the market. On the place I measured the stumps of
red cedar that were eight, ten and twelve feet in diameter. The waters
at hand are of the best for fishing. As we--Mrs. Roy was with me--were
going up from the river where we had been set across after a ten-mile
mountain drive from Shelton, we saw a Mr. Lo lugging a three-foot
salmon into the missionary home; and at Olympia, the capital, and
another point on the sound, the fishmonger told us they did not sell
such fish by the pound, but by the piece, twenty-five cents each. When,
in 1855, this reservation was set apart by the treaty, it was for the
three bands of this tribe and for the Clallams up at the entrance of
the Sound, who, because of variance with one of the other bands, never
left their ancestral habitation to go to the selected spot. The people
belonging to the Reservation now number about six hundred and twenty.

The handling of the Indians here was one of the first fruits of
President Grant's Peace Policy, by which the agencies were assigned to
the several missionary societies, which were to nominate their
respective agents. This was one of those which were assigned to the
American Missionary Association. In 1871 the Association nominated to
this Agency Edwin Eells, Esq., the eldest son of Rev. Gushing Eells,
D.D., who was one of the mission band that crossed the Rocky Mountains
in 1838, under commission of the American Board, to be associated with
Dr. Marcus Whitman's series of Indian Missions. Here is an illustration
of the wisdom of that policy, which has secured a highly successful
management in all the secular, educational and religious affairs of the
Agency, and one that has been continued on through the changes of
governmental administration, and also one that has resulted in repeated
promotions, until now Agent Eells has charge of five of the seven
distinct Reservations in the State of Washington. His present
headquarters are at the Puyallup Agency, near Tacoma, where he has just
completed an eight thousand dollar building to displace an old one, for
the Government Boarding School. In all these five reservations, lands
have been secured in severalty to the Indians, and largely through his
persistent devotion to their welfare. For two or three years his father
had care of the S'kokomish Mission under the American Missionary
Association, and in 1874, his brother, Rev. Myron Eells, was appointed
to the same work, in which he still abides. Besides the preaching, the
care of the Sunday-school and the prayer meetings and the pastoral
work, in which he gets around among his people as often as once in a
month, he has also the charge of the Indian Church among the Clallams,
near New Dunginess, the brethren of that station, in the pastor's
absence, maintaining stated worship. The people at S'kokomish have
gotten beyond Government payments; they live on their own allotted
lands, in cabins or frame houses, wearing citizens' dress, and doing
business as white men do it. One of Pastor Eells's first Sundays at the
mission was noted for the celebration of Christian marriage on the part
of seven or eight couples who had been living together under their
heathen way of taking up. So they have been shuffling off their
polygamy. While we were there, a man of middle life came to the
pastor's house with his first wife, to be married to her after the
Christian form, having made a satisfactory pecuniary arrangement with
the second, who was a sister of the first. In this case there were no
children to complicate settlement. After I had addressed the church
upon their duty of doing more for the support of their pastor, even as
I had betimes had to do before in white home missionary churches, the
several responses were as decorous and assuring as could be desired.

As another advantage of this Grant plan, the Government School and the
Mission are found to be in entire harmony, the principal, Mr. Foster,
and his assistants and the industrial teacher all being Christians and
caring for the moral advancement of their pupils. Nor does the
missionary administration come in any way to overlie the governmental.
From the herd of cows kept for the service of the boarding school,
neither is one set aside for the pastor's family, nor is he allowed to
buy their milk. He gets his supply from outside. Nor does the preacher
use from Uncle Sam's wood pile. He buys from the Indians.

Some may wonder how a man in such a field can keep from drying up. Come
with me into this missionary study. The first thing that strikes you is
a growth of English ivy, from its root in the earth outside creeping
through a crack in the siding and climbing up one corner and then
around the upper corners of the four sides of the room. That evergreen
wreath is a symbol of the fresh intellectual life in that study, which
has all the air and fix of a workshop. On the shelves, besides the
ordinary outfit, there is an extensive geological collection, which
in its classification and nomenclature shows scientific investigation.
Then there is a fine cabinet of Indian relics and curios, appropriate
to the calling of the incumbent: and there is a supply of Indian
literature, historic and scientific, out of which this student is
transmuting the essential elements of the Indian problem of the Pacific
Northwest. And so it is a small library of his own that has thus been
elaborated. The first is a "History of Indian Missions on the Pacific
Coast," published by the American Sunday-school Union; and the second
is "Ten Years at S'kokomish,"--1874-1884--published by our own
Congregational Sunday-school and Publishing Society. These books would
make an enrichment of any Sunday-school library, giving the very
essence of romance and of heroism along with Christian instruction. The
others are monographs, among them the following:

"Marcus Whitman, M.D.: Proofs of his Work in Saving Oregon to the
United States, and in promoting the immigration of 1843;" "Justice to
the Indian;" "Indian Traditions as to Religion;" "Hand of God in the
History of the Pacific Coast;" "Papers on the Anthropology of the
Indians of Washington," as published in the Smithsonian Report of
1886-7. Another such monograph he now has ready for the press--"God's
Hand in the Missions to the Indians beyond the Rocky Mountains," a
paper read at the recent fiftieth anniversary of the organizing of Dr.
Whitman's church. And beyond all this literary work is the occasional
supply of destitute white congregations round about, and service as a
Trustee of the Pacific University in Oregon, and of the Whitman
College, at Walla Walla, Washington. Surely in literary work, to the
names of Jonathan Edwards among his Stockbridge Indians, and John Eliot
among his Naticks, and S.R. Riggs among the Dakotas, and not a few
others, maybe added this of Myron Eells among the S'kokomish.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.


JOTTINGS.

BY REV. W.C. POND, D.D.


If I were to attempt to place before the readers of the MISSIONARY, in
such setting as would be needed for a comprehension of them, all the
interesting minor facts and scenes that pass under my observation in
our work, there would be no room on its pages for anything else. Let me
give a few examples of these.

A young Chinaman is being examined with reference to baptism, and is
asked why he decided to turn from the worship of idols. "God is
_true_" is the reply, a very simple reason,--a trite one possibly;
but there was something in the tone and emphasis of it which thrilled
me. I saw the emptyness of heathen worship at a point from which I had
never looked at it before. A God that is _true_, that can be
absolutely trusted! Where will you find one in any heathen Pantheon?
Conceive now a thoughtful, honest man passing from the timorous worship
of such gods to the rest and comfort and courage which come from
knowing and trusting Him who is true, and you will begin to realize
what that simple answer meant.

"What are your people making such a noise for?" was asked of a Chinese
brother at Ventura, during the Chinese New Year's Festival. "To scare
away the evil spirits," was the reply. "And why don't _you_ scare
them away?" was the next question, for all was quiet at our little
mission house, "Evil spirits stay away when Holy Spirit comes," was the
reply. I am not confident that I recall the exact words, but I have
certainly given the idea, and it meant emancipation for the man that
uttered it, an entrance into the liberty wherewith Christ makes us
free.

"When I get discouraged, as I often do," writes a teacher, "I think of
the five who are studying the Testament, and of a remark one of them
made to me, 'I love Jesus more all the time when I read about him.'"
This brother took his religion with him to China, and brought it back
unharmed.

One of the brethren worked in a hotel where to specially toilsome
service was added a treatment far from kind. He said to his teacher
that he remembered how much Jesus had to bear and so he "had patient."
The wages received he spoke of as the "hardest money" he had earned
since coming to California, and _so_ he took part of it to buy a
nice Bible. An American said scoffingly to him: "Are you one of the
Christian Chinamen?" "Yes," he replied. "I love Jesus; I am not ashamed
that I love Jesus."

One of our Santa Barbara brethren rents quite a tract of land, much of
which he devotes to the culture of small fruits. On a visit to his
place a year or two ago, friends saw strawberry plants heavily laden
with luscious looking fruit so arranged in front of our brother's door
as to spell out this sentence, "God loves the earth."

"It seems," said Jee Gam once, "as though I could recall his very
words, and hear the tones of his voice as he prayed for the conversion
of his countrymen." It was the closing prayer of a gospel service among
the Chinese in Oakland. The brother who offered it was a Chinese
merchant of that city. Two days afterwards he was shot in his own store
by a Chinaman because he refused to submit to blackmail. A policeman
hastened to the spot and saw him die, and testified in court that his
last words were those of prayer to our true God; this testimony, though
given probably by an ungodly man, being such as to draw tears from many
who listened. Yet some say there are no real Christian Chinamen; that
you can't convert a Chinaman; that they are throughout a race of
hypocrites.

It may not be safe to say _every_ month without exception, though
that is the impression made upon me, but it is certainly safe to say
_almost_ every month brings some report to me of pupils beginning
to believe in Jesus and professing their faith in him. This extract
from a letter will serve as an example: "I have some very good news for
you concerning my scholars. Two of them have promised to join the
Association [i.e. of Christian Chinese] next week. One of them I have
been praying for especially, for nearly a year.... There are three
more who, I trust, are born of God, but are not yet brave enough to
take a stand for him. One says his brother will kill him if he joins in
Christ's name." And here is a word from another teacher: "Five of the
brethren unite with the church at the coming communion. I do not feel
that this is through my effort, as I have not known how to work
individually. It is the Lord that 'giveth the increase.' Two of them
have been ready to come into the church for a long time. The others
show their conversion by face and manner as well as by testimony and
prayer."

I fear that I have exhausted my space, though I am far from the end of
possible "jottings." I will close with a few sentences from a letter
received from a Chinese Christian living at a roadside tavern beyond
Oroville. "Since I am determined to be a Christian, has very much
surprised my elder brother. When he heard about I join the Association
he make a great deal of trouble to me. Then I ask our brothers to pray
for that matter, till one day I go and entreat him; also, tell him all
about the gospel of Christ how good for us and redeem us from our sins.
Then he said, 'Do not talk such things to me; we are Chinese; must keep
our customs.' I say, 'I cannot keep anything wrong; idol worship is
against God. Four thousand years ago our Chinese population have no
idol to worship. Don't you search a thing before you keep it?' Then he
answer: 'If good then you keep it,' and then I received baptism; then
do no more persecution to me afterwards." This extract merely hints at
facts which, if related, would show that for our Chinese Christians at
least, the days that _try_ men's souls are not yet past.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


The thirteenth Annual Meeting of the Woman's Missionary Union of
Alabama met with the Congregational Church in Marion, March 31. This
Union has contributed during the year to the A.M.A. for Indian work, to
the A.H.M.S. for Bohemian work, besides aiding a missionary in China,
and one in South Africa. All the auxiliaries have also done good work
in aiding the churches and the poor in their respective localities. The
meeting was pleasant and profitable, and the Union starts upon another
year with the prospect of adding greatly to its strength and
efficiency.

The first Annual Meeting of the Louisiana Missionary Union, held at New
Orleans, April 3, was also full of encouragement. The new interest
awakened, simply by the gathering together to report the progress of
the year, indicates how much can be accomplished. Not only will the
missionary cause receive direct benefit, but there will be a reflex,
healthful influence upon the churches thus represented.

The first Annual Meeting of the Woman's Missionary Union of the Central
South Association, held in Nashville, Tennessee, April 5, was in all
respects encouraging. One of the peculiar features of these Southern
Unions is that the State Association is always likely to meet at a
school centre, as in this case at Nashville, Tennessee, and the older
students thus are enthused and stimulated to missionary purpose and
activity, whether in the ordinary experiences of church life at home,
or as special missionaries.

There was a good representation of auxiliaries, and encouraging word of
new ones soon to be received. The interest in the meeting was intense,
and the reports from the different societies showed a deep and
heartfelt sympathy with the cause of missions. It was very interesting
to note how anxiously some of those who represent a people burdened
with poverty, planned for the work of the coming year, taking for their
field--the world. Considering that this Union is only a year old, its
growth seems remarkable.

The question is sometimes asked, whether the Mountain girls appreciate
the opportunity of education that is now afforded them. We reply by
giving extracts from the letter of a pupil obliged to leave school. The
letter was written to a school-mate, and is but one of many instances
of the kind.

"MY DEAREST FRIEND:--I would have written sooner, but I thought I might
get a chance to go to school, and that is why I have delayed so long.
It is impossible for me to go now, the boys are preparing 'for to make
a crap,' and I can see how much they are needed at home. We have but
one horse, and I cannot go alone. Oh! how glad I would be to see my
teacher. I know I shall never be able to reward her for her kindness to
me, but the Lord will reward her. I never have met the people who were
so kind to me as those people. I still have a desire to get an
education; sometimes I think I will not get to go to school any more,
but where there is a will, there is a way, and I know I have a good
will. My sisters all married before they were twenty. I am twenty-two
now. I want an education more than I want to marry. My folks tell me I
have enough education, but I think I know better than they. To be sure,
I can read and write a little, but that don't satisfy me, I have a hope
yet that I may still get higher, that is if the Lord is willing. We
cannot do anything unless the Lord is willing and will help us. Give my
love to all the girls. Please write and tell me about the school.
Remember me in your prayers.

Your true friend, ---- ----."

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR YOUNG FOLKS.


_Dear Children_:--The first morning I entered my school-room
South, such a mass of little dark faces as greeted me! At first it
seemed so strange to me, they all looked alike, but in a short time I
was able to pick out Simon, and Tommy, and Mollie, and Janie. Most of
them want to learn, and are quite tidy in their appearance. One of the
exercises they enjoy most is the singing. It would be hard to find a
colored boy or girl who does not sing, and many of them have very sweet
voices. They are able to sing the alto with very little practice. It
often surprises me to find how well they keep their parts. One day we
had a very severe shower, and it was so dark we could not see the
black-boards or see to work, so I let them sing for nearly an hour. All
over the building, if you could have visited the different rooms, you
would have enjoyed listening to them. One of their own pieces which
they like to sing, is "Roll, Jordan, roll." They pronounce it "Jurdon."

Many of the parents are working very hard to give their children an
education, and I am glad to say that the children themselves are glad
to learn. One little girl said, "I've got on a _terrible_ bad
looking shoe, and the big girls out doors were laughing at me
yesterday, but I thought I'd rather come to school with the bad shoe,
than stay away a day and not come at all. I pray every day that God
will help me to do right and be a good girl in school. Last night papa
was out of a job, and I prayed that he might get another one, and now
he's got another one." Then looking at her shoes, she said: "I'd rather
wear these ragged shoes than not to pay for my schooling at all."

And now, children, will you come with me for a little drive? We are
going in a phaeton with our good horse, Maud. We drive about a mile out
of the city, cross a little bridge, and finally drive through a
gateway. The ground is sandy, in some places so white that it almost
reminds one of snow. The trees are still green. Our attention is
attracted by a procession moving slowly forward. There is one carriage
and the friends, men and women, are walking. The words they are
chanting show it to be a funeral procession. Every one wears a green
badge, for most all the colored people belong to some order. Finally
they come to a stop and gather about the grave. The mourners break out
into a wail, and they begin to chant the words: "And must my trembling
spirit glide into a world unknown?" The chant I can never describe, for
there is no music in it, and we cannot distinguish any tune. Then the
minister preaches, and they begin another chant. Let us look around a
little. I am sure you are already interested and surprised at what you
see. Here is a group of three little graves; on one, we find three
dolls' heads, a quantity of shells, marbles, dishes and other toys with
which the children used to play. On another, is a tin kitchen, a bell,
a doll in a chair, a marble under a sugar-bowl cover, and part of a
tea-set. On another, that of a grown person, is a long pipe with a
paper of tobacco, medicine boxes with powders. A little further away we
find one on which is a tooth-brush, ten medicine bottles, two lamps, a
basket filled with sand, vases, tumblers, a toy boat made out of bark,
and pieces of glassware. Among other decorations we find a ball and
bat, pitchers, bits of colored glass, pill boxes, teapots, etc. But it
is already growing dark, and Maud is anxious to start; I think you have
seen enough to make you wonder at the curious customs, and I am sure
that you want to help them to know a better way.

One day a little girl said to her teacher: "I got religion last night."
Shall I tell you just here, something of what they mean by "getting
religion?" It means bad air, late hours, shouting, screaming, and
general excitement. Sometimes they sit for hours, and go night after
night saying over and over the same words. When they finally do "get
religion," they jump up and shout, and run about the church, falling
into the arms of those standing nearest. I think the children are
looking for some strange experience. They expect, from what they are
taught, to see some vision, or hear some voice. I try to show them the
simple way of salvation by just taking Jesus at his word.

And now let us turn to a brighter scene. One Sunday about a month ago,
our pastor preached a sermon, which led us to feel that the Lord was
especially near us, and that we had only to do our part to receive an
outpouring of God's Spirit. Some of us agreed to pray for this. Then we
began to pray for our scholars, and to invite them to our meetings. At
first only a few came, but more kept coming every night, and we kept
bringing in seats, until the mission room was so full we had to change
to the large hall up stairs. Every night some would rise for prayers,
and we would stay and talk with them quietly, and try to show them the
way to Jesus. I think there are about forty now, who have expressed a
desire to live a Christian life. Many of them are children and young
people. Four are boys in my Sabbath-school class. We have held prayer
meetings for this after school, and many are glad to come. About twenty
joined our Christian Endeavor Society as active members, at our last
consecration meeting.

And now, dear children, do you know that this is all given us in answer
to prayer? We have simply asked and received. I knew that the home
friends were praying for us. Their prayers are a constant help. Will
you not pray this month that these little ones may be kept from
falling, and that they may grow to be bright and shining lights in the
world, to lead their own people out of the darkness of sin and
ignorance?

Sincerely your friend,

MINNIE T. STROUT.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.

  Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.B. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Osgood, 14 First Ave., Montpelier.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


[A]MASSACHUSETTS AND RHODE ISLAND.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
  Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Ella A. Leland, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Francis B. Cooley, Hartford.
  Secretary--Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Cobb, 59 Bible House, New York City.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Box 932, Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C.B. Safford, Elkhart.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. Evans, Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, 409 Orchard St., Chicago.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  Presidents--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
  Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Lansing.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.C. Keeler, Beloit.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, Box 464, Minneapolis.
  Secretary--Miss Gertude A. Keith, 1350 Nicollet Ave., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. T.M. Jeffris, Huron.
  Treasurer--Miss A.A. Noble, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 1216 H. St., Lincoln
  Secretary--Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 No. Broad St., Fremont.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.E. Perry, Crete.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.W. Benedict, 3841 Delmar Ave., St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.H. Bradbury, 3865 Washington Ave., St Louis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett, White Water, Colorado.
  Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
       Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.L. Whipple, Cheyenne, Wyoming.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. W.E. Dawson, Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. N.F. Cobleigh, Walla Walla.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.R. Abrams, Ellensburg.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Elijah Cash, 927 Temple St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Box 426, Pasadena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
  Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st. St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 13239 Harrison St., Oakland.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.F. Whiting, Tougaloo.
  Secretary--Miss Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Miss S.L. Emerson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
  Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2519 Third Ave., Birmingham.
  Treasurer--Miss M.K. Lunt, Selma.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. E.M. Cravath, Nashville, Tenn.
  Secretary--Miss A.M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss E. Plimpton, Chapel Hill.
  Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
  Treasurer--Miss Lovey Mayo, Raleigh.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S.C. Acheson, 149 W. Woodard St., Denison.
  Secretary--Mrs. Mary A. McCoy, 122 No. Harwood St., Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.I. Scofield, Dallas.

[Footnote A: For the purpose of exact information, we note that
while the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass.
and R.I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association
be sent to use through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however,
should be taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary
Association, since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.]

        *        *        *        *        *

RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1890.


THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People._

FROM

Mr. Daniel Hand, Guilford, Conn.


Income for April, 1890                                       $960.00
Income previously acknowledged                              7,489.85
                                                           ---------
Total                                                      $8,449.85
                                                           =========


CURRENT RECEIPTS


MAINE, $175.41.

Bangor. Central Ch., 10; Hammond St. Ch., 3.25,
  for Pleasant Hill, Tenn.                                     13.25

Belfast. First Cong. Ch.                                       23.54

Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.40

Castine. Y.P.S.C.E., 3.73, and Garments; Helen J.
  Webster, 2; "Rainbow Band," 1.25, and Sewing Bags,
  _for Student Aid, Chandler Normal Sch._                       6.98

Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch., _for freight to N.C._               2.00

Gorham. Childrens Miss'y Soc. in Cong. Ch., _for
  Sherwood, Tenn._                                             12.25

Hiram. "Friends," by Mrs. J.P. Hubbard, 10; Mrs J.P.
  Hubbard, 5, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                          15.00

South Berwick. Two Sab. Sch. Classes, by   Mrs. K.B.
Lewis, _for Indian M._                                          2.34

Wells. "A Friend."                                              1.00

Woman's Aid to A.M.A., by Mrs. C.A. Woodbury,
  _for Woman's Work_: Alfred. Cong. Ch.,
  to const. Mrs. Laura A. Littlefield L.M.          30.00

  Portland. Ladies' Circle of Second Parish
  Ch., _for Acres Memorial Room, Selma,
  Ala._                                             46.65

                                                    -----      76.65


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $657.68.

Amherst Cong. Ch.                                              17.30

Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const Ambrose
  D. Aldrich L.M.                                              22.47

Canaan. Miss Mary A. George                                     5.00

Durham. Cong. Ch., in part                                      7.00

Epping. Cong. Ch., 30.42; Mrs. G.N. Shepard's S.S.
  Class, 3.25.                                                 33.67

Epping. Pansy Circle, Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid,
  Williamsburg Academy, Ky._                                   15.00

Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.                                      234.00

Gorham. Cong. Ch.                                               5.00

Hopkinton. Mrs. M.G. Barnard to const. Mary E.
  Barnard L.M.                                                 30.00

Hudson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     11.00

Keene. Dea. Metcalf's Sab. Sch. Class, First Cong. Ch.          5.00

Keene. Mrs. K.C. Thayer, _for Pleasant Hill. Tenn._            15.00

Laconia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    50.27

Littleton. Cong. Ch., 8.34; John Farr, 5                       13.34

Meriden. Cong. Ch.                                             14.00

Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                        15.00

Nashua. First Cong. Ch.                                        25.40

Pembroke. First Cong. Soc.                                     20.75

Penacook. Jeremiah C. Martin.                                   5.00

Tilton. Cong. Ch.                                              25.00

West Concord. Cong. Ch., to const. Rev. C.F. Roper L.M.        34.00

West Concord. Y.L.M. Soc., by Mrs. Bertha R. Roper,
  _for Storrs Sch._ and to const. Miss Hattie
  B. Holmes L.M.                                               30.00

West Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                        24.48


VERMONT, $197.26.

Bethel First Cong. Ch., 3.37; Y.P.S.C.E., by Lucy M.
  Graham, Treas., 1.75                                          5.12

Brandon. Cong. Ch.                                             10.00

Brattleboro. Central Cong. Ch.                                112.61

Brattleboro. Mrs. F.C. Rice, _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                                10.00

Cornwall. _For freight to McIntosh, Ga._                        1.50

Derby Center. Mrs. R.C. Drisko, Bbl. of C., Freight, 2.,
  _for McIntosh Ga._                                            2.00

Dorset. Cong. Ch.                                              16.00

Essex Junction. Cong. Ch., _for Freight to
  McIntosh, Ga._                                                1.80

East Dummerston. Mrs. A.A. Dutton, Box of C. _for
  Mclntosh Ga._

Johnson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 25 Hymn Books _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

Montpelier. "F.E.B."                                            1.00

Newport. First Cong. Ch.                                       15.08

Putney. Ladies' Aid Soc., Bbl of C., _for McIntosh Ga._

Saint Johnsbury. Sab. Sch. Class, North Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian Sch'p_                                                 5.00

Swanton. C.C. Long                                             10.00

West Westminster. Mrs. H.A. Goodhue, _for Freight to
  McIntosh, Ga._                                                1.15

Williamstown. "A Friend."                                       6.00

Worcester. James F. Smith, Box of S.S. Papers, _for
  McIntosh, Ga._


MASSACHUSETTS, $7,310.40.

Amherst. Ladies, by Mrs. H.L. Hubbell, _for Student Aid,
  Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                                   20.00

Amherst. First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_                   9.00

Amherst. Mrs. J.C. Bryant, _for Atlanta U._                     5.00

Andover. Phillips Academy, _for Pleasant Hill. Tenn._          25.00

Arlington. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                    46.19

Bedford. H.B. Doland, _for Home, Wilmington N.C._              14.00

Berlin. Cong. Ch., 8.50; Y.P.S.C.E., 7.50; Sab. Sch., 4.,
  _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._                              20.00

Boston. Central Cong. Ch.                                     948.20
  Old South Cong. Ch., in Part                 310.59

  "Felice Circle of King's Daughters" Mount
    Vernon Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy,
    Ky._ and to const. Miss Alma Holmes,
    Miss Anna Norris, Miss Lucy Brown and
    Miss L.H. Maxwell L.M.'s                   125.00

  Chas. H. Rutan, _for Student Aid,
    Pleasant Hill Academy, Tenn._               67.50

  W.H.M.S., Park St. Ch. _for Student
    Aid Straight U._                            54.00

  Mrs. Susan C. Warren, _for Jewett
    Memorial Hall, Grand View, Tenn._           25.00

  C.A. Hopkins, _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._                                      36.75

  Mrs. Woodbridge Odlin, _for Freight to
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                        5.10

  Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch.                 122.92

  Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. F. Ch.              24.68

  Miss Almira C. Wilkins, 5; Mrs. M.
    Houston, 3, _for Girl's Hall,
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                        8.00

  Jamaica Plain. "A Friend," _for Indian
    M., Grand River, S.D._                       4.50

  Roxbury. Immanuel Ch., 22; Walnut Av.
    Cong. Ch., 13.50; _for Stoves,
    Girl's Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          35.50

  Highland. Cong. Ch., _for
      Williamsburg Academy, Ky._                15.30

  West Roxbury. Sab. Sch. of South Evan.
    Ch. _for Tougaloo U._ and to
    const. Abner J. Nutter L.M.                 30.00

  South Evan. Ch. and Soc.                      17.94

                                                -----       1,830.98

Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                          12.49

Brookline. Howard Cong. Ch.                                   104.34

Brockton. Porter Cong. Ch.                                     15.00

Brockton. Joseph Hewitt                                         5.00

Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                               87.79

Cambridgeport. "Scatter Good Circle," of Pilgrim Ch.
  _for Freight to Beaufort, N.C._                               2.00

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                       20.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch. _for Academy, Williamsburg, Ky._            80.85

Colerain. Mrs. P.B. Smith.                                      5.00

Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                       26.47

Cotuit. Union Ch.                                              10.00

Danvers. Webster F. Putnam.                                    68.54

Dedham. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid,
  Straight U._                                                 25.00

Dighton. Miss M.F. Aiken, _for Girl's Hall, Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                                  5.00

East Dennis. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                                      5.00

East Somerville. First Orthdox Cong. Ch.                       82.93

East Weymouth. Ladies, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._              25.00

Fall River. Central Cong. Ch., 33; Third Cong. Ch., 16.65.     49.65

Fall River. Y.W.C.T.U., Package Papers, _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

Florence. Florence Cong. Ch.                                   22.38

Framingham. George Nourse.                                     10.00

Georgetown. "S," _for Sherwood, Tenn._                         10.00

Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch., "A Friend," by Rev. R.P.
  Hibbard                                                      25.00

Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              53.68

Granby. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00

Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                                   37.58

Greenwich Village. Mrs. M.A. Sibley                             1.00

Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      7.99

Holliston. "Bible Christians."                                100.00

Holliston. Mrs. S.E. Walker, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                                      2.00

Hopkinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._                                                       34.50

Hopkinton. Mrs. J.P. Crooks. B. of C. _for Williamsburg,
  Ky._

Indian Orchard. Willing Helpers, _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._                                           12.00

Ipswich. First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_                  23.32

Lawrence. Mrs. A.J. Doland, Table Spread, Val. 3, _for
  Home, Wilmington, N.C._

Leicester. First Cong. Ch.                                     17.70

Leominster. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Ortho. Cong.
 Ch., 25; F.J. Lathrop, 5, _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._     30.00

Lowell. Sab. Sch. High St. Ch., _for Mountain Work,
  support of a boy and girl_, and to const. Mrs. Frank
  N. Chase and Mrs. Ephraim Brown. L.M.'s.                     60.00

Lowell. Eliot Ch. to const. Miss Helen A. Ward L.M.            44.19

Lynn. Central Ch., 31; Miss A.E. Knowles, 15c.                 31.15

Milford. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._             4.00

Millbury. First Cong. Ch.                                      45.12

Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                            24.00

Natick. Primary Dep't, Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., 10;
  Cong. Ch., 8.05                                              18.05

Newton. Eliot Ch., 150. First Cong. Ch., 83.30; Miss Mary
  Calkins' S.S. Class, North Village Ch., 5.                  238.30

Newton. J.W. Davis, _for Stereopticon Slides_                   5.00

Norfolk. Union Cong. Ch.                                        3.00

Norton. Mrs. E.B. Wheaton, to const. Arthur M. Round and
  William E. Robbins, L.M.'s.                                  60.00

Northamptom. A.L. Williston, 300; First Cong. Ch., 226.92     526.92

North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     77.28

North Brookfield. Union Cong. Ch., 7; Y.P.S.C.E., 5,
  _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._                              12.00

Northfield. Miss'y Soc. of Northfield Sem., _for
  Indian M._                                                   25.00

Peabody. "Friends." 3 Boxes Books, _for Lathrop Library,
  Sherwood, Tenn._

Peru. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                    9.50

Pittsfield. South Ch. and Soc.                                 49.20

Pittsfield. Ladies, _for Girl's Hall, Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                                 10.00

Pittsfield. "A Member of South Ch."                             5.00

Pittsfield. M.A. Bissell, 2; S.S. Bissell, 2; _for
  Mountain Work_                                                4.00

Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc.                                217.01

Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            14.25

Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch.                                 26.57

Somerville. Young Ladies' Mission Circle of Franklin St.
  Ch., _for Indian M., Santee Agency, Neb._                    20.00

Southampton. Mrs. Edwards, deceased, by her son,
  Rev. H.L. Edwards.                                            5.00

South Easton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           16.80

South Easton. Cong. Ch., 38.68; Young Men's Class, 30,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   68.68

South Framingham. Grace Cong. Ch., (50 of which _for
  Williamsburg Academy, Ky._)                                 217.50

South Framingham. Fred. Folger, 5; Ethel Cutler, Albert J.
  Dutton, Jr., Mabel Sykes, 5; on "True Blue" card             10.00

South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch.                               25.50

Springfield. South Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg
  Academy, Ky._                                                20.00

Taunton. Union Cong. Ch.                                        8.48

Upton. Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._

Waltham. Trinity Cong. Ch.                                     10.17

Ware. "Little Sunbeams," _for Indian M. Birds Nest,
  Santee Agency, Neb._                                         25.00

Watertown. Phillips Cong. Ch., to const. Rev. Edward C.
  Porter and Alfred E. Turner L.M.'s.                         107.08

West Boxford. Cong. Ch.                                         6.85

Westford. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.50

West Medford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                                 30.00

West Medway. Second Cong. Ch., 9.25, and Sab. Sch., 7.70
  (2 of which _for Student Aid, Fisk U._)                      16.95

West Medway. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              8.00

West Newton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                                10.00

Westport. Cong. Ch.                                            20.00

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                          17.17

Winchendon. George L. Beals and Nancy Norcross Beals,
  deceased, by C.L. Beals and C.L.B. Whitney, _for
  the establishment of Beals Library, Williamsburg,
  Academy, Ky._                                               500.00

Winchester. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                   51.00

Worcester. Central Cong. Ch., 136; Old South Ch., Dea.
  Alfred Holden, 5.                                           141.00

Worcester. G. Henry Whitcomb. _for Tougaloo U._                35.00

Worcester. Ladies of Union Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_       13.00

Worcester. Benev. Soc. Plymouth Ch., Box of C.; Sab. Sch.
  Piedmont Ch., Books, Canned fruit, etc., _for
  Jellico, Tenn._

Worcester. Rev. T.W. Thompson, Box of Books, _for
  Lathrop Library, Sherwood, Tenn._

Yarmouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 22.67; Rev. J.W. Dodge
  and Wife, 12.33; Sewing Circle, 20; _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                                 55.00

----. "A Friend"                                               25.00

Hampden Benevolent Association, by Charles Marsh,
  Treasurer:
    South Hadley Falls                          11.46
    Springfield. South                          60.31
    West Springfield. First, to
      const. B.W. Colton L.M.                   40.00

                                                -----         111.77

Woman's Home Missionary Association, by Miss Ella A.
  Leland, Treasurer, _for Woman's Work_:
    _For Salary of Teachers_ (10 of
        which bal. to const. Mrs.
        Elizabeth K. Chapman L.M.)             440.00
    Boston. Union Ch. Aux., _for
      Sch'p, Tougaloo U._                      100.00
    Newton. Mr. Cobb's S.S.
      Class Eliot Ch.                            6.25

                                                -----         546.25
                                                           ---------

                                                           $6,711.55


ESTATE.

Weymouth. Estate of Dea. Jacob Loud, by John J. Loud, Ex.     598.85
                                                           ---------

                                                           $7,310.40


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT THE BOSTON OFFICE.

Cambridgeport, Mass. "Scatter Good Circle," Pilgrim Ch.,
  2 Boxes, _for Beaufort, N.C._

Dorchester, Mass. Mrs. G.H. Guetin, 2 Boxes

Newton, Mass. Eliot Ch., Mrs. M.T. Vincent, 2 Boxes;
  Goodell Young Ladies Ass'n, 1 Bbl; Freedmen's Aid
  Sewing Circle, Case and Package; _for Sherwood,
  Tenn._ J.W. Davis, Books and Papers, _for Jellico,
  Tenn._

Wilmington, Mass. "Snow Birds," 1 Bbl., _for Gregory
  Inst., Wilmington, N.C._


RHODE ISLAND, $108.30.

Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                       50.80

Providence. W.H.M.A. of North Ch., _for Indian M.
  Santee Agency, Neb._                                         50.00

Providence. Y.P.S.C.E. of North Cong. Ch., _for
  Grand View, Tenn._                                            7.50


CONNECTICUT, $3,349.23.

Bantam. Miss Cornelia Bradley, _for Mountain Work_             10.00

Black Rock. Young Ladies' Guild, Box of C., _for
  Thomasville, Ga._

Bridgeport. Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch., 25;
  Y.P.S.C.E. of Park St Ch., 8.02.                             33.02

Bridgeport. Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  Sch'p_                                                       17.50

Bridgeport. Ladies of South Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.
  Val., 55.41, _for Santee Agency, Neb._

Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                         13.40

Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                             25.00

Canaan. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                      21.22

Chester. Cong. Ch.                                             16.65

Collinsville. Mrs. M.A. Warren, _for
  Charleston, S.C._                                             2.00

Columbia. "Friends," _for McIntosh, Ga._

Danielsonville. Thomas Backus (5 of which _for
  Indian M._)                                                  10.00

Darien. Cong. Ch.                                              32.00

Durham. Cong. Ch.                                              10.85

East Hartford. First Ch.                                       20.00

East Haven. Cong. Ch.                                          12.00

Hartford. "Friends" In Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian M._                                                    5.00

Harwington. Cong. Ch.                                          23.80

Huntington. Ladies' Soc., by Miss Eleanor L. Wooster,
  _for Conn. Ind'l. Sch. Ga._                                   7.50

Mansfield Center. Elliot H. Marsh, M.D.                        10.00

Middletown. Y.P.S.C.E. of Bethany Chapel, by
  Edward P. Wilcox, Sec.                                        1.25

Naugatuck. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                                     25.00

Naugatuck. Miss Maggie Platt, _for Tougaloo U._                 5.00

New Haven. Ch. of the Redeemer, 178.35; Rev. S.W.
  Barnum, 5 Copies "Romanism As It Is"; Sab. Sch. Ch.
  of the Redeemer, _for Indian Sch'p_, 20.                    198.35

New Haven. Prof. E.E. Salisbury                                50.00

New Haven. Young Ladies' Mission Circle of United Ch.,
  _for Sch'p, Indian Sch., Santee Agency, Neb._                50.00

New London. First Cong. Ch.                                    55.86

New Preston. Cong. Ch.                                         42.50

North Woodstock. Ladies and Sab. Sch., _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                             17.50

Norwich. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                         21.72

Plainville. Cong. Ch., to const. Miss Emily Dresser, Miss
  Hattie Hough and Miss Daisy Crissey L.M.'s.                  95.00

Plantsville. Cong. Ch.                                         79.41

Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                           35.21

Putnam. Sab. Sen. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                                25.00

Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                       11.38

Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                          22.00

South Coventry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       38.94

Southington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              50.00

Southport. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M., Cape Prince of
  Wales, Alaska_                                             2010.00

Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   19.18

Terryville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_            17.50

Tolland. Lucy L. Clough.                                       10.00

Wapping. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._               10.69

Washington. Cong. Ch. _for Mountain Work_                      18.00

Wethersfield. Mrs. M.S. Tillotson, Bbl. of Books, _for
  Tillotson C. & N. Inst._

Whitneyvllle. Cong. Ch., to const. Rev. C.A.
  Dinsmore L.M.                                                45.52

Willington. Cong. Ch.                                           2.00

Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                       25.00

Woodstock. Miss F. Butler, Pkg. of C., _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

Woman's Home Mission'y Union of Conn.,
  by Mrs. D. Wilder Smith, Sec.,
  _for Woman's Work_:
    Chaplin. Ladies' Soc.                       15.00
    Columbia. Mission Circle
      _for Conn. Ind'l. Sch., Ga._             10.00
    Griswold. Aux.                              10.00
    Higganum. By Mrs. J.G.
      Hubbard, _for Conn. Ind'l.
      Sch., Ga._                                10.00
    Kensington. Eunonean Soc.                    2.50
    Suffield. Young Ladies M.C.                 12.50
                                                -----          60.00

ESTATE.

Darien. Correction.--Estate of Rev. Ezra D. Kinney, 100;
ack. in May number, should read "for the benefit of those
who were lately slaves."


NEW YORK. $2,913.16.

Amsterdam. D. Cady                                             10.00

Aquebogue. Box of C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._

Brasher Falls. Mrs. Eliza A. Bell, in memory of her
  father, Elijah Wood, deceased                               243.53

Brooklyn. The Church of the Pilgrims (of which W.F.
  Merrill, 50; S.B. Chiltenden, 30; J.S. Stanton, 30.
  to const. themselves L.M.'s., and Charles A. Hull,
  30. to const. Miss Amelia H. Benjamin L.M.)                 780.51

Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 63.97; Atlantic Av. Sab. Sch.
  Miss'y. Ass'n. by A.C. Pohl, Treas., 25; Miss H.M.
  Wiggins, 50 cents                                            89.47

Brooklyn. Miss M.A. Hall's Bible Class, 10; Lee Av.
  Cong. Sab. Sch., 7, and Infant Class, 10; Park Av. M.E.
  Ch., 9; Miss Morrison, 4; Wm. Graham, 1; John
  Writenoner, 1, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                       42.00

Brooklyn. "A Friend," _for Industrial work,
  Lexington, Ky._                                               5.00

Buffalo. "R.W.B.," _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._               50.00

Chittenango. Mrs. Amelia L. Brown                               7.00

East Rockaway. Bethany Cong. Ch.                               12.00

Fillmore. L.L. Nourse                                           9.00

Flushing. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for the Freedmen_           40.00

Fredonia. "Friend," _for Williamsburg, Ky._                     5.00

Fredonia. Presb. Ch.                                            4.30

Jefferson. Mrs. S. Ruliffson                                    3.50

Lawrenceville. Lucius Hulburd                                   5.00

Lowville. Mrs. L.C. Hough, to const. Mrs. Salmon
  Crandall L.M.                                                30.00

Maine. First Cong. Ch.                                         13.71

Marcellus. Mrs. L. Hemenway, to const. Josephine
  Hemenway L.M.                                                31.00

Marion. Cong. Ch.                                               5.00

Newark Valley. Y.L. Miss'y. Soc., Box C., _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

New York. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 115.18; Mrs. Susie Dez
  Arnauld, 30; Broadway Tabernacle, F.K. Trowbridge, 25;
  Madison Sq. Presb. Ch. Mrs. Caroline L. Smith, 10; George
  S. Hickok, 10                                               190.18

New York. Mrs. H.B. Spelman, _for Student Aid,
  Atlanta U._                                                  25.00

New York. Sab. Sch. Class Broadway Tabernacle, by Miss
  E. Agnew, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg Academy, Ky._        9.14

New York. Joseph Wild, Books, _for Thomasville, Ga._

Oswego Falls. "Willing Workers" Cong. Ch., _for Gregory
  Inst., Wilmington, N.C._                                      3.50

Pekin. Abigail Peck                                            15.00

Sherburne. First Cong. Ch., to const Mrs. Frances A.
  Morgan and Mrs. Maggie Buchanan L.M.'s                       60.00

Suspension Bridge. First Cong. Ch.                             17.90

Syracuse. Plym. Cong. Ch., 15; Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, 8.        23.00

Verona. E. Day                                                 10.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H.
  Cobb, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

  Albany. Ladies' Aux. Clinton Av.
    Cong. Ch.                                    5.00

  Brooklyn. Ladies' Willing Aid Soc.           100.00

  Buffalo. First Cong. Ch.                      25.00

  Brooklyn. Class 35, Sab. Sch. of
    Puritan Ch.                                 12.00

  Brooklyn. Boys' and Girls' Mission Band
    Central Ch.                                 10.00

  Clifton Springs. Mrs. W.W. Warner              1.00

  Homer. Mrs. C. Hitchcock, 5;
    Mrs. B.W. Payne, 5                          10.00

  Honeoye. Ladies' Aux.                         20.00

  Ithaca. Ladies' Aux. and Ch. Coll.            94.00

  Jamestown. Woman's H.M. Aux, _for
    Student Aid, Tillotson Inst_, and
    bal. to const. Mrs. A.M. Towle L.M.         15.00

  Newark Valley. Ladies' Aux.                   20.00

  Oswego. Ladies' Aux.                          20.00

  Poughkeepsie. Ladies' Aux.                    20.00

  Syracuse. Woman's Christian Assn.,
    Plym. Ch., to const. Mrs. M.E. Kendall
    L.M.                                        50.00

  Syracuse. Primary Dept. Plym. Ch.
    Sab. Sch.                                   20.00

  West Groton. Y.P. Mission Circle. _for
    Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                   20.00

  Westmoreland. Ladies' Aux 14.53;
    Y.P.S.C.E., 6                               20.53

  Woman's Home Missionary Union                122.29
                                               ------         584.82
                                                           ---------
                                                           $2,323.56


ESTATE.

Waverly. Estate of Phebe Hepburne                             589.60
                                                           ---------
                                                           $2,913.16


NEW JERSEY, $163.90.

Bound Brook. "Pilgrim workers," _for Indian M. Santee
  Agency, Neb._                                                20.00

Lyons Parms. Fred W.C. Crane. bal. to const. himself L.M.      10.00

Newark. Loyal Circle of King's Daughters, by Kate L.
  Hamilton,_for Williamsburg, Ky._                              3.00

Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                       80.90

Roselle. "A Friend."                                           50.00

Westfield. Young People's Union, Box of Books


PENNSYLVANIA, $505.00.

Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch., to const. Amos J.
  Boyden, J. Rockhill Claire, Mrs. Ellen E. Dexter,
  Gilbert Elliott, Miss Lizzie Gorton, Miss Marian B.
  Heritage, Miss Della C. Keyes, Mrs. Hannah E. McKnight,
  Miss Mary F. Maxfield, George M. Randle, Paul S.
  Richards, Mrs. E.B. Ripley, and Miss Annie B.
  Stephens L.M.'s.                                            400.00

Philadelphia. M.H. Harrington                                 100.00

Ridgway. Bible Class, by Minnie J. Kline, _for
  Oaks, N.C._                                                   5.00


OHIO. $675.13.

Akron. West Hill Cong. Ch.                                     37.75

Brecksville. First Cong. Ch.                                    2.40

Byrn. S.E. Blakeslee                                            5.50

East Cleveland. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._

Kelloggsville. Mrs. P.F. Kellogg, 5; Eliza S. Comings, 1;
  "Little Frankie Kellogg," 50 cts., _for
  Indian M., Grand River, S.D._                                 6.50

Kent. First Cong. Ch.                                           7.15

Mount Vernon. First Cong. Ch.                                  93.16

North Benton. Simeon Hartzell                                   5.00

North Ridgeville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 6; "Friends,"
  Shoemaking Tools, Ladies Benev. Soc,. Bbl. of fruit, etc;
  Miss Maria Lickorish, 4.25, _for Williamsburg, Ky._          10.25

Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., (6.25 of which _for Jewett
  Memorial Hall_)                                              45.42

Oberlin. Mrs. M.A. Spear, Box and Bbl. of C., 3 _for
  freight, for New Orleans, La._                                3.00

Saybrook. Franklin K .Hilbert                                   5.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. F.I.
  Fairchild, Treasurer, _for Womans Work_:

    Columbus. High St. Ch. Y.P.M.S.             10.00

    Cuyahoga Falls. L.M.S.                       7.00

    Fredericksburg. H.M.S.                       5.00

    Harmar. Oak Grove Mission Band               4.00

    Hudson. L.H.M.S.                             5.00

    Lindenville. W.H.M.S.                        5.00

    Lock. Y.L.M.U.                               2.00

    Madison. Central Cong. Ch.                   8.00

    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch. Aid Soc.           75.00

    Williamsfield. H.M.S.                        3.00

    Wellington. Benev. and H.M.S.               15.00

    York. Cong. Ch. L.M.S.                      15.00

                                                -----         154.00


ESTATE. $375.13

Jersey. Estate of Lucinda Sinnett, by J.B.
  Metcalf, Executor                                           300.00
                                                             -------

                                                             $675.13


INDIANA, $1.00.

Liber. Thomas Towle                                             1.00


ILLINOIS, $355.45.

Altona. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                    14.56

Aurora. Mrs. N. Lanes    5.00

Avon. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00

Chicago. South Cong. Ch., 45.45; Leavitt St.
  Cong. Ch., 71 cts                                            46.16

Earlville. "J.A.D."                                            25.00

Evanston. First Cong. Ch., to const. George T. Stone,
  W.J. Young, Joseph Hubbart and Lorado Taft L.M.'s           139.27

Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                          49.30

Lawn Ridgs. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                            10.00

Lowell. "V.G."                                                  2.00

Naperville. Cong. Ch.                                          20.00

Oak Park. "Friends," _for Freight to Sherwood, Tenn._           5.00

Odell. Mrs. H.E. Dana.                                         10.00

Providence. Cong. Ch.                                          13.16

Seward. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., by Lizzie Short, _for
  Woman's Work_                                                 7.00

Thomasboro. H.M. Seymour                                        3.00

Tolona. Mrs. L. Haskell                                        10.00


MICHIGAN, $150.94.

Armada. Cong. Ch., 10.55. and Sab. Sch, 3.20                   13.75

Canandaigua. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00

Grand Rapids. E.M. Ball                                        30.00

Irving. Cong. Ch.                                               1.84

Morenei. Cong. Ch.                                              6.00

South Haven. Clark Pierce                                      10.00

Three Oaks. Mrs. H.E. Crosby, deceased, to const.
  Josiah Birney Crosby and John Abbott
  Crosby, M.D., L.M.'s                                         60.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mich., by Mrs. E.F.
  Grabill, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    Cadillac. W.H.M.S.                           2.00

    Chelsea. W.H.M.S.                            2.35

    Detroit. W.H.M.S., Trumbull Av.
      Cong. Ch.                                  5.00

    Detroit. Ladies' Union First Cong. Ch.       3.00

    Eaton Rapids. Y.P.S.C.E.                     5.00

    Tipton. W.M.S.                               3.00

                                                 ----          25.35


WISCONSIN, $187.67.

Beloit. "Whatsoever Ten," of King's Daughters, _for
  Sherwood, Tenn._                                             20.00

Berlin. "Young Conquerors" Mission Band, _for
  Librarian of Fisk U._                                         2.46

Bristol and Paris. Woman's Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C.,
  etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Footville. Cong. Ch.                                            7.18

Genesee. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     5.00

Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                        6.96

Madison. Mrs. A.E.H. Deyon, Bbl. and Box of C., _for
  Sherwood, Tenn._

Milwaukee. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                   52.29

Rosendale. Daniel Clark                                         5.00

Whitewater. Cong. Ch.                                          22.50

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Arena. W.H.M.S.                              1.69

    Brodhead. Mrs. C. Matter                     5.00

    Eau Claire. W.H.M.S.                         3.50

    Milwaukee. W.H.M.S. Grand Av.               25.00

    Milwaukee. W.H.M.S. Grand Av.                6.00

    Plattsville. W.H.M.S.                         .75

    Waukesha.    " " " "                         1.50

    Whitewater.  " " " "                        12.75

    Whitewater. S.S.                             9.69
                                                -----          65.28


IOWA, $84.97.

Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                              13.25

Des Moines. Sab. Sch. Class, by Mrs. A.Y. Rawson,
  _for Sch'p, Indian Sch., Santee Agency, Neb._                25.00

Des Moines, Y.P.S.C.E. of North Park Cong. Ch.                  3.13

Dubuque. Sab. Sch. of German Cong. Ch.                         10.00

Muscatine. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                                15.00

Muscatine. German Cong. Ch.                                     4.00

Round Grove. Z. Banks                                           5.00

Waverly. Cong. Ch.                                              9.59


MINNESOTA, $59.01.

Fairmont. "Whatsoever Band" Cong. Ch.; B. of C., _for
  Jonesboro, Tenn._

Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                                             3.20

Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                              6.05

Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                43.62

Rochester. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Crockery, _for
  Jonesboro, Tenn._

Saint Paul. Y.P.S.C.E. St. Anthony Park Cong.
  Ch., 2.75, and Bbl. of C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._             2.75

Sleepy Eye. Union Cong. Ch.                                     3.39


MISSOURI, $24.00.

Garden City. W.B. Wills, 10; P.J. Wills, 1; F.P.
  Morelan, 1; A.C. Wills, 1                                    13.00

Ironton. Mrs. C.E. Markham                                      1.00

Kansas City. M. Marty                                          10.00


KANSAS, $99.55.

Atchison. Cong. Ch.                                             8.12

Highland. Miss Annie Kloss, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                                 8.00

Topeka. First Cong. Ch.                                        76.42

Wabaunsee. First Church of Christ                               7.00


NEBRASKA, $48.15.

Blyville. Cong. Ch.                                             2.90

Clarks. John Parker                                             4.00

Greenwood. Mrs. C.A. Mathis, 10; Cong. Ch., 2.90               12.90

Hastings. Cong. Ch.                                            14.00

Sutton. First Cong. Ch.                                        14.35


NORTH DAKOTA, $25.00.

Fort Abercrombie. "Thank Offering"                             25.00


SOUTH DAKOTA, $36.13.

Faulkton. Rev. Pliny B. Fisk and Wife                           3.00

Huron. First Cong. Ch.                                         25.87

Lake Preston. Cong. Ch.                                         7.26


WASHINGTON, $10.00.

Walla Walla. Pres. A.J. Anderson                               10.00


OREGON, $3.50.

Myrtle Point. C.C. Stoddard                                     2.50

Salem. Joseph Fry                                               1.00


CALIFORNIA, $100.00.

----. "A Friend in California," to const. Charles H.
  Abernethy and Miss Helen Abernathy L.M.'s                   100.00

Saratoga. Women's Missy Soc. First Cong. Ch., Pkg.
  Patchwork, _for Sherwood, Tenn._


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $288.28

Washington. First Cong. Ch.                                   188.28

Washington. "A friend," _for Theo. Dept. Howard U._           100.00


KENTUCKY, $12.00.

Lexington. Prof. Fred W. Foster, 5; "A Friend", 5;
  Miss Lena V. Lowell, 2                                       12.00


TENNESSEE, $95.09.

Harriman. "Friends," by Rev. G.S. Pope                         24.48

Nashville. Manager Jubilee Singers, _for Fisk U._              32.00

Pleasant Hill. "Two Friends," by Rev. B. Dodge, _for
  Girl's Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                           33.00

Pleasant Hill. Cong. Ch.                                        5.61


NORTH CAROLINA, $86.11.

High Point Cong. Ch.                                            1.00

Nalls. Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                1.38

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                          68.73

Wilmington. Miss M. Lewis, _for Home, Wilmington, N.C._        15.00


GEORGIA, $19.84.

Thomasville. Sab. Sch. of Normal and Industrial Sch.,
  _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N.D._                         18.50

Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 64c.; Mrs. Sengstacke's
  Miss's Band, 70 cents                                         1.24


ALABAMA, $12.46.

Talladega. Cong. Ch.                                           12.46


FLORIDA, $2.00.

Georgiana. Mr. & Mrs. F.W. Munson                               2.00


LOUISIANA, $21.85.

New Orleans. Straight University Ch., 11.85;
  Watson Jones, 4                                              15.85

Woman's Missionary Union of La., by Mrs. C.S.
  Shattuck, Treasurer, _for Women's Work_:

    New Iberia. Belle Place Aux.                 1.00

    New Orleans. University Ch. Aux.             5.00
                                                 ----           6.00


TEXAS, $2.50.

Dallas. Cong. Ch.                                               2.50


HOLLAND, $10.00.

Rotterdam. G.P. Ittman, Jr., _for Gymnasium, Fisk U._          10.00


EAST AFRICA, $4.00.

Kamdini. Miss Nancy Jones, _for Fisk U._                        4.00
                                                          ----------

Donations                                                 $16,305.52

Estates                                                     1,488.45
                                                          ----------
                                                          $17,794.97


TUITION, $4,740.42.

Lexington, Ky. Tuition                         228.75

Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                      223.45

Athens, Tenn. Tuition                            3.50

Crossville, Tenn. Tuition                       42.50

Deer Lodge, Tenn. Tuition                       23.72

Jellico, Tenn. Tuition                          39.90

Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                        11.82

Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                         513.75

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                       647.08

Pine Mountain, Tenn. Tuition                    61.65

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                    33.15

Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition                        5.50

Troy, N.C. Tuition                              18.00

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition                       159.50

Charleston, S.C. Tuition                       262.00

Greenwood, S.C. Tuition                         96.30

Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch., Tuition              153.75

Macon, Ga. Tuition                             412.35

McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                           46.66

Savannah, Ga. Tuition                          166.00

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                        68.45

Anniston, Ala. Tuition                          60.00

Athens, Ala. Tuition                            75.10

Mobile, Ala. Tuition                           220.92

Selma, Ala. Tuition                             82.85

Talladega, Ala. Tuition                        170.70

Meridian, Ala. Tuition                          90.50

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                        146.50

New Orleans, La. Tuition                       489.50

Austin, Tx. Tuition                            186.57

                                              -------       4,740.42


United States Government for the Education of Indians       4,275.38

Total for April                                           $26,810.77
                                                          ==========


SUMMARY

Donations                                                 117,815.96

Estates                                                   102,668.08
                                                         -----------

                                                         $220,484.04

Income                                                      4,262.91

Tuition                                                    27,469.74

United States Government for the Education of Indians      13,221.45
                                                         -----------

Total from Oct. 1 to April 30                            $265,438.14
                                                         ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for April                                       $45.34

Previously acknowledged                                       537.38
                                                             -------

Total                                                        $582.72
                                                             =======


H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
Bible House, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Advertisements._

       *       *       *       *       *

"A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER."

[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH

For beauty of polish, saving of labor, freeness from dust,
durability and cheapness, truly unrivalled in any country.

CAUTION.--Beware of worthless imitations under other names,
put up in similar shape and color intended to deceive. Each
package of the genuine bears our Trade Mark. Take no other.]

SOLD BY MERCHANTS IN _CIVILIZED_ COUNTRIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DR. WARNER'S CAMELS HAIR HEALTH UNDERWEAR

FOR MEN WOMEN AND CHILDREN.]

A new Fabric for Underwear superior to Silk or Wool. A
protection against Colds.

Sold by leading Merchants.

Catalogues sent on application.

WARNER BROS. 359 Broadway, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

$60 SALARY. $40 EXPENSES IN ADVANCE allowed each month.
Steady employment at home or traveling. No soliciting. Duties
delivering and making collections. No Postal Cards. Address
with stamp, HAFER & CO., Piqua, O.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BURTON HOUSE,
PRIVATE BOARDING.

Summit St., CRESCENT CITY, FLA.

Open all the Year. Charges Moderate.

D.W. Burton, _Prop._

       *       *       *       *       *

INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing!
Clear Record of half a Century.

"Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking."
Use a common pen.

[Illustration]

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

"Don't on any account omit to mark plainly all your sheets,
pillow cases, napkins and towels. Mark all of your own personal
wardrobe which has to be washed. If this were invariably done, a
great deal of property would be saved to owners, and a great deal
of trouble would be spared those who 'sort out' clean pieces."

KATE UPSON CLARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

MENEELY & COMPANY,
WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS.

For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes
and Peals. For more than half a century
noted for superiority over all others.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOSEPH GILLOTT'S
STEEL PENS

_GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION 1878._

Nos. 303-404-170-604.

THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of American Missionary, Volume 44, No. 6,
June, 1890, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 16036.txt or 16036.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/0/3/16036/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Erika
Q. Stokes and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
