The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, Vol. 10, Issue 281, November 3, 1827, by Various


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction, Vol. 10, Issue 281, November 3, 1827


Author: Various



Release Date: June 21, 2005  [eBook #16098]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE,
AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION, VOL. 10, ISSUE 281, NOVEMBER 3, 1827***


E-text prepared by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 16098-h.htm or 16098-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/0/9/16098/16098-h/16098-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/0/9/16098/16098-h.zip)





THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. X. No. 281.] SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1827. [PRICE 2d.



       *       *       *       *       *




MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO. XIV.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]


The first of the above engravings represents one of the _Body Guards
of the Sheikh of Bornou_, copied from an engraving after a sketch
made by Major Denham, in his recent "Travels in Africa." These negroes,
as they are called, meaning the black chiefs and favourites, all raised
to that rank by Some deed of bravery, are habited in coats of mail,
composed of iron chain, which cover them from the throat to the knees,
dividing behind, and coming on each side of the horse; some of them wear
helmets or skull-caps of the same metal, with chin-pieces, all
sufficiently strong to ward off the shock of a spear. Their horses'
heads are also defended by plates of iron, brass, and silver, just
leaving room for the eyes of the animal; and not unfrequently they are
hung over with charms, enclosed in little red leather parcels, strung
together, round the neck, in front of the head, and about the saddle.

[Illustration]

Their appearance is altogether of a warlike character, the horses being
well caparisoned, and the riders well clothed for personal defence; and
though their equestrian evolutions be somewhat wild, the lance or spear
is doubtless a formidable weapon in their hands. The savage splendour of
their dress, together with the pawing and snorting of their fiery
steeds, render them appropriate auxiliaries to royalty, in countries
where such attributes of power are requisite to impress the people with
the importance of their rulers, and where the milder aids of
civilization and refinement are wanting to protect the sovereign from
violence.

The second engraving, copied from the same authentic source as that
preceding it, is a somewhat grotesque portraiture of one of the _Lancers
of the Sultan of Begharmi_, described, in an historical and geographical
account by a native prince, as an extensive country, containing woods
and rivers, and fields fit for cultivation; but now desolated, as the
inhabitants say, by the "misconduct of the king, who, having increased
in levity and licentiousness to such a frightful degree, as even to
marry his own daughter, God Almighty caused Saboon, the prince of
Wa-da-i, to march against him, and destroy him, laying waste, at the
same time, all his country, and leaving the houses uninhabited, as a
signal chastisement for his impiety."

Major Denham having applied for the covering of the above warrior and
his horse, in his journal thus describes their arrival:--"Aug. 11. Soon
after daylight, Karouash, with Hadgi, Mustapha, the chief of the
Shouaas, and the Sheikh's two nephews, Hassein and Kanemy, came to our
huts. They were attended by more than a dozen slaves, bearing presents
for us, for King George, and the consul at Tripoli. I had applied for a
_lebida_, (horse-covering,) after seeing those taken from the Begharmis;
the sheikh now sent a man, clothed in a yellow wadded jacket, with a
scarlet cap, and mounted on the horse taken from the Begharmis, on which
the sultan's eldest son rode. He was one of the finest horses I had
seen, and covered with a scarlet cloth, also wadded. 'Every thing,'
Hadgi Mustapha said, 'except the man, is to be taken to your great
king.'"

The Begharmis, it will be seen, were conquered by the people of Kanem;
and Major Denham has translated, and given in the appendix to his
_Travels_, a song of thanksgiving on the triumphant return of the
governor, full of the characteristic beauty and simplicity of savage
life. In these struggles it would appear the law of nations is severe on
the weakest; for the son of the late sultan of the Begharmis is
described as "now a slave of the sheikh of Bornou." So wags the world!


LIVING AT TOULOUSE.

Part of a house, sufficient for a small family, unfurnished, may be had
for 14 l. a year; and the most elegant in the city, in the best
situation, for 60 l., including coach-house, stable, cellar, &c. A horse
may be kept well for 14 l. a year. The wages of a coachman are 8 l., a
housemaid 8 l., a noted cook 16 l., and a lady's-maid 10 l. The price of
a chicken is 7-1/2 d.; a partridge 1 s.; a hare 2 s. 6 d.; a duck 1 s.;
a turkey 2 s. 6 d.; the best bread 1-1/2 d. per lb.; common ditto 1 d.;
a bottle of wine 3 d.; brandy is sold by the lb. of 16 oz. and costs 6
d.; grapes 1/2 d. per lb.; meat 3 d.; butter 4 d.; cheese 6d; 50 lbs.
carrots 10 d.; other vegetables at the same rate. A dozen very fine
peaches now cost a halfpenny; pears 3 d. a dozen; labourers, who work
from sunrise to sunset, are fed by the proprietor, and have 6 d. per
day, which, in this part of the country, will go further than three
times the sum in England. The horses and oxen used about the farms are
fed chiefly on straw, and do not consume more than 3 d. a day. The
labouring people make a very nourishing diet from maize flour, which is
fried with grease; and this, with beans, forms the principal part of
their food. They neither use nor wish for meat; but at this season they
have figs and grapes almost for nothing--_Original Letter_.


MOHAMMEDAN SUPERSTITION.

The eastern, and all Mohammedan people, considering Alexander the Great
as the only monarch who conquered the globe from east to west, give him
the title of "the two horned," in allusion to his said conquests. They
likewise believe that Gog and Magog were two great nations, but that, in
consequence of their wicked and mischievous disposition, Alexander
gathered and immured them within two immensely high mountains, in the
darkest and northernmost parts of Europe, by a most surprising and
insuperable wall, made of iron and copper, of great thickness and
height; and that to the present time they are confined there; that,
notwithstanding they are a dwarfish race,--viz. from two to three feet
in height only--they will one day come out and desolate the world. As
Lord Mayor's Day is just approaching, perhaps some of the visiters of
Gog and Magog on that occasion may decide this matter. It is almost akin
to our nursery quibble of the giants hearing the clock strike, &c. &c.


PERSIAN BARBER.

The Khas-terash (literally, personal shaver) of the present sovereign
has, in the abundance of his wealth, built a palace for himself close to
the royal bath at Teheran. And he is _entitled_ to riches, for he
is a man of pre-eminent excellence in his art, and has had for a long
period, under his especial care, the magnificent beard of his majesty,
which is at this moment, and has been for years, the pride of
Persia.--_Persian Sketches_.


LIVING IN GENEVA.

The vicinity of Geneva appears peculiarly eligible for the permanent
residence of an English family. There is perhaps no town on the
continent where greater facilities are afforded for a man of literary
and scientific pursuits to indulge his taste or to increase his
knowledge. The city is close built, and consequently not an agreeable
place to live in; but its immediate environs abound with delightful
spots.

The costume of the Genevese assimilates much with that of the French;
but the better class of females are partial to the English fashions. The
language of the country is French, but its habits and religion are
widely different. Not only does the Protestant faith find here the
salutary prevalence of a kindred faith, but the members of our own
ecclesiastical establishment are enabled to join each other every
Sabbath day in the worship of God, and at stated seasons to receive the
holy sacrament according to the pure and apostolic ritual of the church
of England.

The expense of a house, with a garden and piece of land, within a mile
of the gates, including also the keeping of a caleche and pair of
horses, for a gentleman, his lady, two children, and three servants,
does not exceed 300 l. a year; and with this he is enabled to receive his
friends occasionally, and in a respectable style. To proceed from a
family establishment to a bachelor's pension, "I," says Mr. Seth
Stevenson, in his _Continental Travels_, "was told that a person
at Petit Saconnex has a sleeping-room to himself, and his breakfast,
dinner, tea, and supper with the family, for 500 francs (20 l. 16 s. 8 d.)
per annum."

The taxation of Geneva is described as very trifling. There is a sort of
income-tax, to which every man of property contributes, on his honour,
as to the amount of that property. The whole tax for horses and
carriages amounts to about 18 d. for each person; the richest it seems
pays no more, and the others pay no less. "My friend assures me,"
continues Mr. S. "that his fellow citizens approve of their annexation
to Switzerland, and also of the union of the Valais with the Helvetic
confederation--that the people of this little republic are flourishing
again, contented with their government; and as the best proof of their
returning prosperity since the peace, he adverted to the comparatively
few indigent or distressed persons among them, and to the fact of there
being only forty-five persons in the poor's hospital, besides those
admitted under the head of casualties."

       *       *       *       *       *


ORIGINAL STORY OF HAMLET,

(_From the Latin of Saxo Grammaticus, but interspersed._)


Florwendillus, king of Jutland, married Geruthra, or Gertrude, the only
daughter of Ruric, king of Denmark. The produce of this union was a son,
called Amlettus. When he grew towards manhood, his spirit and
extraordinary abilities excited the envy and hatred of his uncle, who,
before the birth of Amlettus, was regarded as presumptive heir to the
crown. Fengo, which was the name of this haughty prince, conceived a
passion for his sister-in-law, the queen; and meeting with reciprocal
feelings, they soon arranged a plan, which putting into execution, he
ascended the throne of his brother and espoused the widowed princess.
Amlettus, (or Hamlet,) suspecting that his father had died by the hand
or the devices of his uncle, determined to be revenged. But perceiving
the jealousy with which the usurper eyed his superior talents, and the
better to conceal his hatred and intentions, he affected a gradual
derangement of reason, and at last acted all the extravagance of an
absolute madman. Fengo's guilt induced him to doubt the reality of a
malady so favourable to his security; and suspicious of some direful
project being hidden beneath assumed insanity, he tried by different
stratagems to penetrate the truth. One of these was to draw him into a
confidential interview with a young damsel, who had been the companion
of his infancy; but Hamlet's sagacity, and the timely caution of his
intimate friend, frustrated this design. In these two persons we may
recognise the Ophelia and Horatio of Shakspeare. A second plot was
attended with equal want of success. It was concerted by Fengo that the
queen should take her son to task in a private conversation, vainly
flattering himself that the prince would not conceal his true state from
the pleadings of a mother. Shakspeare has adopted every part of this
scene, not only the precise situation and circumstances, but the
sentiments and sometimes the very words themselves. The queen's
apartment was the appointed place of conference, where the king, to
secure certain testimony, had previously ordered one of his courtiers to
conceal himself under _a heap of straw;_ so says the historian; and
though Shakspeare, in unison with the refinement of more modern times,
changes that rustic covering for the royal tapestry, yet it was even as
Saxo Grammaticus relates it. In those primitive ages, straw, hay, of
rushes, strewed on the floor, were the usual carpets in the chambers of
the great. One of our Henrys, in making a progress to the north of
England, previously sent forward a courier to order _clean straw_
at every house where he was to take his lodging. But to return to the
subject.

The prince, suspecting there might be a concealed listener, and that it
was the king, pursued his wild and frantic acts, hoping that by some
lucky chance he might discover his hiding-place. Watchful of all that
passed in the room, as he dashed from side to side, he descried a little
movement of the uneasy courtier's covering. Suddenly Hamlet sprung on
his feet, began to crow like a cock, and flapping his arms against his
sides, leaped upon the straw; feeling something under him, he snatched
out his sword and thrust it through the unfortunate lord. The barbarism
of the times is most shockingly displayed in the brutal manner in which
he treats the dead body; but for the honour of the Danish prince, we
must suppose that it was not merely a wanton act, but done the more
decidedly to convince the king, when the strange situation of the corpse
was seen, how absolutely he must be divested of reason. Being assured he
was now alone with his mother, in a most awful manner he turns upon her,
and avows his madness to be assumed; he reproaches her with her wicked
deeds and incestuous marriage; and threatens a mighty vengeance upon the
instigator of her crime.

In the historian we find that the admonitions of Hamlet awakened the
conscience of the queen, and recalled her to penitence and virtue. The
king, observing the change, became doubly suspicious of the prince; and
baffling some preliminary steps he took to vengeance; Hamlet was
entrapped by him into an embassy to England. He sent along with him two
courtiers, who bore private letters to the English monarch, requesting
him, as the greatest favour he could confer on Denmark, to compass, by
secret and by sure means, the death of the prince as soon as he landed.
Hamlet, during the voyage, had reason to suspect the mission of his
companions; and by a stratagem obtaining their credentials, he found the
treacherous mandate; and changing it for one wherein he ordered the
execution of the two lords, he quietly proceeded with them to the
British shore. On landing, the papers were delivered, and the king,
without further parley, obeyed what he believed to be the request of his
royal ally; and thus did treason meet the punishment due to its crime.
The daughter of the king being charmed with the person and manners of
the foreign prince, evinced such marks of tenderness, that Hamlet could
not but perceive the depth of his conquest. He was not insensible to her
attractions; and receiving the king's assent, in the course of a few
days led her to the nuptial altar. Amidst all joys, he was, however,
like a perturbed ghost that could not rest; and before many suns had
rose and set, he obtained a hard wrung leave from his bride, once more
set sail, and appeared at Elsineur just in time to be a witness of the
splendid rites which Fengo (supposing him now to be murdered) had
prepared for his funeral. On the proclamation of his arrival, he was
welcomed with enthusiasm by the people, whose idol he was, and who had
been overwhelmed with grief when Fengo announced to them his sudden
death in England. The king, inflamed with so ruinous a disappointment,
and becoming doubly jealous of his growing popularity, now affected no
conciliation, but openly manifested his hatred and hostility. Hamlet
again had recourse to his pretended madness, and committed so many
alarming acts, that Fengo, fearing their direction, ordered his sword to
be locked in its scabbard, under a plea of guarding the lunatic from
personal harm, After various adventures, at last the prince accomplished
the death of his uncle's adherents, and vengeance on the fratricide
himself, by setting fire to the palace during the debauch of a midnight
banquet. Rushing amidst the flames, he kills Fengo with his own hand,
reproaching him at the moment with his murder, adultery, and incest.
Immediately on this act of retribution he was proclaimed lawful
successor to the throne, and crowned with all due solemnity.

Thus far Shakspeare treads in the steps of the annalist; the only
difference is in the fate of the hero; in the one he finds a kingdom, in
the other a grave. Saxo Grammaticus carries the history further; and
after the crowning of Hamlet as king, brings him again into Britain,
where, in compliment to that land of beauty, he marries a second wife,
the daughter of a Scottish king. Hamlet brought both his wives to
Denmark, and prepared for a long life of prosperity and peace. But the
sword hung over his head; war burst around him, and he fell in combat by
the hand of Vigelotes, son of Ruric. Saxo Grammaticus sums up his
character in a few words: "He was a wise prince and a great warrior.
Like Achilles, he had the principal actions of his life wrought on his
shield. The daughter of the king of Scotland casting her eye on it,
loved him for the battles he had won, and became his bride."

       *       *       *       *       *




SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGLISH FRUITS.

(_Concluded from page 295._)


_The Vine_.--The value and transcendant excellence of this foreign fruit
is too well known to require any extended account in this paper; as a
native of the southern verge of the northern temperate zone, it only
requires its natural degree of heat to bring it to perfection. The
growth is luxuriant, is fertile, easy of management, and as it requires
support, obedient to the trainer's will. Many excellent varieties ate in
our stoves and vineries; differing in hardness, size of bunches, and in
colour and flavour of fruit. These, it is likely, have been gained from
seeds; and as its cultivation has been primaeval with the inhabitants of
the earth, no wonder it received, for its unequalled utility, their
chiefest care.

That the climate of this country has undergone a considerable change
within the last hundred years, is allowed by all who have considered the
subject; and nothing furnishes a more convincing proof of this, than the
history of the vine. Previous to the reign of Henry VIII., every abbey
and monastery had its vineyard. In the rent-rolls of church property in
those days, and long afterwards, considerable quantities of grapes were
paid as tithe; and the vestiges of some of those vineyards remain to
this day. They were usually placed on the south side of a hill, in a
light dry soil, having the surface covered with sand; the vines being
trained near the ground. But with such inclement and changeable springs,
and long protracted winters, as have been experienced of late, even such
frost as is seen at this moment (24th of April,) vines as standards in
the open air, would be destroyed; or, at least, no dependence could be
placed upon them for a crop. But vineyards in the country could neither
be so profitable, nor are they so necessary as they were in those days;
international intercourse is now more open, and corporations, whether
religious or civil, can be supplied with grapes in any shape, and their
precious juice in any quantity, at a cheaper rate than either home-grown
or home-made. In their cultivation in this country, practitioners are
more liable to err in planting them in too rich, than in too poor a
soil; the first adds too much to their natural luxuriance of growth, and
always reduces the flavour of the fruit.

_The Mulberry_.--This fruit has not been subjected to the
operations and attention of the improver so much, perhaps, as it
deserves; true, it has been planted against walls, and as espaliers; and
in both places has done well.

_The Fig_ has been long in our gardens; a very ancient one is still
alive in the garden of one of the colleges at Oxford. In its native
country it produces two crops in the year, and this property makes its
management rather difficult in a country where it can but with
difficulty be made to produce one; and especially when trained in the
common way to a wall, where the crop is often sacrificed to the useless
symmetry of the tree. It is impatient of frost, and requires protection
during winter; and is also impatient of the knife, and more, perhaps,
than any other tree, is disposed to form its own natural head. When kept
in a glass case, either planted in the ground or in pots, it well repays
the trouble bestowed upon it.

_The Quince_.--This fruit remains very steadily in character to
what it has always been known to be; the taste is too austere to be used
alone from the tree; but with other fruits in pastry, or in the shape of
preserves or marmalade, it is useful.

_The Medley_.--Two or three sorts of this tree are in cultivation:
they are placed in the lowest grade of fruits; though, when they are
perfectly mature, they are much relished by some palates. The azarola,
service, and two or three others used in the south of Europe, are not
worth notice here.

_The Filbert_.--The common wild hazle of our hedges has been
improved, by chance or cultivation, into the several varieties of red
and white filberts and cob-nuts. Working them upon the hazle, or upon
themselves, is necessary; because, it not only makes them more fruitful,
but also brings them sooner into bearing.

_The Walnut_.--This nuciferous tree has been cultivated in England
more for the value of the timber than for its fruit. There are several
varieties, differing chiefly in the size of the nut, from the diminutive
ben-nut, to the large or double French sort. The only improvement which
can be expected in this, is a hardier sort which would be less
susceptible of damage from frost.

_The Chestnut_.--The description of the walnut may be applied to
this, as they are natives of the same climate; and their flowers are
alike impatient of frost. The fruit of this is, however, inferior to
that of the walnut, and seldom arrives at the same degree of perfection.
The tree grows to a great size, and is one of the most valuable of our
forest trees. In "days of yore," it must have been much more plentiful
in this country, or more plentifully imported, than it now is; as the
principal timbers of abbeys, cathedrals, and other ancient buildings,
are chiefly formed of it: being equally durable as the oak, which it so
much resembles, that they can hardly be distinguished from each other,
but by the test of the wet edge of a chissel being stained by the oak,
and not at all by the chestnut.

_The Melon and Cucumber_.--These exotic fruits are extensively
cultivated; the latter takes various shapes in our bills of fare; the
former is more a luxury than a fruit for general use; their culture on
hot-beds forms a material branch of modern gardening, and with that of
the gourd, pumpkin, squash, vegetable marrow, &c., is well known.

_The Pine-Apple_.--This sovereign of fruits is, and can only be, in
this country, an appendage to opulence and rank. Several varieties are
cultivated in our forcing-stoves, and grace the tables of the rich, and
in as great perfection as they can be had between the tropics. In their
wild state, they affect the sides of rivulets, and often under the shade
of lofty trees; but are of inferior flavour, unless the weather is very
dry when they are ripening off; and when cultivated, they receive little
or no water during the last stage of their growth.--_Quarterly Journal
of Science, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTES OF THE MARVELLOUS.

_A Prediction Fulfilled._


At the time of the American war, a gentleman (a mere youth) entered the
army, and saw some little service. One day, during an engagement, he
was, in the hurry and confusion of it, knocked down; and a soldier,
setting his foot upon his chest in passing over him, hurt him so
exceedingly that he became senseless; upon recovering, he found himself
still stretched on the ground, and a singular, looking female stood
beside him, who, as he opened his eyes, exclaimed in an ill-boding
voice, "Ay, young man, mark my words: _that_ hurt will be the
death of you in your forty-second year." He immediately recognised in
this old raven one of those _soothsayers_ who usually followed the
army, and gained a livelihood by their oracular powers. Mr. L. certainly
did _mark_ her words, inasmuch as returning to England, he quitted
the army, entered the church, and amongst other red-coat reminiscences,
used frequently to mention (and mention but to ridicule) the American
soothsayer's prediction. Nevertheless, true it is, that he did die in
his forty-second year, and of a disease in his _chest_ too,
although he had never suffered from the hurt beyond the period at which
he received it.


_Imagination._

The measles (it is pretty well known to all voyagers) is at St. Helena a
hideous and fatal disorder, although generally mild at the Cape, which
is about a fortnight's sail from the former island: every ship,
therefore, from the Cape, upon touching at St. Helena, undergoes
examination, and, if the measles are known to be prevalent at the former
place, is put into quarantine, and no officer, however urgent his
business may be, allowed to land without making oath or affidavit that
he has not been on shore at the Cape, or approached an infected person.
Some years since, a naval officer, acquainted with the then governor of
St. Helena, General P----n, was invited to dine with him, and met at
dinner another officer from another vessel, who, it is to be presumed,
had eluded undergoing the usual precautionary measures, and was perhaps
ignorant of their existence, since he mentioned, during the repast, that
the measles were prevailing at Cape Town, and admitted that he had
entered it. Now, he had just arrived at St. Helena, and though he
expressly stated that he had not gone near any infected person, poor
Mrs. P----, uttering a shriek, fled from the table, exclaiming that she
knew she should have the measles; in fact, she immediately fell sick of
that disorder, (and died, I think I understood.) All her family took it,
and it raged through the island, proving dreadfully destructive.


_Mysterious Incident._

It was the wedding day of Mr. and Mrs. Terry, (I mean the _actual_,
not the anniversary wedding-day,) and the jocund bridegroom, bride, and
their guests were assembled about noon in the drawing-room, when a
servant entered, and said a gentleman had called, and wished to speak to
Mr. T.; that he was waiting below stairs, and would not come up, because
he came upon very particular business. Mr. Terry, desiring his company
to excuse him for a few minutes, quitted the room. One hour elapsed--no
bridegroom; two hours--he did not appear;--three--four--he was not
returned: the bride's mind misgave her, and the hymeneal guests were
quite alarmed: the servants declared that they had seen their master and
the gentleman walk into the garden, from whence they were not returned.
Now, a high brick wall, in which there was no outlet, and over which no
person could climb except by a ladder, enclosed the garden, which, when
searched, was empty, whilst, at the same time, Mr. Terry and his
_friend_, "_the gentleman_," could not have walked out at the
hall-door without being, from its situation, seen and heard by the
servants in the kitchen. Time fled--and he did not return--no!--and
although his lady lived to be nearly ninety years of age, she
_never_ gained tidings again of the spouse, thus so mysteriously
spirited away!


_Raising the Wind._

The superstitions of sailors are not few, as those assert who are
conversant in maritime affairs. Amongst others, is the custom, pretty
well known, of _whistling for a wind_. A gentleman told me, that, on his
first voyage, being then very young, and ignorant of sea usages, he was
in the habit of walking the deck a great deal, "and whistling as he
went," perhaps "for want of thought"--perhaps for lack of something
better to do. Shortly, he fancied that the captain of the vessel seemed
not a little annoyed whenever this took place, although he kept a
respectful silence upon the subject. At length Mr. ---- resolved to
speak to him himself: and, accordingly, one day, when it blew a pretty
brisk gale, said, "I observe, captain, that you appear particularly
uneasy whenever I whistle."--"To say the truth, sir, I _am_ just _now_,"
replied he. "On a fair, still day, whistle as much as you please; but,
when there is a wind like this, _we don't like to have any more
called._"--_New London Literary Gaz._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SELECTOR

AND

LITERARY NOTICES OF

_NEW WORKS._

       *       *       *       *       *


A PHILOSOPHICAL KITCHEN.


A romantic and ludicrous novel has just appeared, entitled "The Mummy,
or Tale of the Twenty-second Century," exhibiting some of the probable
results of "the march of intellect;" and of the pungency of its satire
the following is a fair specimen, describing a kitchen in the
twenty-second century:--

When Dr. Entwerfen left the breakfast-room of Lord Gustavus, which he
did not do till a considerable time after the rest of the party had
quitted it, he was so absorbed in meditation, that he did not know
exactly which way he was going; and, happening unfortunately to turn to
the right when he should have gone to the left, to his infinite surprise
he found himself in the kitchen instead of his own study. Absent as the
doctor was, however, his attention was soon roused by the scene before
him. Being, like many of his learned brotherhood, somewhat of a
gourmand, his indignation was violently excited by finding the cook
comfortably asleep on a sofa on one side of the room, whilst the meat
intended for dinner, a meal it was then the fashion to take about noon,
was as comfortably resting itself from its toils on the other. The
chemical substitute for fire, which ought to have cooked it, having gone
out, and the cook's nap precluding all reasonable expectation of its
re-illumination, the doctor's wrath was kindled, though the fire was
not, and in a violent rage he seized the gentle Celestina's shoulder,
and and shook her till she woke. "Where am I?" exclaimed she, opening
her eyes. "Any where but where you ought to be," cried the doctor, in a
fury. "Look, hussy! look at that fine joint of meat, lying quite cold
and sodden in its own steam." "Dear me!" returned Celestina, yawning,
"I am really quite unfortunate to-day! An unlucky accident has already
occurred to a leg of mutton which was to have formed part of to-day's
aliments, and now this piece of beef is also destroyed. I am afraid
there will be nothing for dinner but some mucilaginous saccharine
vegetables, and they, most probably, will be boiled to a viscous
consistency." "And what excuse can you offer for all this?" exclaimed
the doctor, his voice trembling with passion. "It was unavoidable;"
replied Celestina, coolly; "whilst I was copying a cast from the Apollo
Belvidere this morning, having unguardedly applied too much caloric to
the vessel containing the leg of mutton, the aqueous fluid in which it
was immersed evaporated, and the viand became completely calcinated.
Whilst the other affair--" "Hush, hush!" interrupted the doctor; "I
cannot bear to hear you mention it. Oh, surely Job himself never
suffered such a trial of his patience! In fact, _his_ troubles were
scarcely worth mentioning, for he was never cursed with learned
servants!" Saying this, the doctor retired, lamenting his hard fate in
not having been born in those halcyon days when cooks drew nothing but
their poultry; whilst the gentle Celestina's breast panted with
indignation at his complaint. An opportunity soon offered for revenge;
and seeing the doctor's steam valet ready to be carried to its master's
chamber, she treacherously applied a double portion of caloric; in
consequence of which, the machine burst whilst in the act of brushing
the doctor's coat collar, and by discharging the whole of the scalding
water contained in its cauldron upon him, reduced him to a melancholy
state.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON THE DEATH OF A FRIEND.


  Thou art gone to the grave, but we will not deplore thee,
    Since God was thy refuge, thy ransom, thy guide;
  He gave thee, he took thee and he will restore thee,
    And death has no sting since the Saviour has died.

_The Amulet for_ 1828.

       *       *       *       *       *





St. Martin's, near Canterbury.

[Illustration: St. Martin's, near Canterbury.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN CHURCH ERECTED IN ENGLAND.

(_For the Mirror_.)


The venerable and interesting church of St. Martin is situated on the
side of a hill, (named from it,) at the distance of little more than a
quarter of a mile from the dilapidated walls of Canterbury. It is
generally believed to have been erected by the Christian soldiers in the
Roman army, about the time of king Lucius, A.D. 182, and hence is justly
esteemed as _the first Christian church erected in Britain_, and
indeed nothing appears to contradict this assertion; for the Britons,
before the arrival of the Romans, were, as is well known, in a state of
barbarism and idolatry, and their habitations huts of clay and turf; and
as to its being built after their departure, I do not think it at all
likely, for England was then ravaged and overrun by the warlike clans of
its mountain neighbours, and consequently its inhabitants had not time
or inclination to erect buildings, when their lives and property were
daily in danger. Their successors, the early Saxons, too, I think,
cannot claim any pretensions to St. Martin, they being heathens, and
unacquainted with the Christian religion. Nor could they, entirely
ignorant of Roman materials, have built an edifice completely composed
with them.

Here then was a Christian church and a Christian congregation
established in Britain full 415 years before Augustin's arrival; but as
St. Martin, bishop of Tours, died in the year 395, this church could not
have been erected in his honour; but it might afterwards have been
dedicated to him by Luidhard, chaplain to Bertha, wife of Ethelbert, the
Kentish king; and this is the more likely, as Luidhard himself was a
French bishop.

In conclusion, it may not be unnecessary to state, that though the
papists consider Augustin as the apostle of the English, they do not
acknowledge him as their first instructor in Christianity; for, as it
appears in their service for May 26, Lucius, a British king, wrote to
St. Eleutherius, (who was elected priest A.D. 177,) desiring that he
might be numbered among the Christians. By whom or by what means this
conversion was effected does not appear; but, however, in reply to it,
Eleutherius sent the monks Damian and Fryatius into Britain, from whom
the king and many of his subjects received the gospel.

SAGITTARIUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


PICTURE OF LIBERTY.

(_For the Mirror_.)


  O, Liberty! thou goddess, heav'nly bright!
  Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight,
  External pleasures in thy presence reign.

  ADDISON.


Aristo tells a pretty story of a fairy, who, by some mysterious law of
her nature, was condemned to appear, at certain seasons, in the form of
a foul and poisonous snake. Those who injured her during the period of
her disguise were for ever excluded from participation in the blessings
which she bestowed. But to those who, in spite of her loathsome aspect,
pitied and protected her, she afterwards revealed herself in the
beautiful and celestial form which was natural to her, accompanied their
steps, granted all their wishes, filled their houses with wealth, made
them happy in love and victorious in war. Such a spirit is Liberty. At
times she takes the form of a hateful reptile; she grovels, she hisses,
she stings; but woe to those who in disgust shall venture to crush her!
And happy are those who, having dared to receive her in her degraded and
frightful shape, shall at length be rewarded by her in the time of her
beauty and glory!--_See Edin. Rev. vol._ xlii. _p._ 332.

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


FIRST AND LAST.

(_From the Italian_.)


  One single truth before he died
  Poor Dick could only boast;
  "Alas, I die!" he faintly cried,
  And then--gave up the ghost!


       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH GAMING HOUSES.

(_For the Mirror_.)


  Dicing-houses, where cheaters meet, and cozen young men out of
  their money.

  _Lord Herbert._


  Begin with a guinea, and end with a mortgage.

  _Cumberland._


      What more than madness reigns,
  When one short sitting many hundreds drains,
  When not enough is left him to supply
  Board wages, or a footman's livery.

  _Dryden's Juvenal._


  Gaming finds a man a cully, and leaves him a knave.

  _Tom Brown._


The last "nine days' wonder" is the excess to which gaming is carried
among the higher circles of this country; but I much doubt whether the
present expositions of such enormity in a neighbouring nation will work
the desired effect on Englishmen.

Popular prejudices are obstinate points to combat; but every one who has
had opportunities for observation, must allow, that in their _taste
for gaming_, the French and English character are widely different.
In France, every one plays at cards, or dominoes, and at _all hours in
the day_, in every cafe, wine-shop, and road-side inn throughout the
country. I remember to have frequently seen, in the wine-shops at Paris,
carters in blue smock-frocks playing at ecarte and dominoes over a
bottle of _vin ordinaire_ at eleven o'clock in the morning,
particularly in the neighbourhood of the markets. In England such
amusements would be illegal, and the victualler who allowed them in his
house would probably be deprived of his license.

In France every man plays at billiards--nay, every village has its
billiard tables, one of which is almost as frequent an article of
furniture in private houses, as piano-fortes are in England; and the
sign of two maces crossed, and the inscriptions "Cafe et Billards" are
as common over the wine-houses in the provinces, as chequers formerly
were in our own country towns. I remember meeting with a curious
adventure during my last residence in Paris. One morning, while
leisurely walking in _Rue Montmartre_, I was accosted in French, by a
respectably dressed man, apparently about fifty, who inquired of me the
situation of ---- street, (for at this moment I do not recollect the
name). I replied that, being a foreigner, I could not afford him the
required information, at the same time referring him to the next shop.
He did not follow my suggestion, but almost at the very instant my eye
caught the name of the street for which he had just inquired. The
stranger then told me that being on a visit to the capital, he was
anxious to see the interior of the palace of the Tuilleries, and was
proceeding to a friend resident in the above street, who had promised to
procure him admission to the royal residence, notwithstanding the king
was then in Paris. I congratulated him on his success, having been, a
few days previous, disappointed in the same object, when he offered also
to procure admission for myself and one or two of my friends. We
accordingly entered a second rate _cafe_, when, I made up to the
_garcon_ and demanded of him whether orders for viewing the Tuilleries
were to be obtained there: he made no reply, but my friend of the
street, who had by this time partly ascended a staircase at the
extremity of the room, beckoned, and anxiously besought me to accompany
him. I did so, notwithstanding I was aware that Paris, as well as
London, had its "frauds." We entered a large room, the first impression
of which, on some minds, would have been that of terror. In the centre
stood a handsome billiard-table, over which were two dirty lamps with
reflectors; the walls were papered in tawdry French taste, the ceiling
black with smoke, and the whole room but indifferently lighted with a
disproportionate and dusty window: the door, too, seemed planned for
security, having a large lock and two bolts inside, but exhibited marks
of recent repair from violent fracture. In short, there was a lurking
suspicion about the place, which was not lessened by my companion
meeting with a partner. From their conversation I learned they were both
_foreigners_, and were waiting for a friend to bring the orders to view
the palace, so that all the story was as yet in keeping, and I was
introduced as a suitor for the same favour. My fellows "in waiting"
showed much impatience, complained of cold, and politely asked me to
take a glass of liqueur with them, at the same time taking up the mace
and beginning to amuse themselves at the billiard-table. I looked on;
they asked me to join them; I declined, and professed ignorance of the
game; but their importunities became more pressing, and at last
troublesome. Not a word further was said of the palace admission.
I now judged it time to take my leave, and advancing towards the door
for that purpose, I perceived my companions moved also: I profited by
the hint, and seizing the handle of the door, thanked them for their
civility, assured them I could wait no longer, but would call in
half-an-hour--leaped down the stairs, and did not stop till I reached
_Rue Montmartre_. I afterwards learned this was a common _street trick_
in Paris to decoy strangers to the billiard-table, and had I taken the
mace in hand, it would most probably have been at the expense of a good
dinner for my companions, as a smart for my credulity.

A few evenings subsequent to this common-place incident, I strolled into
a house of play in the palais royal, the situation having been
previously pointed out to me by a friend.[1] The entrance was through a
narrow passage by a silversmith's shop, on the ground floor, at the end
of which a strong light shone through the figures denoting the number of
the house, largely cut in tin; alas! thought I, a fatal number to many
thousands. On the principal landing, being that above the _entre-sol_
story, I gently tapped at a handsome door, which was almost as gently
opened. My friend (for I was not alone,) having deposited his hat and
stick with the garcon, was allowed to pass, but I was stopped for want
of--_whiskers_; till assuring him that I was older than he took me to
be, and an Englishman--I was also permitted to pass. We first entered a
small room, in which was a roulette-table surrounded by players, and
well staked: this communicated by folding-doors with a spacious saloon
with a double table for _Trente-et-un_, or _Rouge et Noir_, round which
were seated the players, behind whom stood a few lookers-on, and still
fewer young men, whose stakes were "few and far between,"--probably
those of cautious adventurers, or novices pecking at the first-fruits of
play. Nothing is better described in books than the folly of _gaming_,
and the sufferings of its victims; but, like Virgil, in his picture of
Heaven, they fall short in describing their extasies; a failing on the
right side, or perhaps purposely made, for the happiness of mankind. The
seated visitors here seemed to be quite at home, some picking up their
Napoleons and five franc pieces, and others recording the issues of the
game, and illustrating the doctrine of chances by pricking holes in
cards. A death-like stillness prevailed, interrupted only by the
monotonous result of the deal of the cards, and the bewitching, though
not frequent chink of gold and silver. The success of the winners was as
silent as the disappointment of the losers; neither joy nor grief
displaying itself otherwise than in an almost unvaried _tristesse_ on
the countenances of the seated players--in some measure produced by ill
health and intense anxiety so as to conceal better feelings. I took my
station at one end of the table beside a middle-aged Frenchman, and by
way of _forfeit-money_ (for _mere_ lookers on are not very acceptable
company) threw a few five-franc pieces, one by one, on the same colour
with his stakes, each of which varied from one to ten Napoleons. After
twelve chances I had lost about thirty francs, but the Frenchman
continued playing, and within twenty minutes rose a winner of three
hundred Napoleons, which the banker changing for paper, he coolly put
into his waistcoat pocket, and walked off. A slight emotion was visible
around the table, but there was no other expression. I had now time to
look around me, and enjoy a little reflection for my foolish risk. It
would be difficult to say whether more anxiety was displayed among the
sitters, or the company at their backs. The attractive _foci_ of all
eyes were the everlasting varieties of red and black, though not
accompanied by the usual grotesque mob of kings, queens, and _knaves_,
the latter being probably excluded by the jealousy of their living
fraternity around the table. A strong and steady light spread over the
faces of all present, and in some few showed the quiverings and workings
of the most intense passion; but the same stare or tip-toe of hope and
fear pervaded the whole assemblage. Some counted their money with
apparent caution, and seemed to divide their winnings from their store
with affected precision, probably with an idea of the winnings being
unfit company for other coin; whilst others listlessly played with their
cash, or in a vulgar phrase, handled it like dirt, the distinguishing
feature of the cold and calculating gamester, to whom money is an object
of secondary concern compared with that of play. In the standing groupe
I remember to have noticed (from his personal resemblance to a friend) a
young Englishman, whom I afterwards learned had been a constant visiter
to that table during the previous three months, and had then won about
two hundred Napoleons. He had just married an interesting woman, about
his own age, twenty-two, and had professedly taken up his degree in the
practice of play, as an elegant and honourable mode of subsistence. A
few weeks after I met him and his wife, on the Italian Boulevards; in
dress he was woefully changed, and in his countenance a ghastly stare,
sunken eye, and emaciated cheeks, bespoke some strong reverse of
fortune: his wife too seemed dimmed by sorrow, and suffering might be
traced in every lineament of her features, notwithstanding the artifice
of dress was tastefully displayed about her person. Alas! thought I, how
often is the charm of wedded life snapped asunder by man--the proud lord
of the creation, and how often by his strong hold on her affections,
does he sink lovely woman still fondly clinging to his disgrace, in the
abyss of crime and guilt.

But as such incidents must be common to many of your readers who have
visited the French metropolis, I shall desist from further recital. The
following outline of those receptacles of vice, _French Gaming
Houses_, from facts which I collected on the spot, aided by
authenticated resources, may not prove uninteresting.

Gaming-houses in Paris were first licensed in 1775, by the lieutenant of
police, who, to diminish the odium of such establishments, decreed that
the profit resulting from them should be applied to the foundation of
hospitals. The gamesters might therefore be said to resemble watermen,
looking one way and rowing another. Their number soon amounted to
twelve, and women were permitted to resort to them two days in the week.
Besides the licensed establishments, several illegal ones were
tolerated. In 1778, gaming was prohibited in France; but not at the
court or in the hotels of ambassadors, where police-officers could not
enter. By degrees the public establishments resumed their wonted
activity, and extended their pernicious effects. The numerous suicides
and bankruptcies which they occasioned, attracted the attention of the
_Parlement_, who drew up regulations for their observance; and
threatened those who should violate them with the pillory and whipping.
At length, the passion for gambling prevailing in the societies
established in the Palais Royal, under the title of _clubs_ or _salons_,
a police ordinance was issued in 1785, prohibiting them from gaming, and
in the following year, additional prohibitory measures were enforced.
During the revolution the gaming-houses were frequently prevented and
licenses withheld; but notwithstanding the rigour of the laws, and the
vigilance of the police, they still contrived to exist; and they are now
regularly licensed by the police, and are under its immediate
inspection. The following items of twenty tables distributed about Paris
(the established stake varying from a Napoleon to a sous) are from the
most authentic documents:--


  Current expenses                            1,551,480 Francs.
  _Bail_ to Government                   6,000,000 Francs.
  Bonus for the bail                            166,666 Francs.
  Making together 7,716,146 Francs, or about   L321,589 English.
  Gain of the tables, per annum               9,600,000 Francs.
  Expenses as above                           7,718,146 Francs.
  Leaving a clear profit of                   1,881,854 Francs,


or about L78,244 English! And yet, in spite of this unanswerable logic
of _figures and facts_, there are every day fresh victims who are
infatuated enough to believe that it is possible to counterbalance the
advantages which the bank possesses, by a judicious management of the
power the player has of altering his stake! The revenue formerly paid to
the government for licenses, has recently been transferred to the city
of Paris.

In England, the outcry against gaming is loud, and deservedly so; and
the extent to which it is stated to be curried in the higher circles is
rather underrated than exaggerated; but the severity of our laws on this
crime, and recent visitations of its rigour, confine it to the saloons
of wealthy vice. With us it is not a national vice, as in France, where
every license, facility, and even encouragement presents itself.
Lotteries, which have been abolished in England, as immoral nuisances,
are tolerated in France, with more mischievous effect, since, the risk
is considerably less than our least shares formerly were, the lotteries
smaller, and those drawn three times every month. The relics of
_our_ gaming system are only to be found on race-courses; but in
France, half the toys sold at a fair or _fete_, where mothers win
rattles for their children, are by _lottery_, whilst our gaming at
fairs is restricted to a few low adventurers for snuff-boxes, &c.
Despair is the gloomiest feature of the French character, and of which
gaming produces a frightful proportion, notwithstanding all that our
neighbours say about _our hanging and drowning in November:_
witness their suicides:--

  In 1819: Suicides, 376; of which, 126 women.
     1820:  do.      325;  do.      114  do.
     1821:  do.      348;  do.      112  do.


Of the suicides of these three years 25, 50, and 36, were attributed to
love, and 52, 42, 43, to despair arising from _gaming, the
lottery_, &c. In the winter of 1826, several exaggerated losses by
gaming were circulated in Paris with great _finesse_, to enable
bankrupts to account for their deficiencies, many of whom were exposed
and deservedly punished.

A few words on the _prevention_ of gaming, the consideration of
which gave rise to this hasty sketch; I mean by dramatic exhibitions of
its direful effects. On our stage we have a pathetic tragedy by E.
Moore, which, though seldom acted, is a fine domestic moral to old and
young; but the author

  "Was his own Beverley, a dupe to play."


It is scarcely necessary to allude to the recent transfers of a
celebrated French _expose_ of French gambling to our English stage,
otherwise than to question their moral tendency. The pathos of our
_Gamester_ may reach the heart; but the French pieces command no
such appeal to our sympathies. On the contrary, the vice is emblazoned
in such romantic and fitful fancies, that their effect is questionable,
especially on the majority of those who flock to such exhibitions. The
_extasies_ of the gamester are too seductive to be heightened by
dramatic effect; neither are they counterbalanced by their consesequent
misery, when the aim of these representations should be to outweigh
them; for the authenticated publication of a single prize in the lottery
has been known to seduce more adventurers than a thousand losses have
deterred from risk. But they keep up the dancing spirits of the
multitude, and it will be well if their influence extends no further.

PHILO.


    [1] As the Palais Royal may be considered the central point of the
        _maisons de jeu_, or gambling-houses, it will not be irrelevant
        to give a brief sketch of them:--

        The apartments which they occupy are on the first floor, and are
        very spacious. Upon ascending the staircase is an antechamber, in
        which are persons called _bouledogues_ (bull-dogs), whose
        office it is to prevent the entrance of certain marked individuals.
        In the same room are men to receive hats, umbrellas, &c., who give
        a number, which is restored upon going out.

        The antechamber leads to the several gaming rooms, furnished with
        tables, round which are seated the individuals playing, called
        _pontes_ (punters), each of whom is furnished with a card and a pin
        to mark the _rouge_ and _noir_, or the number, in order to regulate
        his game. At each end of the table is a man called _bout de table_,
        who pushes up to the bank the money lost. In the middle of the
        table is the man who draws the cards. These persons, under the
        reign of Louis XIV., were called _coupeurs de bourses_
        (purse-cutters); they are now denominated _tailleurs_.
        After having drawn the cards, they mate known the result as
        follows:--_Rouge gagne et couleur perd.--Rouge perd et couleur
        gagne_.

        At _roulette_, the _tailleurs_ are those who put the ball in
        motion and announce the result.

        At _passe-dix_, every time the dice are thrown, the _tailleurs_
        announce how many the person playing has gained.

        Opposite the _tailleur_, and on his right and left, are persons
        called _croupiers_, whose business it is to pay and to collect
        money.

        Behind the _tailleurs_ and _croupiers_ are inspectors, to see
        that too much is not given in payment, besides an indefinite
        number of secret inspectors, who are only known to the proprietors.
        There are also _maitres de maison_, who are called to decide
        disputes; and _messieurs de la chambre_, who furnish cards to
        the _pontes_, and serve them with beer, &c., which is to be
        had _gratis_. Moreover, there is a _grand maitre_, to whom the
        apartments, tables, &c., belong.

        When a stranger enters these apartments, he will soon find near
        him some obliging men of mature age, who, with an air of prudence
        and sagacity, proffer their advice. As these advisers perfectly
        understand _their own_ game, if their _proteges_ lose, the mentors
        vanish; but it they win, the counsellor comes nearer, congratulates
        the happy player, insinuates that it was by following his advice
        that fortune smiled on him, and finally succeeds in borrowing a
        small sum of money on honour. Many of these loungers have no
        other mode of living.

        There is likewise another room, furnished with sofas, called
        _chamber des blesses_, which is far from being the most
        thinly peopled.

        The bank pays in ready money every successful stake and sweeps
        off the losings with wooden instruments, called _rateaux_
        (rakes).

        It was in one of the houses in this quarter that the late Marshal
        Blucher won and lost very heavy sums, during the occupation of
        Paris by the allied armies.

        There are two gaming-houses in Paris of a more splendid description
        than those of the Palais Royal, where dinners or suppers are given,
        and where ladies are admitted.--_Galignani's History of Paris_.


       *       *       *       *       *


A RETROSPECT.


  Oh, when I was a tiny boy,
  My days and nights were full of joy;
    My mates were blithe and kind!--
  No wonder that I sometimes sigh,
  And dash the tear-drop from my eye.
    To cast a look behind!

  A hoop was an eternal round
  Of pleasure. In those days I found
    A top a joyous thing;--
  But now those past delights I drop;
  My head alas! is all my top,
    And careful thoughts the string!

  My marbles--once my bag was stor'd,--
  Now I must play with Elgin's lord,--
    With Theseus for a taw!
  My playful horse has slipt his string.
  Forgotten all his capering,
    And harness'd to the law!

  My kite--how fast and fair it flew.
  Whilst I, a sort of Franklin, drew
    My pleasure from the sky!
  'Twas paper'd o'er with studious themes,--
  The tasks I wrote--my present dreams
    Will never soar so high!

  My joys are wingless all, and dead;
  My dumps are made of more than lead;
    My flights soon find a fall;
  My fears prevail, my fancies droop,
  Joy never cometh with a hoop,
    And seldom with a call!

  My football's laid upon the shelf;
  I am a shuttlecock, myself
    The world knocks to and fro;--
  My archery is all unlearn'd,
  And grief against myself has turn'd
    My sorrow and my bow!

  No more in noontide sun I bask;
  My authorship's an endless task,
    My head's ne'er out of school;
  My heart is pain'd with scorn and slight;
  I have too many foes to fight,
    And friends grown strangely cool!

  The very chum that shar'd my cake
  Holds out so cold a hand to shake,
    It makes me shrink and sigh:--
  On this I will not dwell and hang,
  The changeling would not feel a pang
    Though these should meet his eye!

  No skies so blue or so serene
  As these;--no leaves look half so green
    As cloth'd the play-ground tree!
  All things I lov'd are altered so,
  Nor does it ease my heart to know
    That change resides in me.

  O, for the garb that mark'd the boy!
  The trousers made of corduroy.
    Well ink'd with black and red;
  The crownless hat, ne'er deem'd an ill--
  It only let the sunshine still
    Repose upon my head!

  O, for that small, small beer anew!
  And (heaven's own type) that mild sky-blue
    That wash'd my sweet meals down!
  The master even!--and that small turk
  That fagg'd me!--worse is now my work,--
    A fag; for all the town!

  The "Arabian Nights'" rehears'd in bed!
  The "Fairy Tales" in school-time read
    By stealth, 'twixt verb and noun!
  The angel form that always walk'd
  In all my dreams, and look'd, and talk'd.
    Exactly like Miss Brown!

  The _omne bene_--Christmas come!
  The prize of merit, won for home'--
    Merit had prizes then!
  But now I write for days and days
  For fame--a deal of empty praise,
    Without the silver pen.

  Then home, sweet home! the crowded coach--
  The joyous shout--the loud approach--
    The winding horn like ram's!
  The meeting sweet that made me thrill,
  The sweetmeats almost sweeter still,
    No "_satis_" to the "_jams!_"

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGLISH DRESS.

(_To the Editor of the Mirror_.)


Mr. Editor.--In No. 200 of the MIRROR, you will find an article,
entitled _Female Fashions during the early part of the Last
Century_. The author then promised to give a description of the dress
of the English gentlemen of the same period, but as no such description
has _yet_ appeared in your pages, I trust you will insert the
annexed at your first convenient opportunity.

G.W.N.


_Dress of the English Gentlemen during the Early part of the Last
Century._

In the reign of King William III., the English gentlemen affected to
dress like their dependents. Their hats were laced, and their coats and
waistcoats were embroidered with gold and silver fringe; indeed it
really became extremely difficult to distinguish a man of quality from
one of his lackeys. They did not, however, long persevere in this
ridiculous imitation, for they soon afterwards, like the ladies,
servilely followed the French fashions. The great partiality of the
English _beau monde_ towards the _bon ton_ of France, was a
wonderful advantage to that country--an advantage which the English
government in vain endeavoured to abolish, although a heavy duty was
imposed on all French ribbon and lace imported into this kingdom. Many
millions were annually expended in French cambric, muslin, ribbon, and
lace, which useless expenditure very sensibly injured our commercial
transactions with other nations.

Perukes and long wigs were worn at the revolution; but these being
greatly inconvenient in all weathers, some people _tied up_ their
wigs, which was the first occasion of short wigs coming into fashion.
Some few years afterwards, bob-wigs were adopted by the gentlemen,
especially by those of the army and the navy.

The English costume was remarkably neat and plain anterior to the year
1748; at which period, however, all gentlemen rather resembled military
officers than private individuals, for their coats were not only richly
embroidered with gold and silver, but they even assumed the cockade in
their hats, and carried _long_ rapiers at their sides. At length this
imposing attire was adopted by the merchants and tradesmen of the
metropolis, and soon afterwards by the most notorious rogues and
pickpockets in town, so that when any person with a laced coat, a
cockade, and a sword, walked along the streets of London, it was
absolutely impossible to determine whether he affected to be thought a
nobleman, a military officer, a tradesman, or a pickpocket, for he bore
an equal resemblance to each of these characters.

In the year 1749, hair-powder was used by the _finished_ gentlemen,
though the use of it, a year or two previous, was prohibited in every
class of society. Of the costume of this period (_i.e._ about
1749), the immortal Hogarth, in his works, has left us numerous
specimens, which need no comment here: his productions, indeed, are so
equal in merit, that it is impossible to decide which is his _ne plus
ultra_.

In conclusion, I would advise the reader to refer to a few of Hogarth's
prints, for they will admirably serve to illustrate the above
observations on the fashions and habits of our forefathers.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Astronomical Occurrences_

_FOR NOVEMBER, 1827._

(_For the Mirror_.)


Should the afternoon of Saturday, the 3rd of the month, prove
favourable, we shall be afforded an opportunity of witnessing another of
those interesting phenomena--eclipses, at least the latter part of one,
a portion of it only being visible to the inhabitants of this island;
the defect above alluded to is a lunar one. The passage of the moon
through the earth's shadow commences at 3 h. 29 m. 34 s. afternoon; she
rises at Greenwich at 4 h. 45 m. 34 s. with the northern part of her disk
darkened to the extent of nearly 10 digits. The greatest obscuration
will take place at 5 h. 7 m. 42 s. when 10-1/2 digits will be eclipsed; she
then recedes from the earth's shadow, when the sun's light will first be
perceived extending itself on her lower limb towards the east; it will
gradually increase till she entirely emerges from her veil of darkness,
the extreme verge of which leaves her at her upper limb 32 deg. from her
vertex, or highest point of her disc.

We have the following in "Moore," some years ago, on the nature and
causes of eclipses of the sun and moon:--

  "Far different sun's and moon's eclipses are,
  The moon's are often, but the sun's more rare
  The moon's do much deface her beauty bright;
  Sol's do not his, but hide from us his sight:
  It is the earth the moon's defect procures,
  'Tis the moon's shadow that the sun obscures.
  Eastward, moon's front beginneth first to lack,
  Westward, sun's brows begin their mourning black:
  Moon's eclipses come when she most glorious shines,
  Sun's in moon's wane, when beauty most declines;
  Moon's general, towards heaven and earth together,
  Sun's but to earth, nor to all places neither."


The Sun enters _Sagittarius_ on the 23rd, at 1 h. 2 m. morning.

Mercury will be visible on the 10th, in 10 deg. of _Sagittarius_, a
little after sunset, being then at his greatest eastern elongation; he
is stationary on the 20th, and passes his inferior conjunction on the
30th, at 1-3/4 h. afternoon.

Venus is in conjunction with the above planet on the 24th, at 9 h.
evening; she sets on the 1st at 5 h. 7 m., and on the 30th at 4 h. 47 m.
evening.

Jupiter may be seen before sunrise making his appearance above the
horizon about 5 h.; he is not yet distant enough from the sun to render
the eclipses of his satellites visible to us.

A small comet has just been discovered, situated in one of the feet of
_Cassiopea_. It is invisible to the naked eye, and appears
approaching the pole with great rapidity.

PASCHE.

       *       *       *       *       *




RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

DOMESTIC ECONOMY OF THE ROMANS IN THE FOURTH CENTURY.


A recent discovery has added to our information the most extensive
series of statistical data, which make known from an official act, and
by numerical figures, the state of the Roman empire 1500 years ago; the
price of agricultural and ordinary labour; the relative value of money;
the abundance or scarcity of certain natural productions; the use, more
or less common, of particular sorts of food; the multiplication of
cattle and of flocks; the progress of horticulture; the abundance of
vineyards of various qualities; the common use of singular meats, and
dishes, which we think betrays a corruption of taste; in short the
relation of the value existing between the productions of agriculture
and those of industry, from whence we obtain a proof of the degree of
prosperity which both had reached at this remote period.

This precious archaeological monument is an edict of Diocletian,
published in the year 303 of our era, and fixing the price of labour and
of food in the Roman empire. The first part of this edict was found by
Mr. William Hanks, written upon a table of stone, which he discovered at
Stratonice, now called Eskihissar in Asia Minor. The second part, which
was in the possession of a traveller lately returned from the Levant,
has been, brought from Rome to London by M. de Vescovali, and Colonel
Leake intends to publish a literal translation of it. This agreement of
so many persons of respectable character, and known talents, excludes
all doubts respecting the authenticity of the monument.

The imperial edict of Diocletian is composed of more than twenty-four
articles. It is quite distinct from that delivered the preceding year
for taxing the price of corn in the eastern provinces, and it contained
no law upon the value of corn. It fixed for all the articles which it
enumerated a maximum, which was the price in times of scarcity. For all
the established prices it makes use of the _Roman Denarii_; and it
applies them to the _sextarius_ for liquids, and to the _Roman
pound_ for the things sold by weight.

Before the Augustan age, the _denarius_ was equal to eighteen sous
of our money; but it diminished gradually in value, and under Diocletian
its value was not above nine sous of French money, and 45 centimes. The
Roman pound was equivalent to 12 ounces, and the _sextarius_ which
was the sixth part of a conge, came near to the old Paris chopin, or
half a litre.

Proceeding on these data, M. Moreau de Jonnes has formed a table,
showing, 1. the maximum in Roman measures, the same as the established
imperial edict; and 2. the mean price of objects _formed from_ half
the maximum, and reduced into French measures.

The following is the table drawn up by M. Moreau de Jonnes. The
slightest inspection of it will enable us to appreciate the importance
of this archaeological discovery, for no monument of antiquity has
furnished so long a series of numerical terms, of statistical data, and
positive testimony of the civil life and domestic economy of the Greeks
and Romans:--


I.--PRICE OF LABOUR.

                                            Maximum       Mean Price
                                            in Roman      in English
                                            Money.        Money.

                                                            L. s. d.
  To a day labourer                             25 Den.     0  4  8
  Do. for interior works                        50          0  9  4
  To a mason                                    50          0  9  4
  To a maker of mortar                          50          0  9  4
  To a marble-cutler, or maker of mosaic work   60          0 11  4
  To a tailor for making clothes                50          0  9  4
  Do. for sewing only                            6          0  1  1-1/2
  For making shoes for the patricians          150          1  8  1
  Do. shoes for workmen                        120          1  2  8
  for the military                             100          0 18  8
  for the senators                             100          0 18  8
  for the women                                 60          0 11  4
  Military sandals                              75          0 14  0-1/2
  To a barber for each man                       2          0  0  4-1/2
  To a veterinary surgeon for shearing the
    animals and trimming their feet              6          0  1  1-1/2
  Do. for currycombing and  cleaning them       20          0  9  9
  For one month's lessons in architecture      100          0 18  8
  To an advocate for a petition
    to the tribunal                            250          2  6  9
  For the hearing a cause                     1000          9  7  6


II.--PRICE OF WINES.

                                            Maximum        Mean Price of
                                            of the         the English
                                            Sextarius.     Pint, Wine
                                                            Measure.

                                                            L. s. d.
  Picene, Tiburtine, Sabine, Aminean,
    Surentine, Setinian, and Falernian wines    30 Den.     0  5  4
  Old wines of the first quality                24          0  4  2-3/4
  Do. of second quality                         16          0  2 10
  Country wine                                   8          0  1  5
  Beer                                           4          0  0  4-3/4
  Beer of Egypt                                  2          0  0  2
  Spiced wine of Asia                           30          0  5  4
  Barley wine of Attica                         24          0  4  2-3/4
  Decoction of different raising                16          0  2 10


III.--PRICE OF MEAT.

                                            Maximum         Mean Price of
                                            of the Roman    the French
                                            pound.          pound.

                                                            L. s. d.
  Flesh of oxen                                  8 Den.     0  2  0
  Do. of mutton, or of goat                      8          0  2  0
  Do. of lamb, or of kid                        12          0  3  0
  Do. of pork                                   12          0  3  0
  The best lard                                 16          0  4  0
  The best ham from Westphalia, from Cerdagne,
    or from the country of the Marses           20          0  5  0
  Fat fresh pork                                12          0  3  0
  Belly and tripe                               16          0  4  0
  Pig's liver, enlarged by being
    fattened upon figs                          16          0  4  0
  Pig's feet, each                               4          0  0  9
  Fresh pork sausages, weighing one ounce        2          0  0  4-1/2
  Do. of fresh beef                             16          0  2  9-1/2
  Pork sausages and seasoned                    16          0  4  0
  Do. of smoked beef                            10          0  2  9-1/2


IV.--POULTRY AND GAME.

                                            Maximum       Mean Price of
                                            of each       each in English
                                            in Roman      Money.
                                              Money.
                                                            L. s. d.
  One fat male peacock                         250 Den.     2  6  9
  One fat female peacock                       200          1 17  9
  One male wild peacock                        125          1  3  4-1/2
  One female wild peacock                      100          0 18  8
  One fat goose                                200          2  6  9
  Do. not fat                                  100          0 18  8
  One hen                                       60          0 11  4
  One duck                                      40          0  7  4
  One partridge                                 30          0  5  8
  One hare                                     150          1  8  1
  One rabbit                                    40          0  7  4


V.--FISH.

                                            Maximum       Mean Price of
                                            of each       each in English
                                            in Roman      Money.
                                            Money.
                                                            L. s. d.
  Sea fish, first quality                       24 Den.     0  4  6
  Do. second quality                            16          0  3  0
  River fish, first quality                     12          0  2  3
  Do. second quality                             8          0  1  6
  Salt fish                                      6          0  1  1-1/2
  Oysters, per hundred                         100          0 18  8


VI.--CULINARY VEGETABLES.


  Lettuces, the best, five together              4          0  0  9
  Do. second quality, ten together               4          0  0  9
  Common cabbages, the best, single              4          0  0  9
  Cauliflower, the best, five together           4          0  0  9
  Do. second quality, ten together               4          0  0  9
  Beet root, the best, five together             4          0  0  9
  Do. second quality, ten together               4          0  0  9
  Radishes, the largest                          4          0  0  9


VII.--OTHER PROVISIONS.

                                          Maximum         Mean Price of
                                          of the          each in English
                                          Sextarius in    Money.
                                          Roman Money.

                                                            L. s. d.
  Honey, the best                               40 Den.     0 15  0
  Do. second quality                            20          0  7  6
  Oil, the best quality                         40          0 15  0
  Do. the second quality                        24          0  9  1
  Vinegar                                        6          0  3  3
  A stimulant to excite the appetite, made
    of the essence of fish                       6          0  2  3
  Dried cheese, the Roman pound                 12          0  3  4 Fr. lb.


We are much surprised at the very high prices in this table. Labour and
provisions cost ten and twenty times as much as with us. But when we
come to compare the price of provisions with the price of labour the
dearness of all the necessaries of life appears still more excessive.
M. Moreau de Jonnes makes this comparison. He brings together from the
edicts of Diocletian a great many facts given by historians, and he
shows, that, if the abundance of the precious metals has any influence
on raising the prices, the want of labour, industry, and of produce,
must cause it also.

These considerations point out in the strongest manner the poverty of
this royal people, of whom two-thirds, if not three-fourths, were
reduced to live on fish and cheese, and drink piquette, when the expense
of the table of Vitellius amounted, in a single year, to 175 millions of
Francs.--_Brewster's Journal of Science._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GATHERER.

"I am but a _Gatherer_ and disposer of other men's stuff."--_Wotton_

       *       *       *       *       *


TWELVE GOLDEN RULES OF CHARLES I.


1. Profane no divine ordinances. 2. Touch no state matters. 3. Urge no
healths. 4. Pick no quarrels. 5. Maintain no ill opinions. 6. Encourage
no vice. 7. Repeat no grievances. 8. Reveal no secrets. 9. Make no
comparisons. 10. Keep no bad company. 11. Make no long meals. 12. Lay no
wagers.

       *       *       *       *       *


EPIGRAMS,

_Written on the Union_, 1801, _by a celebrated Barrister of Dublin._

_Adapted to the Commercial Failures_, 1800.


  Why should we exclaim, that the times are so bad,
    Pursuing a querulous strain?
  When Erin gives up all the rights that she had,
    What _right has she left to com_plain?

       *       *       *       *       *


  The Cit complains to all he meets,
  That grass will grow in Dublin streets,
    And swears that all is over!
  Short-sighted mortals, can't you see,
  Your mourning will be chang'd to glee--
    For then you'll live in _clover_.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Necessitas non habet legem._

ON SIR JOHN ANSTRUTHER.

_By the Honourable Thomas Erskine._

  Necessity and Law are alike each other:
  Necessity has no Law--nor has Anstruther.


       *       *       *       *       *


EPITAPH ON A CONTROVERSIALIST.


On the death of that turbulent and refractory enthusiast, John Lilburne,
_alias Free-born John, alias Lilburne the Trouble-world_, there
appeared the following epigrammatic epitaph:--

  Is John departed, and is Lilburne gone?
  Farewell to both, to Lilburne and to John!
  Yet being gone, take this advice from me,
  Let them not _both_ in one grave buried be.

  Here lay ye John; lay Lilburne thereabout,
  For if they both should meet, they would fall out.


This alluded to a saying, that John Lilburne was so quarrelsome, that if
he were the only man in the world, John would quarrel with Lilburne, and
Lilburne with John. Lilburne, it will be remembered, was a sad thorn in
Cromwell's sore side, for which the protector amply repaid him.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOSPITAL OF SURGERY.


A new surgical hospital is to be forthwith erected in the neighbourhood
of Charing Cross, where the King, with his usual and characteristic
munificence, has given a spot of ground on which it is to be erected. A
benevolent individual has given, within these few days, 1,500 l.
towards a fund for the building.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. Limbird, 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) and sold by all Newssmen and Booksellers._



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT,
AND INSTRUCTION, VOL. 10, ISSUE 281, NOVEMBER 3, 1827***


******* This file should be named 16098.txt or 16098.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/0/9/16098



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

