The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Opera, by R.A. Streatfeild

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Opera
       A Sketch of the Development of Opera. With full Descriptions
       of all Works in the Modern Repertory

Author: R.A. Streatfeild

Other: J. A. Fuller-Maitland

Release Date: July 9, 2005 [EBook #16248]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OPERA ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







THE OPERA

A Sketch of the Development of Opera. With full Descriptions of all
Works in the Modern Repertory.

BY R.A. STREATFEILD

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY J.A. FULLER-MAITLAND

_THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED_

LONDON

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LIMITED

PHILADELPHIA: J.B. LIPPINCOTT CO.




CONTENTS

CHAP.      PAGE

INTRODUCTION      vii

I. THE BEGINNINGS OF OPERA      1

PERI--MONTEVERDE--CAVALLI--CESTI--CAMBERT--LULLI--PURCELL--
KEISER--SCARLATTI--HANDEL

II. THE REFORMS OF GLUCK      19

III. OPERA BUFFA, OPERA COMIQUE, AND SINGSPIEL      40

PERGOLESI--ROUSSEAU--MONSIGNY--GRETRY--CIMAROSA--HILLER

IV. MOZART      52

V. THE CLOSE OF THE CLASSICAL PERIOD      74

MEHUL--CHERUBINI--SPONTINI--BEETHOVEN--BOIELDIEU

VI. WEBER AND THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL      87

WEBER--SPOHR--MARSCHNER--KREUTZER--LORTZING--NICOLAI--FLOTOW--
MENDELSSOHN--SCHUBERT--SCHUMANN

VII. ROSSINI, DONIZETTI, AND BELLINI      106

VIII. MEYERBEER AND FRENCH OPERA      126

HEROLD--MEYERBEER--BERLIOZ--HALEVY--AUBER

IX. WAGNER'S EARLY WORKS       151

X. WAGNER'S LATER WORKS      176

XL. MODERN FRANCE     214

GOUNOD--THOMAS--BIZET--SAINT SAENS--REYER---MASSENET--BRUNEAU--
CHARPENTIER--DEBUSSY

XII. MODERN ITALY     262

VERDI--BOITO--PONCHIELLI--PUCCINI--MASCAGNI--LEONCAVALLO--GIORDANO

XIII. MODERN GERMAN AND SLAVONIC OPERA     302

CORNELIUS--GOETZ---GOLDMARK--HUMPERDINCK--STRAUSS--SMETANA--
GLINKA--PADEREWSKI

XIV. ENGLISH OPERA     323

BALFE--WALLACE--BENEDICT--GORING THOMAS--MACKENZIE--STANFORD--
SULLIVAN--SMYTH

INDEX OF OPERAS     351

INDEX OF COMPOSERS     361




INTRODUCTION


If Music be, among the arts, 'Heaven's youngest-teemed star', the
latest of the art-forms she herself has brought forth is
unquestionably Opera. Three hundred years does not at first seem a
very short time, but it is not long when it covers the whole period of
the inception, development, and what certainly looks like the
decadence, of an important branch of man's artistic industry. The art
of painting has taken at least twice as long to develop; yet the three
centuries from Monteverde to Debussy cover as great a distance as that
which separates Cimabue from Degas. In operatic history, revolutions,
which in other arts have not been accomplished in several generations,
have got themselves completed, and indeed almost forgotten, in the
course of a few years. Twenty-five years ago, for example, Wagner's
maturer works were regarded, by the more charitable of those who did
not admire them, as intelligible only to the few enthusiasts who had
devoted years of study to the unravelling of their mysteries; the
world in general looked askance at the 'Wagnerians', as they were
called, and professed to consider the shyly-confessed admiration of
the amateurs as a mere affectation. In that time we have seen the
tables turned, and now there is no more certain way for a manager to
secure a full house than by announcing one of these very works. An
even shorter period covers the latest Italian renaissance of music,
the feverish excitement into which the public was thrown by one of its
most blatant productions, and the collapse of a set of composers who
were at one time hailed as regenerators of their country's art.

But though artistic conditions in opera change quickly and continually,
though reputations are made and lost in a few years, and the real
reformers of music themselves alter their style and methods so radically
that the earlier compositions of a Gluck, a Wagner, or a Verdi present
scarcely any point of resemblance to those later masterpieces by which
each of these is immortalised, yet the attitude of audiences towards
opera in general changes curiously little from century to century; and
plenty of modern parallels might be found, in London and elsewhere, to
the story which tells of the delay in producing 'Don Giovanni' on
account of the extraordinary vogue of Martini's 'Una Cosa Rara', a work
which only survives because a certain tune from it is brought into the
supper-scene in Mozart's opera.

There is a good deal of fascination, and some truth, in the theory
that different nations enjoy opera in different ways. According to
this, the Italians consider it solely in relation to their sensuous
emotions; the French, as producing a titillating sensation more or
less akin to the pleasures of the table; the Spaniards, mainly as a
vehicle for dancing; the Germans, as an intellectual pleasure; and the
English, as an expensive but not unprofitable way of demonstrating
financial prosperity. The Italian might be said to hear through what
is euphemistically called his heart, the Frenchman through his palate,
the Spaniard through his toes, the German through his brain, and the
Englishman through his purse. But in truth this does not represent the
case at all fairly. For, to take only modern instances, Italy, on
whose congenial soil 'Cavalleria Rusticana' and the productions it
suggested met with such extraordinary success, saw also in 'Falstaff'
the wittiest and most brilliant musical comedy since 'Die
Meistersinger', and in 'Madama Butterfly' a lyric of infinite
delicacy, free from any suggestion of unworthy emotion. Among recent
French operas, works of tragic import, treated with all the intricacy
of the most advanced modern schools, have been received with far
greater favour than have been shown to works of the lighter class
which we associate with the genius of the French nation; and of late
years the vogue of such works as 'Louise' or 'Pelleas et Melisande'
shows that the taste for music without any special form has conquered
the very nation in which form has generally ranked highest. In
Germany, on the other hand, some of the greatest successes with the
public at large have been won by productions which seem to touch the
lowest imaginable point of artistic imbecility; and the
ever-increasing interest in musical drama that is manifested year
after year by London audiences shows that higher motives than those
referred to weigh even with Englishmen. The theory above mentioned
will not hold water, for there are, as a matter of fact, only two ways
of looking at opera: either as a means, whether expensive or not, of
passing an evening with a very little intellectual trouble, some
social _eclat_, and a certain amount of pleasure, or as a form of art,
making serious and justifiable claims on the attention of rational
people. These claims of opera are perhaps more widely recognised in
England than they were some years ago; but there are still a certain
number of persons, and among them not a few musical people, who
hesitate to give opera a place beside what is usually called
'abstract' music. Music's highest dignity is, no doubt, reached when
it is self-sufficient, when its powers are exerted upon its own
creations, entirely without dependence upon predetermined emotions
calling for illustration, and when the interest of the composition as
well as the material is conveyed exclusively in terms of music. But
the function of music in expressing those sides of human emotion which
lie too deep for verbal utterance, a function of which the gradual
recognition led on to the invention of opera, is one that cannot be
slighted or ignored; in it lies a power of appeal to feeling that no
words can reach, and a very wonderful definiteness in conveying exact
shades of emotional sensation. Not that it can of itself suggest the
direction in which the emotions are to be worked upon; but this
direction once given from outside, whether by a 'programme' read by
the listener or by the action and accessories of the stage, the force
of feeling can be conveyed with overwhelming power, and the whole
gamut of emotion, from the subtlest hint or foreshadowing to the fury
of inevitable passion, is at the command of him who knows how to wield
the means by which expression is carried to the hearer's mind. And in
this fact--for a fact it is--lies the completest justification of
opera as an art-form. The old-fashioned criticism of opera as such,
based on the indisputable fact that, however excited people may be,
they do not in real life express themselves in song, but in
unmodulated speech, is not now very often heard. With the revival in
England of the dramatic instinct, the conventions of stage declamation
are readily accepted, and if it be conceded that the characters in a
drama may be allowed to speak blank verse, it is hardly more than a
step further to permit the action to be carried on by means of vocal
utterance in music. Until latterly, however, English people, though
taking pleasure in the opera, went to it rather to hear particular
singers than to enjoy the work as a whole, or with any consideration
for its dramatic significance. We should not expect a stern and
uncompromising nature like Carlyle's to regard the opera as anything
more than a trivial amusement, and that such was his attitude towards
it appears from his letters; but it is curious to see that a man of
such strongly pronounced dramatic tastes as Edward FitzGerald, though
devoted to the opera in his own way, yet took what can only be called
a superficial view of its possibilities.

The Englishman who said of the opera, 'At the first act I was
enchanted; the second I could just bear; and at the third I ran away',
is a fair illustration of an attitude common in the eighteenth
century; and in France things were not much better, even in days when
stage magnificence reached a point hardly surpassed in history. La
Bruyere's 'Je ne sais comment l'opera avec une musique si parfaite, et
une depense toute royale, a pu reussir a m'ennuyer', shows how little
he had realised the fatiguing effect of theatrical splendour too
persistently displayed. St. Evremond finds juster cause for his bored
state of mind in the triviality of the subject-matter of operas, and
his words are worth quoting at some length: 'La langueur ordinaire ou
je tombe aux operas, vient de ce que je n'en ai jamais vu qui ne m'ait
paru meprisable dans la disposition du sujet, et dans les vers. Or,
c'est vainement que l'oreille est flattee, et que les yeux sont
charmes, si l'esprit ne se trouve pas satisfait; mon ame
d'intelligence avec mon esprit plus qu'avec mes sens, forme une
resistance aux impressions qu'elle peut recevoir, ou pour le moins
elle manque d'y preter un consentement agreable, sans lequel les
objets les plus voluptueux meme ne sauraient me donner un grand
plaisir. Une sottise chargee de musique, de danses, de machines, de
decorations, est une sottise magnifique; c'est un vilain fonds sous de
beaux dehors, ou je penetre avec beaucoup de desagrement.'

The cant phrase in use in FitzGerald's days, 'the lyric stage', might
have conveyed a hint of the truth to a man who cared for the forms of
literature as well as its essence. For, in its highest development,
opera is most nearly akin to lyrical utterances in poetry, and the most
important musical revolution of the present century has been in the
direction of increasing, not diminishing, the lyrical quality of
operatic work. The Elizabethan writers--not only the dramatists, but the
authors of romances--interspersed their blank verse or their prose
narration with short lyrical poems, just as in the days of Mozart the
airs and concerted pieces in an opera were connected by wastes of
recitative that were most aptly called 'dry'; and as it was left to a
modern poet to tell, in a series of lyrics succeeding one another
without interval, a dramatic story such as that of _Maud_, so was it a
modern composer who carried to completion, in 'Tristan und Isolde', the
dramatic expression of passion at the highest point of lyrical
utterance. It is no more unnatural for the raptures of Wagner's lovers,
or the swan-song of ecstasy, to be sung, than for the young man whose
character Tennyson assumes, to utter himself in measured verse,
sometimes of highly complex structure. The two works differ not in kind,
but in degree of intensity, and to those whose ears are open to the
appeal of music, the power of expression in such a case as this is
greater beyond all comparison than that of poetry, whether declaimed or
merely read. That so many people recognise the rational nature of opera
in the present day is in great measure due to Wagner, since whose
reforms the conventional and often idiotic libretti of former times have
entirely disappeared. In spite of the sneers of the professed
anti-Wagnerians, which were based as often as not upon some ineptitude
on the part of the translator, not upon any inherent defect in the
original, the plots invented by Wagner have won for themselves an
acceptance that may be called world-wide. And whatever be the verdict on
his own plots, there can be no question as to the superiority of the
average libretto since his day. No composer dare face the public of the
present day with one of the pointless, vapid sets of rhymes, strung
together with intervals of bald recitative, that pleased our
forefathers, and equally inconceivable is the re-setting of libretti
that have served before, in the manner of the eighteenth century
composers, a prodigious number of whom employed one specially admired
'book' by Metastasio.

Unfortunately those who take an intelligent interest in opera do not
even yet form a working majority of the operatic audience in any
country. While the supporters of orchestral, choral, or chamber music
consist wholly of persons, who, whatever their degree of musical
culture, take a serious view of the art so far as they can appreciate
it, and therefore are unhampered by the necessity of considering the
wishes of those who care nothing whatever about the music they perform.
In connection with every operatic enterprise the question arises of how
to cater for a great class who attend operatic performances for any
other reason rather than that of musical enjoyment, yet without whose
pecuniary support the undertaking must needs fail at once. Nor is it
only in England that the position is difficult. In countries where the
opera enjoys a Government subsidy, the influences that make against true
art are as many and as strong as they are elsewhere. The taste of the
Intendant in a German town, or that of the ladies of his family, may be
on such a level that the public of the town, over the operatic
arrangement of which he presides, may very well be compelled to hear
endless repetitions of flashy operas that have long passed out of every
respectable repertory; and in other countries the Government official
within whose jurisdiction the opera falls may, and very often does,
enforce the engagement of some musically incompetent prima donna in whom
he, or some scheming friend, takes a particular interest.

The moral conditions of the operatic stage are no doubt far more
satisfactory than they were, and in England the general deodorisation of
the theatre has not been unfelt in opera; but even without the unworthy
motives which too often drew the bucks and the dandies of a past day to
the opera-house, the influence of the unintelligent part of the
audience upon the performers is far from good in an artistic sense. It
is this which fosters that mental condition with which all who are
acquainted with the operatic world are only too familiar. Now, just as
in the days when Marcello wrote his _Teatro alla moda_, there is
scarcely a singer who does not hold, and extremely few who do not
express, the opinion that all the rest of the profession is in league
against them; and by this supposition, as well as by many other
circumstances, an atmosphere is created which is wholly antagonistic to
the attainment of artistic perfection. All honour is due to the purely
artistic singers who have reached their position without intrigue, and
whose influence on their colleagues is the best stimulus to wholesome
endeavour. It is beyond question that the greater the proportion of
intelligent hearers in any audience or set of subscribers, the higher
will the standard be, not only in vocalisation, but in that combination
which makes the artist as distinguished from the mere singer. For every
reason, too, it is desirable that opera should be given, as a general
rule, in the language of the country in which the performance takes
place, and although the system of giving each work with its own original
words is an ideally perfect one for trained hearers, yet the
difficulties in the way of its realisation, and the absurdities that
result from such expedients as a mixture of two or more languages in the
same piece, render it practically inexpedient for ordinary operatic
undertakings. The recognition of English as a possible medium of vocal
expression may be slow, but it is certainly making progress, and in the
last seasons at Covent Garden it was occasionally employed even before
the fashionable subscribers, who may be presumed to have tolerated it,
since they did not manifest any disapproval of its use. Since the first
edition of this book was published, the Utopian idea, as it then seemed,
of a national opera for London has advanced considerably towards
realisation, and it is certain that when it is set on foot, the English
language alone will be employed.

While opera is habitually performed in a foreign language, or, if in
English, by those who have not the art of making their words
intelligible, there will always be a demand for books that tell the
story more clearly than is to be found in the doggerel translations of
the libretti, unless audiences return with one accord to the attitude of
the amateurs of former days, who paid not the slightest attention to the
plot of the piece, provided only that their favourite singers were
taking part. Very often in that classic period the performers themselves
knew nothing and cared less about the dramatic meaning of the works in
which they appeared, and a venerable anecdote is current concerning a
certain supper party, the guests at which had all identified themselves
with one or other of the principal parts in 'Il Trovatore'. A question
being asked as to the plot of the then popular piece, it was found that
not one of the company had the vaguest notion what it was all about.
The old lady who, during the church scene in 'Faust', asked her
grand-daughter, in a spirit of humble inquiry, what the relationship was
between the two persons on the stage, is no figment of a diseased
imagination; the thing actually happened not long ago, and one is left
to wonder what impression the preceding scenes had made upon the hearer.

Of books that profess to tell the stories of the most popular operas
there is no lack, but, as a rule, the plots are related in a 'bald and
unconvincing' style, that leaves much to be desired, and sometimes in a
confused way that necessitates a visit to the opera itself in order to
clear up the explanation. There are useful dictionaries, too, notably
the excellent 'Opern-Handbuch' of Dr Riemann, which gives the names and
dates of production of every opera of any note; but the German scientist
does not always condescend to the detailed narration of the stories,
though he gives the sources from which they may have been derived. Mr
Streatfeild has hit upon the happy idea of combining the mere
story-telling part of his task with a survey of the history of opera
from its beginning early in the seventeenth century to the present day.
In the course of this historical narrative, the plots of all operas that
made a great mark in the past, or that have any chance of being revived
in the present, are related clearly and succinctly, and with a rare and
delightful absence of prejudice. The author finds much to praise in
every school; he is neither impatient of old opera nor intolerant of
new developments which have yet to prove their value; and he makes us
feel that he is not only an enthusiastic lover of opera as a whole, but
a cultivated musician. The historical plan adopted, in contradistinction
to the arrangement by which the operas are grouped under their titles in
alphabetical order, involves perhaps a little extra trouble to the
casual reader; but by the aid of the index, any opera concerning which
the casual reader desires to be informed can be found in its proper
place, and the chief facts regarding its origin and production are given
there as well as the story of its action.


J.A. FULLER-MAITLAND

_June 1907_




THE OPERA




CHAPTER I

THE BEGINNINGS OF OPERA


PERI--MONTEVERDE--CAVALLI--CESTI--CAMBERT--LULLI--PURCELL--
KEISER--SCARLATTI--HANDEL


The early history of many forms of art is wrapped in obscurity. Even in
music, the youngest of the arts, the precise origin of many modern
developments is largely a matter of conjecture. The history of opera,
fortunately for the historian, is an exception to the rule. All the
circumstances which combine to produce the idea of opera are known to
us, and every detail of its genesis is established beyond the
possibility of doubt.

The invention of opera partook largely of the nature of an accident.
Late in the sixteenth century a few Florentine amateurs, fired with the
enthusiasm for Greek art which was at that time the ruling passion of
every cultivated spirit in Italy, set themselves the task of
reconstructing the conditions of the Athenian drama. The result of their
labours, regarded as an attempted revival of the lost glories of Greek
tragedy, was a complete failure; but, unknown to themselves, they
produced the germ of that art-form which, as years passed on, was
destined, in their own country at least, to reign alone in the
affections of the people, and to take the place, so far as the altered
conditions permitted, of the national drama which they had fondly hoped
to recreate.

The foundations of the new art-form rested upon the theory that the
drama of the Greeks was throughout declaimed to a musical accompaniment.
The reformers, therefore, dismissed spoken dialogue from their drama,
and employed in its place a species of free declamation or recitative,
which they called _musica parlante_. The first work in which the new
style of composition was used was the 'Dafne' of Jacopo Peri, which was
privately performed in 1597. No trace of this work survives, nor of the
musical dramas by Emilio del Cavaliere and Vincenzo Galilei to which the
closing years of the sixteenth century gave birth. But it is best to
regard these privately performed works merely as experiments, and to
date the actual foundation of opera from the year 1600, when a public
performance of Peri's 'Euridice' was given at Florence in honour of the
marriage of Maria de' Medici and Henry IV. of France. A few years later
a printed edition of this work was published at Venice, a copy of which
is now in the library of the British Museum, and in recent times it has
been reprinted, so that those who are curious in these matters can study
this protoplasmic opera at their leisure. Expect for a few bars of
insignificant chorus, the whole work consists of the accompanied
recitative, which was the invention of these Florentine reformers. The
voices are accompanied by a violin, _chitarone_ (a large guitar), _lira
grande_, _liuto grosso_, and _gravicembalo_ or harpsichord, which filled
in the harmonies indicated by the figured bass. The instrumental
portions of the work are poor and thin, and the chief beauty lies in the
vocal part, which is often really pathetic and expressive. Peri
evidently tried to give musical form to the ordinary inflections of the
human voice, how successfully may be seen in the Lament of Orpheus which
Mr. Morton Latham has reprinted in his 'Renaissance of Music,' The
original edition of 'Euridice' contains an interesting preface, in which
the composer sets forth the theory upon which he worked, and the aims
which he had in view. It is too long to be reprinted here, but should be
read by all interested in the early history of opera.

With the production of 'Euridice' the history of opera may be said to
begin; but if the new art-form had depended only upon the efforts of
Peri and his friends, it must soon have languished and died. With all
their enthusiasm, the little band of Florentines had too slight an
acquaintance with the science of music to give proper effect to the
ideas which they originated. Peri built the ship, but it was reserved
for the genius of Claudio Monteverde to launch it upon a wider ocean
than his predecessor could have dreamed of. Monteverde had been trained
in the polyphonic school of Palestrina, but his genius had never
acquiesced in the rules and restrictions in which the older masters
delighted. He was a poor contrapuntist, and his madrigals are chiefly
interesting as a proof of how ill the novel harmonies of which he was
the discoverer accorded with the severe purity of the older school But
in the new art he found the field his genius required. What had been
weakness and license in the madrigal became strength and beauty in the
opera. The new wine was put into new bottles, and both were preserved.
Monteverde produced his 'Arianna' in 1607, and his 'Orfeo' in 1608, and
with these two works started opera upon the path of development which
was to culminate in the works of Wagner. 'Arianna,' which, according to
Marco da Gagliano, himself a rival composer of high ability, 'visibly
moved all the theatre to tears,' is lost to us save for a few
quotations; but 'Orfeo' is in existence, and has recently been reprinted
in Germany. A glance at the score shows what a gulf separates this work
from Peri's treatment of the same story. Monteverde, with his orchestra
of thirty-nine instruments--brass, wood, and strings complete--his rich
and brilliant harmonies, sounding so strangely beautiful to ears
accustomed only to the severity of the polyphonic school, and his
delicious and affecting melodies, sometimes rising almost to the dignity
of an aria, must have seemed something more than human to the eager
Venetians as they listened for the first time to music as rich in colour
as the gleaming marbles of the Ca d'Oro or the radiant canvases of
Titian and Giorgione.

The success of Monteverde had its natural result. He soon had pupils
and imitators by the score. The Venetians speedily discovered that they
had an inherent taste for opera, and the musicians of the day delighted
to cater for it. Monteverde's most famous pupil was Cavalli, to whom may
with some certainty be attributed an innovation which was destined to
affect the future of opera very deeply. In his time, to quote Mr.
Latham's 'Renaissance of Music,' 'the _musica parlante_ of the earliest
days of opera was broken up into recitative, which was less eloquent,
and aria, which was more ornamental. The first appearance of this change
is to be found in Cavalli's operas, in which certain rhythmical
movements called "arias" which are quite distinct from the _musica
parlante_, make their appearance. The music assigned by Monteverde to
Orpheus when he is leading Eurydice back from the Shades is undoubtedly
an air, but the situation is one to which an air is appropriate, and
_musica parlante_ would be inappropriate. If the drama had been a play
to be spoken and not sung, there would not have been any incongruity in
allotting a song to Orpheus, to enable Eurydice to trace him through the
dark abodes of Hades. But the arias of Cavalli are not confined to such
special situations, and recur frequently,' Cavalli had the true Venetian
love of colour. In his hands the orchestra began to assume a new
importance. His attempts to give musical expression to the sights and
sounds of nature--the murmur of the sea, the rippling of the brook and
the tempestuous fury of the winds--mark an interesting step in the
history of orchestral development. With Marcantonio Cesti appears
another innovation of scarcely less importance to the history of opera
than the invention of the aria itself--the _da capo_ or the repetition
of the first part of the aria in its entirety after the conclusion of
the second part. However much the _da capo_ may have contributed to the
settlement of form in composition, it must be admitted that it struck at
the root of all real dramatic effect, and in process of time degraded
opera to the level of a concert. Cesti was a pupil of Carissimi, who is
famous chiefly for his sacred works, and from him he learnt to prefer
mere musical beauty to dramatic truth. Those of his operas which remain
to us show a far greater command of orchestral and vocal resource than
Monteverde or Cavalli could boast, but so far as real expression and
sincerity are concerned, they are inferior to the less cultured efforts
of the earlier musicians. It would be idle to attempt an enumeration of
the Venetian composers of the seventeenth century and their works. Some
idea of the musical activity which prevailed may be gathered from the
fact that while the first public theatre was opened in 1637, before the
close of the century there were no less than eleven theatres in the city
devoted to the performance of opera alone.

Meanwhile the enthusiasm for the new art-form spread through the cities
of Italy. According to an extant letter of Salvator Rosa's, opera was in
full swing in Rome during the Carnival of 1652. The first opera of
Provenzale, the founder of the Neapolitan school, was produced in 1658.
Bologna, Milan, Parma, and other cities soon followed suit. France, too,
was not behindhand, but there the development of the art soon deserved
the name a new school of opera, distinct in many important particulars
from its parent in Italy. The French nobles who saw the performance of
Peri's 'Euridice' at the marriage of Henry IV. may have carried back
tales of its splendour and beauty to their own country, but Paris was
not as yet ripe for opera. Not until 1647 did the French Court make the
acquaintance of the new art which was afterwards to win some of its most
brilliant triumphs in their city. In that year a performance of Peri's
'Euridice' (which, in spite of newer developments, had not lost its
popularity) was given in Paris under the patronage of Cadinal Mazarin.
This was followed by Cavalli's 'Serse,' conducted by the composer
himself. These performances quickened the latent genius of the French
people, and Robert Cambert, the founder of their school, hastened to
produce operas, which, though bearing traces of Italian influence, were
nevertheless distinctively French in manner and method. His works, two
of which are known to us, 'Pomone' and 'Les Peines et les Plaisirs de
l'Amour,' were to a certain extent a development of the masques which
had been popular in Paris for many years. They are pastoral and
allegorical in subject, and are often merely a vehicle for fulsome
adulation of the 'Roi Soleil.' But in construction they are operas pure
and simple. There is no spoken dialogue, and the music is continuous
from first to last. Cambert's operas were very successful, and in
conjunction with his librettist Perrin he received a charter from the
King in 1669, giving him the sole right of establishing opera-houses in
the kingdom. Quarrels, however, ensued. Cambert and Perrin separated.
The charter was revoked, or rather granted to a new-comer, Giovanni
Battista Lulli, and Cambert, in disgrace, retired to England, where he
died. Lulli (1633-1687) left Italy too young to be much influenced by
the developments of opera in that country, and was besides too good a
man of business to allow his artistic instinct to interfere with his
chance of success. He found Cambert's operas popular in Paris, and
instead of attempting any radical reforms, he adhered to the form which
he found ready made, only developing the orchestra to an extent which
was then unknown, and adding dignity and passion to the airs and
recitatives. Lulli's industry was extraordinary. During the space of
fourteen years he wrote no fewer than twenty operas, conceived upon a
grand scale, and produced with great magnificence. His treatment of
recitative is perhaps his strongest point, for in spite of the beauty of
one or two isolated songs, such as the famous 'Bois epais' in 'Amadis'
and Charon's wonderful air in 'Alceste,' his melodic gift was not great,
and his choral writing is generally of the most unpretentious
description. But his recitative is always solid and dignified, and often
impassioned and pathetic. Music, too, owes him a great debt for his
invention of what is known as the French form of overture, consisting
of a prelude, fugue, and dance movement, which was afterwards carried to
the highest conceivable pitch of perfection by Handel.

Meanwhile an offshoot of the French school, transplanted to the banks of
the Thames, had blossomed into a brief but brilliant life under the
fostering care of the greatest musical genius our island has ever
produced, Henry Purcell. Charles II. was not a profound musician, but he
knew what sort of music he liked, and on one point his mind was made
up--that he did not like the music of the elderly composers who had
survived the Protectorate, and came forward at his restoration to claim
the posts which they had held at his father's court. Christopher
Gibbons, Child, and other relics of the dead polyphonic school were
quietly dismissed to provincial organ-lofts, and Pelham Humphreys, the
most promising of the 'Children of the Chapel Royal,' was sent over to
Paris to learn all that was newest in music at the feet of Lulli.
Humphreys came back, in the words of Pepys, 'an absolute Monsieur,' full
of the latest theories concerning opera and music generally, and with a
sublime contempt for the efforts of his stay-at-home colleagues. His own
music shows the French influence very strongly, and in that of his pupil
Henry Purcell (1658-1695) it may also be perceived, although coloured
and transmuted by the intensely English character of Purcell's own
genius. For many years it was supposed that Purcell's first and,
strictly speaking, his only opera, 'Dido and AEneas,' was written by him
at the age of seventeen and produced in 1675. Mr. Barclay Squire has now
proved that it was not produced until much later, but this scarcely
lessens the wonder of it, for Purcell can never have seen an opera
performed, and his acquaintance with the new art-form must have been
based upon Pelham Humphrey's account of the performances which he had
seen in Paris. Possibly, too, he may have had opportunities of studying
the engraved scores of some of Lulli's operas, which, considering the
close intercourse between the courts of France and England, may have
found their way across the Channel. 'Dido and AEneas' is now universally
spoken of as the first English opera. Masques had been popular from the
time of Queen Elizabeth onwards, which the greatest living poets and
musicians had not disdained to produce, and Sir William Davenant had
given performances of musical dramas 'after the manner of the Ancients'
during the closing years of the Commonwealth, but it is probable that
spoken dialogue occurred in all these entertainments, as it certainly
did in Locke's 'Psyche,' Banister's 'Circe,' in fact, in all the
dramatic works of this period which were wrongly described as operas. In
'Dido and AEneas,' on the contrary, the music is continuous throughout.
Airs and recitatives, choruses and instrumental pieces succeed each
other, as in the operas of the Italian and French schools. 'Dido and
AEneas' was written for performance at a young ladies' school kept by
one Josias Priest in Leicester Fields and afterwards at Chelsea. The
libretto was the work of Nahum Tate, the Poet Laureate of the time. The
opera is in three short acts, and Virgil's version of the story is
followed pretty closely save for the intrusion of a sorceress and a
chorus of witches who have sworn Dido's destruction and send a messenger
to AEneas, disguised as Mercury, to hasten his departure. Dido's death
song, which is followed by a chorus of mourning Cupids, is one of the
most pathetic scenes ever written, and illustrates in a forcible manner
Purcell's beautiful and ingenious use of a ground-bass. The gloomy
chromatic passage constantly repeated by the bass instruments, with
ever-varying harmonies in the violins, paints such a picture of the
blank despair of a broken heart as Wagner himself, with his immense
orchestral resources, never surpassed. In the general construction of
his opera Purcell followed the French model, but his treatment of
recitative is bolder and more various than that of Lulli, while as a
melodist he is incomparably superior. Purcell never repeated the
experiment of 'Dido and AEneas.' Musical taste in England was presumably
not cultivated enough to appreciate a work of so advanced a style. At
any rate, for the rest of his life, Purcell wrote nothing for the
theatre but incidental music. Much of this, notably the scores of 'Timon
of Athens,' 'Bonduca,' and 'King Arthur,' is wonderfully beautiful, but
in all of these works the spoken dialogue forms the basis of the piece,
and the music is merely an adjunct, often with little reference to the
main interest of the play. In 'King Arthur' occurs the famous 'Frost
Scene,' the close resemblance of which to the 'Choeur de Peuples des
Climats Glaces' in Lulli's 'Isis' would alone make it certain that
Purcell was a careful student of the French school of opera.

Opera did not take long to cross the Alps, and early in the seventeenth
century the works of Italian composers found a warm welcome at the
courts of southern Germany. But Germany was not as yet ripe for a
national opera. During the first half of the century there are records
of one or two isolated attempts to found a school of German opera, but
the iron heel of the Thirty Years' War was on the neck of the country,
and art struggled in vain against overwhelming odds. The first German
opera, strictly so called, was the 'Dafne' of Heinrich Schuetz, the words
of which were a translation of the libretto already used by Peri. Of
this work, which was produced in 1627, all trace has been lost.
'Seelewig,' by Sigmund Staden, which is described as a 'Gesangweis auf
italienische Art gesetzet,' was printed at Nuremberg in 1644, but there
is no record of its ever having been performed. To Hamburg belongs the
honour of establishing German opera upon a permanent basis. There, in
1678, some years before the production of Purcell's 'Dido and AEneas,' an
opera-house was opened with a performance of a Singspiel entitled 'Der
erschaffene, gefallene und aufgerichtete Mensch,' the music of which was
composed by Johannn Theile. Three other works, all of them secular,
were produced in the same year. The new form of entertainment speedily
became popular among the rich burghers of the Free City, and composers
were easily found to cater for their taste.

For many years Hamburg was the only German town where opera found a
permanent home, but there the musical activity must have been
remarkable. Reinhard Keiser (1673-1739), the composer whose name stands
for what was best in the school, is said alone to have produced no fewer
than a hundred and sixteen operas. Nearly all of these works have
disappeared, and those that remain are for the most part disfigured by
the barbarous mixture of Italian and German which was fashionable at
Hamburg and in London too at that time. The singers were possibly for
the most part Italians, who insisted upon singing their airs in their
native language, though they had no objection to using German for the
recitatives, in which there was no opportunity for vocal display.
Keiser's music lacks the suavity of the Italian school, but his
recitatives are vigorous and powerful, and seem to foreshadow the
triumphs which the German school was afterwards to win in declamatory
music. The earliest operas of Handel (1685-1759) were written for
Hamburg, and in the one of them which Fate has preserved for us,
'Almira' (1704), we see the Hamburg school at its finest. In spite of
the ludicrous mixture of German and Italian there is a good deal of
dramatic power in the music, and the airs show how early Handel's
wonderful gift of melody had developed. The chorus has very little to
do, but a delightful feature of the work is to be found in the series of
beautiful dance-tunes lavishly scattered throughout it. One of these, a
Sarabande, was afterwards worked up into the famous air, 'Lascia ch' io
pianga,' in 'Rinaldo.' When the new Hamburg Opera-House was opened in
1874, it was inaugurated by a performance of 'Almira,' which gave
musicians a unique opportunity of realising to some extent what opera
was like at the beginning of the eighteenth century. In 1706 Handel left
Hamburg for the purpose of prosecuting his studies in Italy. There he
found the world at the feet of Alessandro Scarlatti (1659-1725), a
composer whose importance to the history of opera can scarcely be
over-estimated. He is said, like Cesti, to have been a pupil of
Carissimi, though, as the latter died in 1674, at the age of seventy, he
cannot have done much more than lay the foundation of his pupil's
greatness. The invention of the _da capo_ is generally attributed to
Scarlatti, wrongly, as has already been shown, since it appears in
Cesti's opera 'La Dori,' which was performed in 1663. But it seems
almost certain that Scarlatti was the first to use accompanied
recitative, a powerful means of dramatic expression in the hands of all
who followed him, while his genius advanced the science of
instrumentation to a point hitherto unknown.

Nevertheless, Scarlatti's efforts were almost exclusively addressed to
the development of the musical rather than the dramatic side of opera,
and he is largely responsible for the strait-jacket of convention in
which opera was confined during the greater part of the eighteenth
century, in fact until it was released by the genius of Gluck.

Handel's conquest of Italy was speedy and decisive. 'Rodrigo,' produced
at Florence in 1707, made him famous, and 'Agrippina' (Venice, 1708)
raised him almost to the rank of a god. At every pause in the
performance the theatre rang with shouts of 'Viva il caro Sassone,' and
the opera had an unbroken run of twenty-seven nights, a thing till then
unheard of. It did not take Handel long to learn all that Italy could
teach him. With his inexhaustible fertility of melody and his complete
command of every musical resource then known, he only needed to have his
German vigour tempered by Italian suppleness and grace to stand forth as
the foremost operatic composer of the age. His Italian training and his
theatrical experience gave him a thorough knowledge of the capabilities
of the human voice, and the practical common-sense which was always one
of his most striking characteristics prevented him from ever treating it
from the merely instrumental point of view, a pitfall into which many of
the great composers have fallen. He left Italy for London in 1710, and
produced his 'Rinaldo' at the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket the
following year. It was put upon the stage with unexampled magnificence,
and its success was prodigious. 'Rinaldo' was quickly followed by such
succession of masterpieces as put the ancient glories of the Italian
stage to shame. Most of them were produced at the Haymarket Theatre,
either under Handel's own management or under the auspices of a company
known as the Royal Academy of Music. Handel's success made him many
enemies, and he was throughout his career the object of innumerable
plots on the part of disappointed and envious rivals. The most active of
these was Buononcini, himself a composer of no mean ability, though
eclipsed by the genius of Handel. Buononcini's machinations were so far
successful--though he himself was compelled to leave England in disgrace
for different reasons--that in 1741, after the production of his
'Deidamia,' Handel succumbed to bankruptcy and a severe attack of
paralysis. After this he wrote no more for the stage, but devoted
himself to the production of those oratorios which have made his name
famous wherever the English language is spoken.

In spite of their transcendent beauties, the form of Handel's operas has
long banished them from the stage. Handel, with all his genius, was not
one of the great revolutionists of the history of music. He was content
to bring existing forms to the highest possible point of perfection,
without seeking to embark upon new oceans of discovery. Opera in his day
consisted of a string of airs connected by recitative, with an
occasional duet, and a chorus to bring down the curtain at the end of
the work. The airs were, as a rule, fully accompanied. Strings,
hautboys, and bassoons formed the groundwork of the orchestra. If
distinctive colouring or sonority were required, the composer used
flutes, horns, harps, and trumpets, while to gain an effect of a special
nature, he would call in the assistance of lutes and mandolins, or
archaic instruments such as the viola da gamba, violetta marina,
cornetto and theorbo. The _recitativo secco_ was accompanied by the
harpsichord, at which the composer himself presided. The _recitativo
stromentato_, or accompanied recitative, was only used to emphasise
situations of special importance. Handel's incomparable genius infused
so much dramatic power into this meagre form, that even now the truth
and sincerity of his songs charm us no less than their extraordinary
melodic beauty. But it is easy to see that in the hands of composers
less richly endowed, this form was fated to degenerate into a mere
concert upon the stage. The science of vocalisation was cultivated to
such a pitch of perfection that composers were tempted, and even
compelled, to consult the tastes of singers rather than dramatic truth.
Handel's successors, such as Porpora and Hasse, without a tithe of his
genius, used such talent as they possessed merely to exhibit the vocal
dexterity of popular singers in the most agreeable light. The favourite
form of entertainment in these degraded times was the pasticcio, a
hybrid production composed of a selection of songs from various popular
operas, often by three or four different composers, strung together
regardless of rhyme or reason. Even in Handel's lifetime the older
school of opera was tottering to its fall. Only the man was needed who
should sweep the mass of insincerity from the stage and replace it by
the purer ideal which had been the guiding spirit of Peri and
Monteverde.




CHAPTER II

THE REFORMS OF GLUCK


The death of Lulli left French opera established upon a sure foundation.
The form which he perfected seemed, with all its faults, to commend
itself to the genius of the nation, and for many years a succession of
his followers and imitators, such as Campra and Destouches, continued to
produce works which differed little in scope and execution from the
model he had established. The French drama of the seventeenth century
had reached such a high point of development that its influence over the
sister art was all-powerful. The composers of the French court willingly
sacrificed musical to declamatory interest, and thus, while they steered
clear of the mere tunefulness which was the rock on which Italian
composers made shipwreck, they fell into the opposite extreme and wrote
works which seem to us arid and jejune. Paris at this time was curiously
isolated from the world of music, and it is strange to find how little
the development of Italian opera affected the French school. Marais
(1650-1718) was more alive to Southern influences than most of his
contemporaries, and in his treatment of the aria there is a perceptible
approach to Italian methods; but Rameau (1683-1764) brought back French
opera once more to its distinctive national style. Though he followed
the general lines of Lulli's school, he brought to bear upon it a richer
sense of beauty and a completer musical organisation than Lulli ever
possessed. In his treatment of declamation pure and simple, he was
perhaps Lulli's inferior, but in all other respects he showed a decided
advance upon his predecessor. He infused new life into the monotonous
harmony and well-worn modulations which had done duty for so many years.
His rhythms were novel and suggestive, and the originality and resource
of his orchestration opened the eyes of Frenchmen to new worlds of
beauty and expression. Not the least important part of Rameau's work lay
in the influence which his music exerted upon the genius of the man to
whom the regeneration of opera is mainly due. Christoph Willibald Gluck
(1714-1787) was the son of a forester. Such musical education as he
received he acquired in Italy, and his earlier works are written in the
Italian style which was fashionable at the time. There are few
indications in his youthful operas of the power which was destined later
to work such changes in the world of opera. He was at first
whole-hearted in his devotion to the school of Porpora, Hasse and the
others who did so much to degrade Italian opera. 'Artaserse,' his first
work, was produced in 1741, the year in which Handel bade farewell for
ever to the stage. It was successful, and was promptly followed by
others no less fortunate. In 1745 Gluck visited England where he
produced 'La Caduta de' Giganti,' a work which excited the contempt of
Handel. In the following year he produced 'Piramo e Tisbe,' a pasticcio,
which failed completely. Its production, however, was by no means labour
lost, if it be true, as the story goes, that it was by its means that
Gluck's eyes were opened to the degradation to which opera had been
reduced. It was about this time that Gluck first heard Rameau's music,
and the power and simplicity of it compared with the empty sensuousness
of Italian opera, must have materially strengthened him in the desire to
do something to reform and purify his art. Yet, in spite of good
resolutions, Gluck's progress was slow. In 1755 he settled at Vienna,
and there, under the shadow of the court, he produced a series of works
in which the attempt to realise dramatic truth is often distinctly
perceptible, though the composer had as yet not mastered the means for
its attainment. But in 1762 came 'Orfeo ed Euridice,' a work which
placed Gluck at the head of all living operatic composers, and laid the
foundation of the modern school of opera.

The libretto of 'Orfeo' was by Calzabigi, a prominent man of letters,
but it seems probable that Gluck's own share in it was not a small one.
The careful study which he had given to the proper conditions of opera
was not likely to exclude so important a question as that of the
construction and diction of the libretto, and the poem of 'Orfeo' shows
so marked an inclination to break away from the conventionality and sham
sentiment of the time that we can confidently attribute much of its
originality to the influence of the composer himself. The opening scene
shows the tomb of Eurydice erected in a grassy valley. Orpheus stands
beside it plunged in the deepest grief, while a troop of shepherds and
maidens bring flowers to adorn it. His despairing cry of 'Eurydice'
breaks passionately upon their mournful chorus, and the whole scene,
though drawn in simple lines, is instinct with genuine pathos. When the
rustic mourners have laid their gifts upon the tomb and departed,
Orpheus calls upon the shade of his lost wife in an air of exquisite
beauty, broken by expressive recitative. He declares his resolution of
following her to the underworld, when Eros enters and tells him of the
condition which the gods impose on him if he should attempt to rescue
Eurydice from the shades. Left to himself, Orpheus discusses the
question of the rescue in a recitative of great intrinsic power, which
shows at a glance how far Gluck had already distanced his predecessors
in variety and dramatic strength. The second act takes place in the
underworld. The chorus of Furies is both picturesque and effective, and
the barking of Cerberus which sounds through it is a touch, which though
its _naivete_ may provoke a smile, is characteristic of Gluck's
strenuous struggle for realism. Orpheus appears and pleads his cause in
accents of touching entreaty. Time after time his pathetic song is
broken by a sternly decisive 'No,' but in the end he triumphs, and the
Furies grant him passage. The next scene is in the Elysian fields.
After an introduction of charming grace, the spirits of the blessed are
discovered disporting themselves after their kind. Orpheus appears, lost
in wonder at the magical beauty of all around him. Here again is a
remarkable instance of Gluck's pictorial power. Simple as are the means
he employs, the effect is extraordinary. The murmuring of streams, the
singing of birds, and the placid beauty of the landscape are depicted
with a touch which, if light, is infallibly sure. Then follows the
famous scene in which Orpheus, forbidden to look at the face of his
beloved, tries to find her by touch and instinct among the crowd of
happy spirits who pass him by. At last she approaches, and he clasps her
in his arms, while a chorus of perfect beauty bids him farewell as he
leads her in triumph to the world above. The third act shows the two
wandering in a cavern on their way to the light of day. Eurydice is
grieved that her husband should never look into her eyes, and her faith
is growing cold. After a scene in which passionate beauty goes side by
side with strange relapses into conventionality, Orpheus gives way to
her prayers and reproaches, and turns to embrace her. In a moment she
sinks back lifeless, and he pours forth his despair in the immortal
strains of 'Che faro senza Euridice.' Eros then appears, and tells him
that the gods have had pity upon his sorrow. He transports him to the
Temple of Love, where Eurydice, restored to life, is awaiting him, and
the opera ends with conventional rejoicings.

Beautiful as 'Orfeo' is--and the best proof of its enduring beauty is
that, after nearly a hundred and fifty years of change and development,
it has lost none of its power to charm--we must not be blind to the fact
that it is a strange combination of strength and weakness. Strickly
speaking, Gluck was by no means a first-rate musician, and in 1762 he
had not mastered his new gospel of sincerity and truth so fully as to
disguise the poverty of his technical equipment. Much of the orchestral
part of the work is weak and thin. Berlioz even went so far as to
describe the overture as _une niaiserie incroyable_, and the vocal part
sometimes shows the influence of the empty formulas from which Gluck was
trying to escape. Throughout the opera there are unmistakable traces of
Rameau's influence, indeed it is plain that Gluck frankly took Rameau's
'Castor et Pollux' as his model when he sat down to compose 'Orfeo.' The
plot of the earlier work, the rescue of Pollux by Castor from the
infernal regions, has of course much in common with that of 'Orfeo' and
it is obvious that Gluck took many hints from Rameau's musical treatment
of the various scenes which the two works have in common.

In spite, however, of occasional weaknesses, 'Orfeo' is a work of
consummate loveliness. Compared to the tortured complexity of our modern
operas, it stands in its dignified simplicity like the Parthenon beside
the bewildering beauty of a Gothic cathedral; and its truth and grandeur
are perhaps the more conspicuous because allied to one of those classic
stories which even in Gluck's time had become almost synonymous with
emptiness and formality.

Five years elapsed between the production of 'Orfeo' and of Gluck's next
great opera, 'Alceste'; but that these years were not wasted is proved
by the great advance which is perceptible in the score of the later
work. The libretto of 'Alceste' is in many ways superior to that of
'Orfeo,' and Gluck's share of the work shows an incontestable
improvement upon anything he had yet done. His touch is firmer, and he
rarely shows that inclination to drop back into the old conventional
style, which occasionally mars the beauty of 'Orfeo.' Gluck wrote a
preface to the published score of 'Alceste,' which is one of the most
interesting documents in the history of music. It proves
conclusively--not that any proof is necessary--that the composer had
thought long and seriously about the scope of his art, and that the
reforms which he introduced were a deliberate attempt to reconstruct
opera upon a new basis of ideal beauty. If he sometimes failed to act up
to his own theories, it must be remembered in what school he had been
trained, and how difficult must have been the attempt to cast off in a
moment the style which had been habitual to him for so many years.

When 'Alceste' was produced in Paris in 1776, Gluck made some
alterations in the score, some of which were scarcely improvements. In
his later years he became so completely identified with the French
school that the later version is now the more familiar.

The opera opens before the palace at Pherae, where the people are
gathered to pray Heaven to spare the life of Admetus, who lies at the
point of death. Alcestis appears, and, after an air of great dignity and
beauty, bids the people follow her to the temple, there to renew their
supplications. The next scene shows the temple of Apollo. The high
priest and the people make passionate appeal to the god for the life of
their king, and the oracle replies that Admetus must perish, if no other
will die in his place. The people, seized with terror, fly from the
place, and Alcestis, left alone, determines to give up her own life for
that of her husband. The high priest accepts her devotion, and in the
famous air 'Divinites du Styx,' she offers herself a willing sacrifice
to the gods below. In the original version the second act opened with a
scene in a gloomy forest, in which Alcestis interviews the spirits of
Death, and, after renewing her vow, obtains leave to return and bid
farewell to her husband. The music of this scene is exceedingly
impressive, and intrinsically it must have been one of the finest in the
opera, but it does not advance the action in the least, and its omission
sensibly increases the tragic effect of the drama. In the later version
the act begins with the rejoicings of the people at the recovery of
Admetus. Alcestis appears, and after vainly endeavouring to conceal her
anguish from the eyes of Admetus is forced to admit that she is the
victim whose death is to restore him to life. Admetus passionately
refuses the sacrifice, and declares that he will rather die with her
than allow her to immolate herself on his account. He rushes wildly into
the palace, and Alcestis bids farewell to life in an air of
extraordinary pathos and beauty. The third act opens with the
lamentations of the people for their departed queen. Hercules, released
for a moment from his labours, enters and asks for Admetus. He is
horrified at the news of the calamity which has befallen his friend, and
announces his resolve of rescuing Alcestis from the clutches of Death.
Meanwhile Alcestis has reached the portals of the underworld, and is
about to surrender herself to the powers of Hell. Admetus, who has not
yet given up hope of persuading her to relinquish her purpose, appears,
and pleads passionately with her to leave him to his doom. His prayers
are vain, and Alcestis is tearing herself for the last time from his
arms, when Hercules rushes in. After a short struggle he defeats the
powers of Death and restores Alcestis to her husband. The character of
Hercules did not appear in the earlier version of the opera, and in fact
was not introduced until after Gluck had left Paris, a few days after
the production of 'Alceste.' Most of the music allotted to him is
probably not by Gluck at all, but seems to have been written by Gossec,
who was at that time one of the rising musicians in Paris. The close of
the opera is certainly inferior to the earlier parts, but the
introduction of Hercules is a great improvement upon the original
version of the last act, in which the rescue of Alcestis is effected by
Apollo. The French librettist did not treat the episode cleverly, and
indeed all the last scene is terribly prosaic, and lacking in poetical
atmosphere. To see how the appearance of the lusty hero in the halls of
woe can heighten the tragic interest by the sheer force of contrast, we
must turn to the 'Alcestis' of Euripides, where the death of Alcestis
and the strange conflict of Hercules with Death is treated with just
that touch of mystery and unearthliness which is absent from the
libretto which Gluck was called upon to set. Of the music of 'Alceste,'
its passion and intensity, it is impossible to speak too highly. It has
pages of miraculous power, in which the deepest tragedy and the most
poignant pathos are depicted with unfaltering certainty. It is strange
to think by what simple means Gluck scaled the loftiest heights.
Compared with our modern orchestra the poverty of the resources upon
which he depended seems almost ludicrous. Even in the vocal part of
'Alceste' he was so careful to avoid anything like the sensuous beauty
of the Italian style, that sometimes he fell into the opposite extreme
and wrote merely arid rhetoric. Yet he held so consistently before him
his ideal of dramatic truth, that his music has survived all changes of
taste and fashion, and still delights connoisseurs as fully as on the
day it was produced. 'Paride ed Elena,' Gluck's next great work, shows
his genius under a more lyrical aspect. Here he gives freer reign to the
romanticism which he had designedly checked in 'Alceste,' and much of
the music seems in a measure to anticipate the new influences which
Mozart was afterwards to infuse into German music. Unfortunately the
libretto of 'Paride ed Elena,' though possessing great poetical merit,
is monotonous and deficient in incident, so that the opera has never won
the success which it deserves, and is now almost completely forgotten.

The admiration for the French school of opera which had been aroused in
Gluck by hearing the works of Rameau was not by any means a passing
fancy. His music proves that the French school had more influence upon
his development than the Italian, so it was only natural that he should
wish to have an opportunity of introducing his works to Paris. That
opportunity came in 1774, when, after weary months of intrigue and
disappointment, his 'Iphigene en Aulide' was produced at the Academie
Royale de Musique. After that time Gluck wrote all his greatest works
for the French stage, and became so completely identified with the
country of his adoption, that nowadays we are far more apt to think of
him as a French than as a German composer. 'Iphigenie en Aulide' is
founded upon Racine's play, which in its turn had been derived from the
tragedy of Euripides. The scene of the opera is laid at Aulis, where the
Greek fleet is prevented by contrary winds from starting for Troy.
Diana, who has been unwittingly insulted by Agamemnon, demands a human
sacrifice, and Iphigenia, the guiltless daughter of Agamemnon, has been
named by the high priest Calchas as the victim. Iphigenia and her mother
Clytemnestra are on their way to join the fleet at Aulis, and Agamemnon
has sent a despairing message to bid them return home, hoping thus to
avoid the necessity of sacrificing his child. Meanwhile the Greek hosts,
impatient of delay, clamour for the victim, and are only appeased by the
assurance of Calchas that the sacrifice shall take place that very day.
Left alone with Agamemnon, Calchas entreats him to submit to the will of
the gods. Agamemnon, torn by conflicting emotions, at first refuses, but
afterwards, relying upon the message which he has sent to his wife and
daughter, promises that if Iphigenia sets foot in Aulis he will give her
up to death. He has hardly spoken the words when shouts of joy announce
the arrival of Clytemnestra and Iphigenia. The message has miscarried,
and they are already in the camp. As a last resource Agamemnon now tells
Clytemnestra that Achilles, the lover of her daughter, is false, hoping
that this will drive her from the camp. Clytemnestra calls upon
Iphigenia to thrust her betrayer from her bosom, and Iphigenia replies
so heroically that it seems as though Agamemnon's plot to save his
daughter's life might actually succeed. Unfortunately Achilles himself
appears, and, after a scene of reproach and recrimination, succeeds in
dispelling Iphigenia's doubts and winning her to complete
reconciliation.

The second act begins with the rejoicings over the marriage of
Iphigenia. The general joy is turned to lamentation by the discovery of
Agamemnon's vow and the impending doom of Iphigenia. Clytemnestra
passionately entreats Achilles to save her daughter, which he promises
to do, though Iphigenia professes herself ready to obey her father. In
the following scene Achilles meets Agamemnon, and, after a long
altercation, swears to defend Iphigenia with the last drop of his blood.
He rushes off, and Agamemnon is left in anguish to weigh his love for
his daughter against his dread of the angry gods, Love triumphs and he
sends Areas, his attendant, to bid Clytemnestra fly with Iphigenia home
to Mycenae.

In the third act the Greeks are angrily demanding their victim. Achilles
prays Iphigenia to fly with him, but she is constant to her idea of
duty, and bids him a pathetic farewell. Achilles, however, is not to be
persuaded, and in an access of noble rage swears to slay the priest upon
the steps of the altar rather than submit to the sacrifice of his love.
After another farewell scene with her mother Iphigenia is led off, while
Clytemnestra, seeing in imagination her daughter under the knife of the
priest, bursts forth into passionate blasphemy. Achilles and his
Thessalian followers rush in to save Iphigenia, and for a time the
contest rages fiercely, but eighteenth-century convention steps in.
Calchas stops the combat, saying that the gods are at length appeased;
Iphigenia is restored to Achilles, and the opera ends with general
rejoicings.

'Iphigenie en Aulide' gave Gluck a finer opportunity than he had yet
had. The canvas is broader than in 'Alceste' or 'Orfeo,' and the
emotions are more varied. The human interest, too, is more evenly
sustained, and the supernatural element, which played so important a
part in the two earlier works, is almost entirely absent. Nevertheless,
fine as much of the music is, the restraint which Gluck exercised over
himself is too plainly perceptible, and the result is that many of the
scenes are stiff and frigid. There is scarcely a trace of the delightful
lyricism which rushes through 'Paride ed Elena' like a flood of
resistless delight. Gluck had set his ideal of perfect declamatory truth
firmly before him, and he resisted every temptation to swerve into the
paths of mere musical beauty. He had not yet learnt how to combine the
two styles. He had not yet grasped the fact that in the noblest music
truth and beauty are one and the same thing.

In 'Armide,' produced in 1777, he made another step forward. The
libretto was the same as that used by Lulli nearly a hundred years
before. The legend, already immortalised by Tasso, was strangely
different from the classical stories which had hitherto inspired his
greatest works. The opening scene strikes the note of romanticism which
echoes through the whole opera. Armida, a princess deeply versed in
magic arts, laments that one knight, and one only, in the army of the
Crusaders has proved blind to her charms. All the rest are at her feet,
but Rinaldo alone is obdurate. She has had a boding dream, moreover, in
which Rinaldo has vanquished her, and all the consolations of her
maidens cannot restore her peace of mind. Hidraot, her uncle, entreats
her to choose a husband, but she declares that she will bestow her hand
upon no one but the conqueror of Rinaldo. While the chorus is
celebrating her charms, Arontes, a Paynim warrior, enters bleeding and
wounded, and tells how the prowess of a single knight has robbed him of
his captives. Armida at once recognises the hand of the recalcitrant
Rinaldo, and the act ends with her vows of vengeance against the
invincible hero.

The second act shows Rinaldo in quest of adventures which may win him
the favour of Godfrey of Bouillon, whose wrath he has incurred. Armida's
enchantments lead him to her magic gardens, where, amidst scenes of
voluptuous beauty, he yields to the fascinations of the place, lays down
his arms, and sinks into sleep. Armida rushes in, dagger in hand, but
the sight of the sleeping hero is too potent for her, and overcome by
passion, she bids the spirits of the air transport them to the bounds of
the universe. In the third act we find that Rinaldo has rejected the
love of the enchantress. Armida is inconsolable; she is ashamed of her
weakness, and will not listen to the well-meaning consolations of her
attendants. She calls upon the spirit of Hate, but when he appears she
rejects his aid, and still clings desperately to her fatal passion. The
fourth act, which is entirely superfluous, is devoted to the adventures
in the enchanted garden of Ubaldo and a Danish knight, two Crusaders who
have set forth with the intention of rescuing Rinaldo from the clutches
of the sorceress. The fifth act takes place in Armida's palace.
Rinaldo's proud spirit has at length been subdued, and he is completely
the slave of the enchantress. The duet between the lovers is of the most
bewitching loveliness, and much of it curiously anticipates the romantic
element which was to burst forth in a future generation. Armida tears
herself from Rinaldo's arms, and leaves him to be entertained by a
ballet of spirits, while she transacts some business with the powers
below. Ubaldo and the Danish knight now burst in, and soon bring Rinaldo
to a proper frame of mind. He takes a polite farewell of Armida, who in
vain attempts to prevent his going, and is walked off by his two
Mentors. Left alone, Armida calls on her demons to destroy the palace,
and the opera ends in wild confusion and tumult.

To say that 'Armide' recalls the romantic grace of 'Paride ed Elena,' is
but half the truth. The lyrical grace of the earlier work is as it were
concentrated and condensed in a series of pictures which for voluptuous
beauty surpass anything that had been written before Gluck's day.
Against the background formed by the magical splendour of the enchanted
garden, the figure of Armida stands out in striking relief. The mingled
pride and passion of the imperious princess are drawn with wonderful
art. Even while her passion brings her to the feet of her conqueror, her
haughty spirit rebels against her fate. Such weaknesses as the opera
contains are principally attributable to the libretto, which is
ill-constructed, and cold and formal in diction. Rinaldo is rather a
colourless person, and the other characters are for the most part merely
lay-figures, though the grim figure of Hate is drawn with extraordinary
power. But upon Armida the composer concentrated the full lens of his
genius, and for her he wrote music which satisfies every requirement of
dramatic truth, without losing touch of the lyrical beauty and
persuasive passion which breathes life into soulless clay.

In 'Iphigenie en Tauride,' the last of his great works, which was
produced in 1778, Gluck reached his highest point. Here he seems for the
first time thoroughly to fuse and combine the two elements which are for
ever at war in his earlier operas, musical beauty and dramatic truth.
Throughout the score of 'Iphigenie en Tauride' the declamation is as
vivid and true as in 'Alceste,' while the intrinsic loveliness of the
music yields not a jot to the passion-charged strains of 'Armide.' The
overture paints the gradual awakening of a tempest, and when the storm
is at its height the curtain rises upon the temple of Diana at Tauris,
where Iphigenia, snatched by the goddess from the knife of the
executioner at Aulis, has been placed as high priestess. The priestesses
in chorus beseech the gods to be propitious, and when the fury of the
storm is allayed, Iphigenia recounts her dream of Agamemnon's death, and
laments the woes of her house. She calls upon Diana to put an end to her
life, which already has lasted too long. Thoas, the king of the country,
now enters, alarmed by the outcries of the priestesses. He is a prey to
superstitious fears, and willingly listens to the advice of his
followers, that the gods can only be appeased by human blood. A message
is now brought that two young strangers have been cast upon the
rock-bound coast, and Thoas at once decides that they shall be the
victims. Orestes and Pylades are now brought in. They refuse to make
themselves known, and are bidden to prepare for death, while the act
closes with the savage delight of the Scythians.

The second act is in the prison. Orestes bewails his destiny, and
refuses the consolation which Pylades offers in a noble and famous song.
Pylades is torn from his friend's arms by the officers of the guard, and
Orestes, left to himself, after a paroxysm of madness sinks to sleep
upon the prison floor. His eyes are closed, but his brain is a prey to
frightful visions. The Furies surround him with horrible cries and
menaces, singing a chorus of indescribable weirdness. Lastly, the shade
of the murdered Clytemnestra passes before him, and he awakes with a
shriek to find his cell empty save for the mournful form of Iphigenia,
who has come to question the stranger as to his origin and the purpose
of his visit to Tauris. In broken accents he tells her--what is new to
her ears--the tale of the murder of Agamemnon, and the vengeance taken
upon Clytemnestra by himself; adding, in order to conceal his own
identity, that Orestes is also dead, and that Electra is the sole
remnant of the house of Atreus. Iphigenia bursts into a passionate
lament, and the act ends with her offering a solemn libation to the
shade of her brother.

In the third act Iphigenia resolves to free one of the victims, and to
send him with a message to Electra. A sentiment which she cannot explain
bids her choose Orestes, but the latter refuses to save his life at the
expense of that of his friend. A contention arises between the two,
which is only decided by Orestes swearing to take his own life if
Pylades is sacrificed. The precious scroll is thereupon entrusted to
Pylades, who departs, vowing to return and save his friend.

In the fourth act Iphigenia is a prey to conflicting emotions. A
mysterious sympathy forbids her to slay the prisoner, yet she tries to
steel her heart for the performance of her terrible task, and calls upon
Diana to aid her. Orestes is brought on by the priestesses, and while
urging Iphigenia to deal the blow, blesses her for the pity which stays
her hand. Just as the knife is about to descend, the dying words of
Orestes, 'Was it thus thou didst perish in Aulis, Iphigenia my sister?'
bring about the inevitable recognition, and the brother and sister rush
into each other's arms. But Thoas has yet to be reckoned with. He is
furious at the interruption of the sacrifice, and is about to execute
summary vengeance upon both Iphigenia and Orestes, when Pylades returns
with an army of Greek youths--whence he obtained them is not
explained--and despatches the tyrant in the nick of time. The opera
ends with the appearance of Pallas Athene, the patroness of Argos, who
bids Orestes and his sister return to Greece, carrying with them the
image of Diana, too long disgraced by the barbarous rites of the
Scythians.

'Echo et Narcisse,' an opera cast in a somewhat lighter mould, which was
produced in 1779, seems to have failed to please, and 'Iphigenie en
Tauride' may be safely taken as the climax of Gluck's career. It is the
happiest example of his peculiar power, and shows more convincingly than
any of its predecessors where the secret of his greatness really lay. He
was the first composer who treated an opera as an integral whole. He was
inferior to many of his predecessors, notably to Handel, in musical
science, and even in power of characterisation. But while their works
were often hardly more than strings of detached scenes from which the
airs might often be dissociated without much loss of effect, his operas
were constructed upon a principle of dramatic unity which forbade one
link to be taken from the chain without injuring the continuity of the
whole. In purely technical matters, too, his reforms were far-reaching
and important. He was first to make the overture in some sort a
reflection of the drama which it preceded, and he used orchestral
effects as a means of expressing the passion of his characters in a way
that had not been dreamed of before. He dismissed the harpsichord from
the orchestra, and strengthened his band with clarinets, an instrument
unknown to Handel. His banishment of _recitativo secco_, and his
restoration of the chorus to its proper place in the drama, were
innovations of vast importance to the history of opera, but the chief
strength of the influence which he exerted upon subsequent music lay in
his power of suffusing each of his operas in an atmosphere special to
itself.




CHAPTER III

OPERA BUFFA, OPERA COMIQUE, AND SINGSPIEL

PERGOLESI--ROUSSEAU--MONSIGNY--GRETRY--

CIMAROSA--HILLER


While Gluck was altering the course of musical history in Vienna,
another revolution, less grand in scope and more gradually accomplished,
but scarcely less important in its results, was being effected in Italy.
This was the development of opera buffa, a form of art which was
destined, in Italy at any rate, to become a serious rival to the older
institution of opera seria, and, in the hands of Mozart, to produce
masterpieces such as the world had certainly not known before his day,
nor is ever likely to see surpassed. There is some uncertainty about the
actual origin of opera buffa. A musical comedy by Vergilio Mazzocchi and
Mario Marazzoli, entitled 'Chi sofre speri,' was produced in Florence
under the patronage of Cardinal Barberini as early as 1639. The poet
Milton was present at this performance, and refers to it in one of his
_Epistolae Familiares_. In 1657 a theatre was actually built in Florence
for the performance of musical comedies. For some reason, however, it
did not prove a success, and after a few years was compelled to close
its doors. After these first experiments there seems to have been no
attempt made to resuscitate opera buffa until the rise of the Neapolitan
school in the following century. The genesis of the southern branch of
opera buffa may with certainty be traced to the intermezzi, or musical
interludes, which were introduced into the course of operas and dramas,
probably with the object of relieving the mental strain induced by the
effort of following a long serious performance. The popularity of these
intermezzi throws a curious light upon the character of Italian
audiences at that time. We should think it strange if an audience
nowadays refused to sit through 'Hamlet' unless it were diversified by
occasional scenes from 'Box and Cox.' As time went on, the proportions
and general character of these intermezzi acquired greater importance,
but it was not until the eighteenth century was well advanced that one
of them was promoted to the rank of an independent opera, and, instead
of being performed in scraps between the acts of a tragedy, was given
for the first time as a separate work. This honour was accorded to
Pergolesi's 'La Serva Padrona,' in 1734, and the great success which it
met with everywhere soon caused numberless imitations to spring up, so
that in a few years opera buffa in Italy was launched upon a career of
triumph.

Founded as it was in avowed imitation of the tragedy of the Greeks,
opera had never deigned to touch modern life at any point. For a long
time the subjects of Italian operas were taken solely from classical
legend, and though in time librettists were compelled to have recourse
to the medieval romances, they never ventured out of an antiquity more
or less remote. Thus it is easy to conceive the delight of the
music-loving people of Naples when they found that the opera which they
adored could be enjoyed in combination with a mirthful and even farcical
story, interpreted by characters who might have stepped out of one of
their own market-places. But, apart from the freedom and variety of the
subjects with which it dealt, the development of opera buffa gave rise
to an art-form which is of the utmost importance to the history of
opera--the concerted finale. Nicolo Logroscino (1700-1763) seems to have
been the first composer who conceived the idea of working up the end of
an act to a musical climax by bringing all his characters together and
blending their voices into a musical texture of some elaboration.
Logroscino wrote only in the Neapolitan dialect, and his works had
little success beyond the limits of his own province; but his invention
was quickly adopted by all writers of opera buffa, and soon became an
important factor in the development of the art. Later composers
elaborated his idea by extending the finale to more than one movement,
and by varying the key-colour. Finally, but not until after many years,
it was introduced into opera seria, when it gave birth to the idea of
elaborate trios and quartets, which were afterwards to play so important
a part in its development. Logroscino's reputation was chiefly local,
but the works of Pergolesi (1710-1736) and Jomelli (1714-1774) made the
Neapolitan school famous throughout Europe. Both these composers are now
best known by their sacred works, but during their lives their operas
attained an extraordinary degree of popularity. Both succeeded equally
in comedy and tragedy, but Jomelli's operas are now forgotten, while
Pergolesi is known only by his delightful intermezzo 'La Serva Padrona,'
This diverting little piece tells of the schemes of the chambermaid,
Serpina, to win the hand of her master, Pandolfo. She is helped by
Scapin, the valet, who, disguised as a captain, makes violent love to
her, and piques the old gentleman into proposing, almost against his
will. 'La Serva Padrona' made the tour of Europe, and was received
everywhere with tumultuous applause. In Paris it was performed in 1750,
and may be said at once to have founded the school of French opera
comique. Rousseau extolled its beauty as a protest against the arid
declamation of the school of Lulli, and it was the subject of one of the
bitterest dissensions ever known in the history of music. But the
'Guerre des Bouffons,' as the struggle was called, proved one thing,
which had already been satisfactorily decided in Italy, namely, that
there was plenty of room in the world for serious and comic opera at the
same time.

There had been a kind of opera comique in France for many years, a
species of musical pantomime which was very popular at the fairs of St.
Laurent and St. Gervais. This form of entertainment scarcely came
within the province of art, but it served as a starting-point for the
history of opera comique, which was afterwards so brilliant. The success
of the Italian company which performed the comic operas of Pergolesi,
Jomelli, and others, fired the French composers to emulation, and in
1753 the first French opera comique, in the strict sense of the word,
'Le Devin du Village,' by the great Rousseau, was performed at the
Academie de Musique. Musically the work is feeble and characterless, but
the contrast which it offered to the stiff and serious works of the
tragic composers made it popular. Whatever its faults may be, it is
simple and natural, and its tender little melodies fell pleasantly upon
ears too well accustomed to the pomposities of Rameau and his school. At
first lovers of opera comique in Paris had to subsist chiefly upon
translations from the Italian; but in 1755 'Ninette a la Cour,' a dainty
little work written by a Neapolitan composer, Duni, to a French
libretto, gained a great success. Soon afterwards, Monsigny, a composer
who may well be called the father of opera comique, produced his first
work, and started upon a career of success which extended into the next
century.

The early days of opera comique in Paris were distracted by the jealousy
existing between the French and Italian schools, but in 1762 peace was
made between the rival factions, and by process of fusion the two became
one. With the opening of the new Theatre de l'Opera Comique--the Salle
Favart, as it was then called--there began a new and brilliant period
for the history of French art. It is a significant fact, and one which
goes far to prove how closely the foundation of opera comique was
connected with a revolt against the boredom of grand opera, that the
most successful composers in the new _genre_ were those who were
actually innocent of any musical training whatsoever. Monsigny
(1729-1817) is a particularly striking instance of natural genius
triumphing in spite of a defective education. Nothing can exceed the
thinness and poverty of his scores, or their lack of all real musical
interest; yet, by the sureness of his natural instinct for the stage, he
succeeded in writing music which still moves us as much by its brilliant
gaiety as by its tender pathos. 'Le Deserteur,' his most famous work, is
a touching little story of a soldier who deserts in a fit of jealousy,
and is condemned to be shot, but is saved by his sweetheart, who begs
his pardon from the king. Much of the music is almost childish in its
_naivete_, but there is real pathos in the famous air 'Adieu, Louise,'
and some of the lighter scenes in the opera are touched off very
happily.

The musical education of Gretry (1741-1831) was perhaps more elaborate
than that of Monsigny, but it fell very far short of profundity. His
music excels in grace and humour, and he rarely treated serious subjects
with success. Such works as 'Le Tableau Parlant,' 'Les Deux Avares,' and
'L'Amant Jaloux' are models of lightness and brilliancy, whatever may be
thought of their musicianship. 'Richard Coeur de Lion' is the one
instance of Gretry having successfully attempted a loftier theme, and
it remains his masterpiece. The scene is laid at the castle of
Duerrenstein in Austria, where Richard lies imprisoned, and deals with
the efforts of his faithful minstrel Blondel to rescue him. In this work
Gretry adapted his style to his subject with wonderful versatility. Much
of the music is noble and dignified in style, and Blondel's air in
particular, 'O Richard, O mon roi,' has a masculine vigour which is
rarely found in the composer's work. But as a rule Gretry is happiest in
his delicate little pastorals and fantastic comedies, and, for all their
slightness, his works bear the test of revival better than those of many
of his more learned contemporaries. Philidor (1726-1797) was almost more
famous as a chess-player than as a composer. He had the advantage of a
sound musical education under Campra, one of the predecessors of Rameau,
and his music has far more solid qualities than that of Gretry or
Monsigny. His treatment of the orchestra, too, was more scientific than
that of his contemporaries, but he had little gift of melody, and he was
deficient in dramatic instinct. He often visited England, and ended by
dying in London. One of the best of his works, 'Tom Jones,' was written
upon an English subject. Philidor was popular in his day, but his works
have rarely been heard by the present generation.

With Gretry the first period of opera comique may be said to close;
indeed, the taste of French audiences had begun to change some years
before the close of the eighteenth century. The mighty wave of the
Revolution swept away the idle gallantries of the sham pastoral, while
Ossian newly discovered and Shakespeare newly translated opened the eyes
of cultivated Frenchmen to the possibilities of poetry and romance. At
the same time, the works of Haydn and Mozart, which had already crossed
the frontier, disturbed preconceived notions about the limits of
orchestral colouring, and made the thin little scores of Gretry and his
contemporaries seem doubly jejune. The change in public taste was
gradual, but none the less certain. The opening years of the nineteenth
century saw a singular evolution, if not revolution, in the history of
opera comique.

Meanwhile opera in Italy was pursuing its triumphant course. The
introduction of the finale brought the two great divisions of opera into
closer connection, and most of the great composers of this period
succeeded as well in opera buffa as in opera seria. The impetus given to
the progress of the art by the brilliant Neapolitan school was ably
sustained by such composers as Nicolo Piccinni (1728-1800), a composer
who is now known principally to fame as the unsuccessful rival brought
forward by the Italian party in Paris in the year 1776 in the vain hope
of crushing Gluck. Piccinni sinks into insignificance by the side of
Gluck, but he was nevertheless an able composer, and certainly the
leading representative of the Italian school at the time. He did much to
develop the concerted finale, which before his day had been used with
caution, not to say timidity, and was so constant in his devotion to
the loftiest ideal of art that he died in poverty and starvation.
Cimarosa (1749-1801) is the brightest name of the next generation. He
shone particularly in comedy. His 'Gli Orazi e Curiazi,' which moved his
contemporaries to tears, is now forgotten, but 'Il Matrimonio Segreto'
still delights us with its racy humour and delicate melody. The story is
simplicity itself, but the situations are amusing in themselves, and are
led up to with no little adroitness, Paolino, a young lawyer, has
secretly married Carolina, the daughter of Geronimo, a rich and
avaricious merchant. In order to smooth away the difficulties which must
arise when the inevitable discovery of the marriage takes place, he
tries to secure a rich friend of his own, Count Robinson, for Geronimo's
other daughter, Elisetta. Unfortunately Robinson prefers Carolina, and
proposes himself as son-in-law to Geronimo, who is of course delighted
that his daughter should have secured so unexceptionable a _parti_,
while the horrified Paolino discovers to his great dissatisfaction that
the elderly Fidalma, Geronimo's sister, has cast languishing eyes upon
himself. There is nothing for the young couple but flight, but
unfortunately as they are making their escape they are discovered, and
their secret is soon extorted. Geronimo's wrath is tremendous, but in
the end matters are satisfactorily arranged, and the amiable Robinson
after all expresses himself content with the charms of Elisetta. 'Il
Matrimonio Segreto' was produced at Vienna in 1792, and proved so very
much to the taste of the Emperor Leopold, who was present at the
performance, that he gave all the singers and musicians a magnificent
supper, and then insisted upon their performing the opera again from
beginning to end. Cimarosa was a prolific writer, the number of his
operas reaching the formidable total of seventy-six; but, save for 'Il
Matrimonio Segreto,' they have all been consigned to oblivion. Although
he was born only seven years before Mozart, and actually survived him
for ten years, he belongs entirely to the earlier school of opera buffa.
His talent is thoroughly Italian, untouched by German influence, and he
excels in portraying the gay superficiality of the Italian character
without attempting to dive far below the surface.

Even more prolific than Cimarosa was Paisiello (1741-1815), a composer
whose works, though immensely popular in their day, did not possess
individuality enough to defy the ravages of time. Paisiello deserves to
be remembered as the first man to write an opera on the tale of 'Il
Barbiere di Siviglia.' This work, though coldly received when it was
first performed, ended by establishing so firm a hold upon the
affections of the Italian public, that when Rossini tried to produce his
opera on the same subject, the Romans refused to give it a hearing.

Paer (1771-1839) belongs chronologically to the next generation, but
musically he has more in common with Paisiello than with Rossini. His
principal claim to immortality rests upon the fact that a performance
of his opera 'Eleonora' inspired Beethoven with the idea of writing
'Fidelio'; but although his serious efforts are comparatively worthless,
many of his comic operas are exceedingly bright and attractive. 'Le
Maitre de Chapelle,' which was written to a French libretto, is still
performed with tolerable frequency in Paris.

It is hardly likely that the whirligig of time will ever bring Paisiello
and his contemporaries into popularity again in England, but in Italy
there has been of late years a remarkable revival of interest in the
works of the eighteenth century. Some years ago the Argentina Theatre in
Rome devoted its winter season almost entirely to reproductions of the
works of this school. Many of these old-world little operas, whose very
names had been forgotten, were received most cordially, some of
them--Paisiello's 'Scuffiara raggiratrice,' for instance--with genuine
enthusiasm.

Wars and rumours of wars stunted musical development of all kinds in
Germany during the earlier years of the eighteenth century. After the
death of Keiser in 1739, the glory departed from Hamburg, and opera
seems to have lain under a cloud until the advent of Johann Adam Hiller
(1728-1804), the inventor of the Singspiel. Miller's Singspiele were
vaudevilles of a simple and humorous description interspersed with
music, occasionally concerted numbers of a very simple description, but
more often songs derived directly from the traditions of the German
Lied. These operettas were very popular, as the frequent editions of
them which were called for, prove. Yet, in spite of their success, it
was felt by many of the composers who imitated him that the combination
of dialogue and music was inartistic, and Johann Friedrich Reichardt
(1752-1814) attempted to solve the difficulty by relegating the music to
a merely incidental position and conducting all the action of the piece
by means of the dialogue. Nevertheless the older form of the Singspiel
retained its popularity, and, although founded upon incorrect aesthetic
principles--for no art, however ingenious, can fuse the convention of
speech and the convention of song into an harmonious whole--was the
means in later times of giving to the world, in 'Die Zauberfloete' and
'Fidelio,' nobler music than had yet been consecrated to the service of
the stage.




CHAPTER IV

MOZART


Although Mozart's (1756-1791) earliest years were passed at Salzburg,
the musical influences which surrounded his cradle were mainly Italian.
Salzburg imitated Vienna, and Vienna, in spite of Gluck, was still
Italian in its sympathies, so far at any rate as opera seria was
concerned. Mozart wrote his first opera, 'La Finta Semplice,' for
Vienna, when he was twelve years old. It would have been performed in
1768 but for the intrigues of jealous rivals and the knavery of an
impresario. It was not actually produced until the following year, when
the Archbishop of Salzburg arranged a performance of it in his own city
to console his little _protege_ for his disappointment at Vienna. It is
of course an extraordinary work when the composer's age is taken into
account, but intrinsically differs little from the thousand and one
comic operas of the period, Mozart's first German opera, 'Bastien und
Bastienne,' though written after 'La Finta Semplice,' was performed
before it. It was given in 1768 in a private theatre belonging to Dr.
Anton Meszmer, a rich Viennese bourgeois. It follows the lines of
Miller's Singspiele closely, but shows more originality, especially in
the orchestration, than 'La Finta Semplice.' The plot of the little work
is an imitation of Rousseau's 'Devin du Village,' telling of the
quarrels of a rustic couple, and their reconciliation through the good
offices of a travelling conjurer. It was significant that the Italian
and German schools should be respectively represented in the two infant
works of the man who was afterwards to fuse the special beauties of each
in works of immortal loveliness. Mozart's next four operas were, for the
most part, hastily written--'Mitridate, Re di Ponto' (1770) and 'Lucio
Silla' (1775) for Milan, "La Finta Giardiniera' (1775) for Munich, and
'Il Re Pastore' (1775) for Salzburg. They adhere pretty closely to the
conventional forms of the day, and, in spite of the beauty of many of
the airs, can scarcely be said to contain much evidence of Mozart's
incomparable genius. In 1778 the young composer visited Paris, where he
stayed for several months. This period may be looked upon as the
turning-point in his operatic career. In Paris he heard the operas of
Gluck and Gretry, besides those of the Italian composers, such as
Piccinni and Sacchini, whose best works were written for the French
stage. He studied their scores carefully, and from them he learnt the
principles of orchestration, which he was afterwards to turn to such
account in 'Don Giovanni' and 'Die Zauberfloete,' The result of his
studies was plainly visible in the first work which he produced after
his return to Germany, 'Idomeneo.' This was written for the Court
Theatre at Munich, and was performed for the first time on the 29th of
January, 1781. The libretto, by the Abbe Giambattista Varesco, was
modelled upon an earlier French work which had already been set to music
by Campra. Idomeneo, King of Crete, on his way home from the siege of
Troy, is overtaken by a terrific storm. In despair of his life, he vows
that, should he reach the shore alive, he will sacrifice the first human
being he meets to Neptune. This proves to be his son Idamante, who has
been reigning in his stead during his absence. When he finds out who the
victim is--for at first he does not recognise him--he tries to evade
his vow by sending Idamante away to foreign lands. Electra the daughter
of Agamemnon, driven from her country after the murder of her mother,
has taken refuge in Crete, and Idomeneo bids his son return with her to
Argos, and ascend the throne of the Atreidae. Idamante loves Ilia, the
daughter of Priam, who has been sent to Crete some time before as a
prisoner from Troy, and is loved by her in return. Nevertheless he bows
to his father's will, and is preparing to embark with Electra, when a
storm arises, and a frightful sea monster issues from the waves and
proceeds to devastate the land. The terror-stricken people demand that
the victim shall be produced, and Idomeneo is compelled to confess that
he has doomed his son to destruction. All are overcome with horror, but
the priests begin to prepare for the sacrifice. Suddenly cries of joy
are heard, and Idamante, who has slain the monster single-handed, is
brought in by the priests and people. He is ready to die, and his father
is preparing to strike the fatal blow, when Ilia rushes in and entreats
to be allowed to die in his place. The lovers are still pleading
anxiously with each other when a subterranean noise is heard, the statue
of Neptune rocks, and a solemn voice pronounces the will of the gods in
majestic accents. Idomeneo is to renounce the throne, and Idamante is to
marry Ilia and reign in his stead. Every one except Electra is vastly
relieved, and the opera ends with dances and rejoicings.

The music of 'Idomeneo' is cast for the most part in Italian form,
though the influence of Gluck is obvious in many points, particularly in
the scene of the oracle. Here we find Mozart in his maturity for the
first time; he has become a man, and put away childish things. In two
points 'Idomeneo' is superior to any opera that had previously been
written--in the concerted music (the choruses as well as the trios and
quartets), and in the instrumentation. The chorus is promoted from the
part which it usually plays in Gluck, that of a passive spectator. It
joins in the drama, and takes an active part in the development of the
plot, and the music which it is called upon to sing is often finer and
more truly dramatic than that allotted to the solo singers. But the
chorus had already been used effectively by Gluck and other composers;
it is in his solo concerted music that Mozart forges ahead of all
possible rivals. The power which he shows of contrasting the conflicting
emotions of his characters in elaborate concerted movements was
something really new to the stage. The one quartet in Handel's
'Radamisto' and the one trio in his 'Alcina,' magnificent as they are,
are too exceptional in their occurrence to be quoted as instances, while
the attempts of Rameau and his followers to impose dramatic significance
into their concerted music, though technically interesting, do but
faintly foreshadow the glory of Mozart. The orchestration of 'Idomeneo,'
too, is something of the nature of a revelation. At Munich, Mozart had
at his disposal an excellent and well-trained band, and this may go far
to explain the elaborate care which he bestowed upon the instrumental
side of his opera. The colouring of the score is sublime in conception
and brilliant in detail. Even now it well repays the closest and most
intimate study. 'Idomeneo' is practically the foundation of all modern
orchestration.

Mozart's next work was very different both in scope and execution. It
has already been pointed out that the two first works which the
composer, as a child, wrote for the stage, followed respectively the
Italian and German models. Similarly, he signalised his arrival at the
full maturity of his powers by producing an Italian and German
masterpiece side by side. 'Die Entfuehrung aus dem Serail' was written
for the Court Theatre at Vienna, in response to a special command of the
Emperor Joseph II. It was produced on July 13, 1782. The original
libretto was the work of C.F. Bretzner, but Mozart introduced so many
alterations and improvements into the fabric of the story that, as it
stands, much of it is practically his own work.

The Pasha Selim has carried off a Christian damsel named Constanze, whom
he keeps in close confinement in his seraglio, in the hope that she may
consent to be his wife. Belmont, Constanze's lover, has traced her to
the Pasha's country house with the assistance of Pedrillo, a former
servant of his own, now the Pasha's slave and chief gardener. Belmont's
attempts to enter the house are frustrated by Osmin, the surly
major-domo. At last, however, through the good offices of Pedrillo, he
contrives to gain admission in the character of an architect. Osmin has
a special motive for disliking Pedrillo, who has forestalled him in the
affections of Blondchen, Constanze's maid; nevertheless he is beguiled
by the wily servant into a drinking bout, and quieted with a harmless
narcotic. This gives the lovers an opportunity for an interview, in
which the details of their flight are arranged. The next night they make
their escape. Belmont gets off safely with Constanze, but Pedrillo and
Blondchen are seen by Osmin before they are clear of the house. The hue
and cry is raised, and both couples are caught and brought back. They
are all condemned to death, but the soft-hearted Pasha is so much
overcome by their fidelity and self-sacrifice that he pardons them and
sends them away in happiness.

Much of 'Die Entfuehrung' is so thoroughly and characteristically
German, that at first sight it may be thought surprising that it should
have succeeded so well in a city like Vienna, which was inclined to look
upon the Singspiel as a barbarian product of Northern Germany. But there
is a reason for this, and it is one which goes to the root of the whole
question of comic opera. Mozart saw that Italian comic operas often
succeeded in spite of miserable libretti, because the entire interest
was concentrated upon the music, and all the rest was forgotten. The
German Singspiel writers made the mistake of letting their music be, for
the most part, purely incidental, and conducting all the dramatic part
of their plots by dialogue. Mozart borrowed the underlying idea of the
opera buffa, applied it to the form of the Singspiel, which he kept
intact, and produced a work which succeeded in revolutionising the
history of German opera. But, apart from the question of form, the music
of 'Die Entfuehrung' is in itself fine enough to be the foundation even
of so imposing a structure as modern German music. The orchestral forces
at Mozart's disposal were on a smaller scale than at Munich; but though
less elaborate than that of 'Idomeneo,' the score of 'Die Entfuehrung' is
full of the tenderest and purest imagination. But the real importance of
the work lies in the vivid power of characterisation, which Mozart here
reveals for the first time in full maturity. It is by the extraordinary
development of this quality that he transcends all other writers for
the stage before or since. It is no exaggeration to say that Mozart's
music reveals the inmost soul of the characters of his opera as plainly
as if they were discussed upon a printed page. In his later works the
opportunities given him of proving this magical power were more frequent
and better. The libretto of 'Die Entfuehrung' is a poor affair at best,
but, considering the materials with which he had to work, Mozart never
accomplished truer or more delicate work than in the music of Belmont
and Constanze, of Pedrillo, and greatest of all, of Osmin.

In 1786 Mozart wrote the music to a foolish little one-act comedy
entitled 'Der Schauspieldirektor,' describing the struggles of two rival
singers for an engagement. A sparkling overture and a genuinely comic
trio are the best numbers of the score; but the libretto gave Mozart
little opportunity of exercising his peculiar talents. Since his
original production various attempts have been made to fit 'Der
Schauspieldirektor' with new and more effective libretti, but in no case
has its performance attained any real success.

For the sake of completeness it may be well to mention the existence of
a comic opera entitled 'L'Oie du Caire,' which is an exceedingly clever
combination of the fragments left by Mozart of two unfinished operas,
'L'Oca del Cairo' and 'Lo Sposo Deluso,' fitted to a new and original
libretto by the late M. Victor Wilder. In its modern form, this little
opera, in which a lover is introduced into his mistress's garden inside
an enormous goose, has been successfully performed both in France and
England.

Not even the success of 'Die Entfuehrung' could permanently establish
German opera in Vienna. The musical sympathies of the aristocracy were
entirely Italian, and Mozart had to bow to expediency. His next work,
'Le Nozze de Figaro' (1786), was written to an adaptation of
Beaumarchais's famous comedy 'Le Mariage de Figaro,' which had been
produced in Paris a few years before. Da Ponte, the librettist, wisely
omitted all the political references, which contributed so much to the
popularity of the original play, and left only a bustling comedy of
intrigue, not perhaps very moral in tendency, but full of amusing
incident and unflagging in spirit. It speaks volumes for the ingenuity
of the librettist that though the imbroglio is often exceedingly
complicated, no one feels the least difficulty in following every detail
of it on the stage, though it is by no means easy to give a clear and
comprehensive account of all the ramifications of the plot.

The scene is laid at the country-house of Count Almaviva. Figaro, the
Count's valet, and Susanna, the Countess's maid, are to be married that
day; but Figaro, who is well aware that the Count has a penchant for his
_fiancee_, is on his guard against machinations in that quarter. Enter
the page Cherubino, an ardent youth who is devotedly attached to his
mistress. He has been caught by the Count flirting with Barberina, the
gardener's daughter, and promptly dismissed from his service, and now
he comes to Susanna to entreat her to intercede for him with the
Countess. While the two are talking they hear the Count approaching, and
Susanna hastily hides Cherubino behind a large arm-chair. The Count
comes to offer Susanna a dowry if she will consent to meet him that
evening, but she will have nothing to say to him. Basilio, the
music-master, now enters, and the Count has only just time to slip
behind Cherubino's arm-chair, while the page creeps round to the front
of it, and is covered by Susanna with a cloak. Basilio, while repeating
the Count's proposals, refers to Cherubino's passion for the Countess.
This arouses the Count, who comes forward in a fury, orders the
immediate dismissal of the page, and by the merest accident discovers
the unlucky youth ensconced in the arm-chair. As Cherubino has heard
every word of the interview, the first thing to do is to get him out of
the way. The Count therefore presents him with a commission in his own
regiment, and bids him pack off to Seville post-haste. Figaro now
appears with all the villagers in holiday attire to ask the Count to
honour his marriage by giving the bride away. The Count cannot refuse,
but postpones the ceremony for a few hours in the hope of gaining time
to prosecute his suit. Meanwhile the Countess, Susanna, and Figaro are
maturing a plot of their own to discomfit the Count and bring him back
to the feet of his wife. Figaro writes an anonymous letter to the Count,
telling him that the Countess has made an assignation with a stranger
for that evening in the garden, hoping by this means to arouse his
jealousy and divert his mind from the wedding. He assures him also of
Susanna's intention to keep her appointment in the garden, intending
that Cherubino, who has been allowed to put off his departure, shall be
dressed up as a girl and take Susanna's place at the interview. The page
comes to the Countess's room to be dressed, when suddenly the
conspirators hear the Count approaching. Cherubino is hastily locked in
an inner room, while Susanna slips Into an alcove. While the Count is
plying his wife with angry questions, Cherubino clumsily knocks over a
chair. The Count hears the noise, and quickly jumps to the conclusion
that the page is hiding in the inner room. The Countess denies
everything and refuses to give up the key, whereupon the Count drags her
off with him to get an axe to break in the door. Meanwhile Susanna
liberates Cherubino, and takes his place in the inner room, while the
latter escapes by jumping down into the garden. When the Count finally
opens the door and discovers only Susanna within, his rage is turned to
mortification, and he is forced to sue for pardon. The Countess is
triumphant, but a change is given to the position of affairs by the
appearance of Antonio, the gardener, who comes to complain that his
flowers have been destroyed by someone jumping on them from the window.
The Count's jealous fears are returning, but Figaro allays them by
declaring that he is the culprit, and that he made his escape by the
window in order to avoid the Count's anger. Antonio then produces a
paper which he found dropped among the flowers. This proves to be
Cherubino's commission. Once more the secret is nearly out, but Figaro
saves the situation by declaring that the page gave it to him to get the
seal affixed. The Countess and Susanna are beginning to congratulate
themselves on their escape, when another diversion is created by the
entrance of Marcellina, the Countess's old duenna, and Bartolo, her
ex-guardian. Marcellina has received a promise in writing from Figaro
that he will marry her if he fails to pay a sum of money which he owes
her by a certain date, and she comes to claim her bridegroom. The Count
is delighted at this new development, and promises Marcellina that she
shall get her rights.

The second act (according to the original arrangement) is mainly devoted
to clearing up the various difficulties. Figaro turns out to be the
long-lost son of Marcellina and Bartolo, so the great impediment to his
marriage is effectually removed, and by the happy plan of a disguise the
Countess takes Susanna's place at the assignation, and receives the
ardent declarations of her husband. When the Count discovers his mistake
he is thoroughly ashamed of himself, and his vows of amendment bring the
piece to a happy conclusion.

It seems hardly possible to write critically of the music of 'Le Nozze
di Figaro,' Mozart had in a superabundant degree that power which is
characteristic of our greatest novelists, of infusing the breath of life
into his characters. We rise from seeing a performance of 'Le Nozze,'
with no consciousness of the art employed, but with a feeling of having
assisted in an actual scene in real life. It is not until afterwards
that the knowledge is forced upon us that this convincing presentment of
nature is the result of a combination of the purest inspiration of
genius with the highest development of art. Mozart knew everything that
was to be known about music, and 'Le Nozze di Figaro,' in spite of its
supreme and unapproachable beauty, is really only the legitimate outcome
of two centuries of steady development. Perhaps the most striking
feature of the work is the absolute consistency of the whole. In spite
of the art with which the composer has Individualised his characters,
there is no clashing between the different types of music allotted to
each. As for the music itself, if the exuberant youthfulness of 'Die
Entfuehrung' has been toned down to a serener flow of courtliness, we are
compensated for the loss by the absence of the mere _bravura_ which
disfigures many of the airs in the earlier work. The dominant
characteristic of the music is that wise and tender sympathy with the
follies and frailties of mankind, which moves us with a deeper pathos
than the most terrific tragedy ever penned. It is perhaps the highest
achievement of the all-embracing genius of Mozart that he made an
artificial comedy of intrigue, which is trivial when it is not squalid,
into one of the great music dramas of the world.

Mozart's next work, 'Don Giovanni' (October 29, 1787), was written for
Prague, a city which had always shown him more real appreciation than
Vienna. It was adapted by Da Ponte from a Spanish tale which had already
been utilised by Moliere. Although, so far as incident goes, it is not
perhaps an ideal libretto, it certainly contains many of the elements of
success. The characters are strongly marked and distinct, and the
supernatural part of the story, which appealed particularly to Mozart's
imagination and indeed determined him to undertake the opera, is managed
with consummate skill.

Don Giovanni, a licentious Spanish nobleman, who is attracted by the
charms of Donna Anna, the daughter of the Commandant of Seville, breaks
into her palace under cover of night, in the hope of making her his own.
She resists him and calls for help. In the struggle which ensues the
Commandant is killed by Don Giovanni, who escapes unrecognised. Donna
Elvira, his deserted wife, has pursued him to Seville, but he employs
his servant Leporello to occupy her attention while he pays court to
Zerlina, a peasant girl, who is about to marry an honest clodhopper
named Masetto. Donna Anna now recognises Don Giovanni as her father's
assassin, and communicates her discovery to her lover, Don Ottavio;
Elvira joins them, and the three vow vengeance against the libertine.
Don Giovanni gives a ball in honour of Zerlina's marriage, and in the
course of the festivities seizes an opportunity of trying to seduce her.
He is only stopped by the interference of Anna, Elvira, and Ottavio, who
have made their way into his palace in masks and dominoes. In the next
act the vengeance of the three conspirators appears to hang fire a
little, for Don Giovanni is still pursuing his vicious courses, and
employing Leporello to beguile the too trustful Elvira. After various
escapades he finds himself before the statue of the murdered Commandant.
He jokingly invites his old antagonist to sup with him, an invitation
which the statue, to his intense surprise, hastens to accept. Leporello
and his master return to prepare for the entertainment of the evening.
When the merriment is at its height, a heavy step is heard in the
corridor, and the marble man enters. Don Giovanni is still undaunted,
and even when his terrible visitor offers him the choice between
repentance and damnation, yields not a jot of his pride and insolence.
Finally the statue grasps him by the hand and drags him down, amid
flames and earthquakes, to eternal torment.

The taste of Mozart's time would not permit the drama to finish here.
All the other characters have to assemble once more. Leporello gives
them an animated description of his master's destruction, and they
proceed to draw a most edifying moral from the doom of the sinner. The
music to this finale is of matchless beauty and interest, but modern
sentiment will not hear of so grievous an anti-climax, and the opera now
usually ends with Don Giovanni's disappearance.

The music of 'Don Giovanni' has so often been discussed, that brief
reference to its more salient features will be all that is necessary.
Gounod has written of it: 'The score of "Don Giovanni" has influenced
my life like a revelation. It stands in my thoughts as an incarnation of
dramatic and musical impeccability,' and lesser men will be content to
echo his words. The plot is less dramatically coherent than that of 'Le
Nozze di Figaro,' but it ranges over a far wider gamut of human feeling.
From the comic rascality of Leporello to the unearthly terrors of the
closing scene is a vast step, but Mozart is equally at home in both. His
incomparable art of characterisation is here displayed in even more
consummate perfection than in the earlier work. The masterly way in
which he differentiates the natures of his three soprani--Anna, a type
of noble purity; Elvira, a loving and long-suffering woman, alternating
between jealous indignation and voluptuous tenderness; and Zerlina, a
model of rustic coquetry--may especially be remarked, but all the
characters are treated with the same profound knowledge of life and
human nature. Even in his most complicated concerted pieces he never
loses grip of the idiosyncrasies of his characters, and in the most
piteous and tragic situations he never relinquishes for a moment his
pure ideal of intrinsic musical beauty. If there be such a thing as
immortality for any work of art, it must surely be conceded to 'Don
Giovanni.'

'Cosi fan tutte,' his next work, was produced at Vienna in January,
1790. It has never been so successful as its two predecessors, chiefly
on account of its libretto, which, though a brisk little comedy of
intrigue, is almost too slight to bear a musical setting. The plot
turns upon a wager laid by two young officers with an old cynic of their
acquaintance to prove the constancy of their respective sweethearts.
After a touching leave-taking they return disguised as Albanians and
proceed to make violent love each one to the other's _fiancee_. The
ladies at first resist the ardent strangers, but end by giving way, and
the last scene shows their repentance and humiliation when they discover
that the too attractive foreigners are their own lovers after all. There
is much delightful music in the work, and it is greatly to be regretted
that it should have been so completely cast into the shade by 'Le Nozze
di Figaro,'

Mozart's next opera, 'La Clemenza di Tito,' was hastily written, while
he was suffering from the illness which in the end proved fatal. The
libretto was an adaptation of an earlier work by Metastasio. Cold and
formal, and almost totally devoid of dramatic interest, it naturally
failed to inspire the composer. The form in which it was cast compelled
him to return to the conventions of opera seria, from which he had long
escaped, and altogether, as an able critic remarked at the time, the
work might rather be taken for the first attempt of budding talent than
for the product of a mature mind. The story deals with the plotting of
Vitellia, the daughter of the deposed Vitellius, to overthrow the
Emperor Titus. She persuades her lover Sextus to conspire against his
friend, and he succeeds in setting the Capitol on fire. Titus, however,
escapes by means of a disguise, and not only pardons all the
conspirators, but rewards Vitellia with his hand. The opera was produced
at Prague on the 6th of September, 1791, and the cold reception which it
experienced did much to embitter the closing years of Mozart's life.

'Die Zauberfloete,' his last work, was written before 'La Clemenza di
Tito,' though not actually produced until September 30, 1791. The
libretto, which was the work of Emanuel Schikaneder, is surely the most
extraordinary that ever mortal composer was called upon to set.

At the opening of the opera, the Prince Tamino rushes in, pursued by a
monstrous serpent, and sinks exhausted on the steps of a temple, from
which three ladies issue in the nick of time and despatch the serpent
with their silver spears. They give Tamino a portrait of Pamina, the
daughter of their mistress, the Queen of Night, which immediately
inspires him with passionate devotion. He is informed that Pamina has
been stolen by Sarastro, the high-priest of Isis, and imprisoned by him
in his palace. He vows to rescue her, and for that purpose is presented
by the ladies with a magic flute, which will keep him safe in every
danger, while Papageno, a bird-catcher, who has been assigned to him as
companion, receives a glockenspiel. Three genii are summoned to guide
them, and the two champions thereupon proceed to Sarastro's palace.
Tamino is refused admittance by the doorkeeper, but Papageno in some
unexplained way contrives to get in, and persuades Pamina to escape with
him. They fly, but are recaptured by Monostatos, a Moor, who has been
appointed to keep watch over Pamina. Sarastro now appears, condemns
Monostatos to the bastinado, and decrees that the two lovers shall
undergo a period of probation in the sanctuary. In the second act the
ordeal of silence is imposed upon Tamino. Pamina cannot understand his
apparent coldness, and is inclined to listen to the counsels of her
mother, who tries to induce her to murder Sarastro. The priest, however,
convinces her of his beneficent intentions. The lovers go through the
ordeals of fire and water successfully, and are happily married. The
Queen of Night and her dark kingdom perish everlastingly, and the reign
of peace and wisdom is universally established. The humours of Papageno
in his search for a wife have nothing to do with the principal interest
of the plot, but they serve as an acceptable contrast to the more
serious scenes of the opera.

The libretto of the 'Die Zauberfloete' is usually spoken of as the climax
of conceivable inanity, but the explanation of many of its absurdities
seems to lie in the fact that it is an allegorical illustration of the
struggles and final triumph of Freemasonry. Both Mozart and Schikaneder
were Freemasons, and 'Die Zauberfloete' is in a sense a manifesto of
their belief. Freemasonry in the opera is represented by the mysteries
of Isis, over which the high-priest Sarastro presides. The Queen of
Night is Maria Theresa, a sworn opponent of Freemasonry, who interdicted
its practice throughout her dominions, and broke up the Lodges with
armed force. Tamino may be intended for the Emperor Joseph II., who,
though not a Freemason himself as his father was, openly protected the
brotherhood; and we may look upon Pamina as the representative of the
Austrian people. The name of Monostatos seems to be connected with
monasticism, and may be intended to typify the clerical party, which,
though outwardly on friendly terms with Freemasonry, seems in reality to
have been bent upon its destruction. Papageno and his wife Papagena are
excellent representatives of the light-hearted and pleasure-loving
population of Vienna. It is difficult to make any explanation fit the
story very perfectly, but the suggestion of Freemasonry is enough to
acquit Mozart of having allied his music to mere balderdash; while,
behind the Masonic business, the discerning hearer will have no
difficulty in distinguishing the shadowy outlines of another and a far
nobler allegory, the ascent of the human soul, purified by suffering and
love, to the highest wisdom. It was this, no doubt, that compelled
Goethe's often expressed admiration, and even tempted him to write a
sequel to Schikaneder's libretto. 'Die Zauberfloete' is in form a
Singsgiel--that is to say, the music is interspersed with spoken
dialogue--but there the resemblance to Hiller's creations ceases. From
the magnificent fugue in the overture to the majestic choral finale, the
music is an astonishing combination of divinely beautiful melody with
marvels of contrapuntal skill. Perhaps the most surprising part of 'Die
Zauberfloete' is the extraordinary ease and certainty with which Mozart
manipulates what is practically a new form of art. Nursed as he had been
in the traditions of Italian opera, it would not have been strange if he
had not been able to shake off the influences of his youth. Yet 'Die
Zauberfloete' owes but little to any Italian predecessor. It is German to
the core. We may be able to point to passages which are a development of
something occurring in the composer's earlier works, such as 'Die
Entfuehrung,' but there is hardly anything in the score of 'Die
Zauberfloete' which suggests an external influence. Its position in the
world of music is ably summarised by Jahn: 'If in his Italian operas
Mozart assimilated the traditions of a long period of development and in
some sense put the finishing stroke to it, with "Die Zauberfloete" he
treads on the threshold of the future, and unlocks for his country the
sacred treasure of national art.'

Of Mozart's work as a whole, it is impossible to speak save in terms
which seem exaggerated. His influence upon subsequent composers cannot
be over-estimated. Without him, Rossini and modern Italian opera, Weber
and modern German, Gounod and modern French, would have been impossible.
It may be conceded that the form of his operas, with the alternation of
airs, concerted pieces and _recitativo secco_, may conceivably strike
the ears of the uneducated as old-fashioned, but the feelings of
musicians may best be summed up in the word of Gounod: 'O Mozart, divin
Mozart! Qu'il faut peu te comprendre pour ne pas t'adorer! Toi, la
verite constante! Toi, la beaute parfaite! Toi, le charme inepuisable!
Toi, toujours profond et toujours limpide! Toi, l'humanite complete et
la simplicite de l'enfant! Toi, qui as tout ressenti, et tout exprime
dans une langue musicale qu'on n'a jamais surpassee et qu'on ne
surpassera jamais.'




CHAPTER V

THE CLOSE OF THE CLASSICAL PERIOD

MEHUL--CHERUBINI--SPONTINI--BEETHOVEN--BOIELDIEU


Mozart and Gluck, each in his respective sphere, carried opera to a
point which seemed scarcely to admit of further development. But before
the advent of Weber and the romantic revolution there was a vast amount
of good work done by a lesser order of musicians, who worked on the
lines laid down by their great predecessors, and did much to familiarise
the world with the new beauties of their masters' work. The history of
art often repeats itself in this way. First comes the genius burning
with celestial fire. He sweeps away the time-worn formulas, and founds
his new art upon their ruins. Then follows the crowd of disciples, men
of talent and imagination, though without the crowning impulse that
moves the world. They repeat and amplify their leader's maxims, until
the world, which at first had stood aghast at teaching so novel, in time
grows accustomed to it, and finally accepts it without question. Next
comes the final stage, when what has been caviare to one generation is
become the daily bread of the next. The innovations of the master,
caught up and reproduced by his disciples, in the third generation
become the conventional formulas of the art, and the world is ripe once
more for a revolution!

Deeply as Gluck's work affected the history of music, his immediate
disciples were few. Salieri (1750-1825), an Italian by birth, was
chiefly associated with the Viennese court, but wrote his best work,
'Les Danaides,' for Paris. He caught the trick of Gluck's grand style
cleverly, but was hardly more than an imitator. Sacchini (1734-1786) had
a more original vein, though he too was essentially a composer of the
second class. He was not actually a pupil of Gluck, though his later
works, written for the Paris stage, show the influence of the composer
of 'Alceste' very strongly. The greatest of Gluck's immediate
followers--the greatest, because he imbibed the principles of his
master's art without slavishly reproducing his form--was Mehul
(1763-1817), a composer who is so little known in England that it is
difficult to speak of him in terms which shall not sound exaggerated to
those who are not familiar with his works. How highly he is ranked by
French critics may be gathered from the fact that when 'Israel in Egypt'
was performed for the first time in Paris some years ago, M. Julien
Tiersot, one of the sanest and most clear-headed of contemporary writers
on music, gave it as his opinion that Handel's work was less conspicuous
for the qualities of dignity and sonority than Mehul's 'Joseph.'
Englishmen can scarcely be expected to echo this opinion, but as to the
intrinsic greatness of Mehul's work there cannot be any question. He
was far more of a scientific musician than Gluck, and his scores have
nothing of his master's jejuneness. His melody, too, is dignified and
expressive, but he is sensibly inferior to Gluck in what may be called
dramatic instinct, and this, coupled with the fact that the libretti of
his operas are almost uniformly uninteresting, whereas Gluck's are drawn
from the immortal legends of the past, is perhaps enough to explain why
the one has been taken and the other left. Mehul's last and greatest
work, 'Joseph,' is still performed in France and Germany, though our
national prejudices forbid the hope that it can ever be heard in this
country except in a mutilated concert version. The opera follows the
Biblical story closely, and Mehul has reproduced the large simplicity of
the Old Testament with rare felicity. From the magnificent opening air,
'Champs paternels,' to the sonorous final chorus, the work is rich in
beauty of a very high order. Of his other serious works few have
remained in the current repertory, chiefly owing to their stupid
libretti, for there is not one of them that does not contain music of
rare excellence. 'Stratonice,' a dignified setting of the pathetic old
story of the prince who loves his father's betrothed, deserves to live
if only for the sake of the noble air, 'Versez tous vos chagrins,' a
masterpiece of sublime tenderness as fine as anything in Gluck. 'Uthal,'
a work upon an Ossianic legend, has recently been revived with success
in Germany. It embodies a curious experiment in orchestration, the
violins being entirely absent from the score. The composer's idea, no
doubt, was to represent by this means the grey colouring and misty
atmosphere of the scene in which his opera was laid, but the originality
of the idea scarcely atones for the monotony in which it resulted.
Although his genius was naturally of a serious and dignified cast, Mehul
wrote many works in a lighter vein, partly no doubt in emulation of
Gretry, the prince of opera comique. Mehul's comic operas are often
deficient in sparkle, but their musical force and the enchanting
melodies with which they are begemmed have kept them alive, and several
of them--'Une Folie,' for instance, and 'Le Tresor Suppose'--have been
performed in Germany during the last decade, while 'L'Irato,' a
brilliant imitation of Italian opera buffa, has recently been given at
Brussels with great success.

Although born in Florence and educated in the traditions of the
Neapolitan school, Cherubini (1760-1842) belongs by right to the French
school. His 'Lodoiska,' which was produced in Paris in 1791, established
his reputation; and 'Les Deux Journees' (1800), known in England as 'The
Water-Carrier,' placed him, in the estimation of Beethoven, at the head
of all living composers of opera. Posterity has scarcely endorsed
Beethoven's dictum, but it is impossible to ignore the beauty of
Cherubini's work. The solidity of his concerted pieces and the
picturesqueness of his orchestration go far to explain the enthusiasm
which his works aroused in a society which as yet knew little, if
anything, of Mozart. Cherubini's finest works suffer from a frigidity
and formality strangely in contrast with the grace of Gretry or the
melody of Mehul, but the infinite resources of his musicianship make
amends for lack of inspiration, and 'Les Deux Journees' may still be
listened to with pleasure, if not with enthusiasm. The scene of the
opera is laid in Paris, under the rule of Cardinal Mazarin, who has been
defied by Armand, the hero of the story. The gates of Paris are strictly
guarded, and every precaution is taken to prevent Armand's escape; but
he is saved by Mikeli, a water-carrier, whose son he had once
befriended, and who now repays the favour by conveying him out of Paris
in his empty water-cart. Armand escapes to a village near Paris, but is
captured by the Cardinal's troops while protecting his wife Constance,
who has followed him, from the insults of two soldiers. In the end a
pardon arrives from the Queen, and all ends happily. In spite of the
serious and even tragic cast of the plot, the use of spoken dialogue
compels us to class 'Les Deux Journees' as an opera comique; and the
same rule applies to 'Medee,' Cherubini's finest work, an opera which
for dignity of thought and grandeur of expression deserves to rank high
among the productions of the period. Lesueur (1763-1837) may fitly be
mentioned by the side of Mehul and Cherubini. His opera 'Les Bardes,'
though now forgotten, has qualities of undeniable excellence. Its faults
as well as its beauties are those of the period which produced it. It is
declamatory rather than lyrical, and decorative rather than dramatic,
but in the midst of its conventions and formality there is much that is
true as well as picturesque.

During the closing years of the eighteenth and at the beginning of the
nineteenth century the activity of the French school of opera is in
remarkable contrast with the stagnation which prevailed in Italy and
Germany. Italy, a slave to the facile graces of the Neapolitan school,
still awaited the composer who should strike off her chains and renew
the youth of her national art; while Germany, among the crowds of
imitators who clung to the skirts of Mozart's mantle, could not produce
one worthy to follow in his steps. Yet though French opera embodied the
finest thought and aspiration of the day, it is only just to observe
that the impetus which impelled her composers upon new paths of progress
came largely from external sources. It is curious to note how large a
share foreigners have had in building up the fabric of French opera.
Lulli, Gluck, and Cherubini in turn devoted their genius to its service.
They were followed by Spontini (1774-1851), who in spite of chauvinistic
prejudice, became, on the production of 'La Vestale' in 1807, the most
popular composer of the day. Spontini's training was Neapolitan, but his
first visit to Paris showed him that there was no place upon the French
stage for the trivialities which still delighted Italian audiences. He
devoted himself to careful study, and his one-act opera 'Milton,' the
first-fruits of his musicianship, showed a remarkable advance upon his
youthful efforts. Spontini professed an adoration for Mozart which
bordered upon idolatry, but his music shows rather the influence of
Gluck. He is the last of what may be called the classical school of
operatic composers, and he shows little trace of the romanticism which
was beginning to lay its hand upon music. He was accused during his
lifetime of overloading his operas with orchestration, and of writing
music which it was impossible to sing--accusations which sound strangely
familiar to those who are old enough to remember the reception of Wagner
in the seventies and eighties. His scores would not sound very elaborate
nowadays, nor do his melodies appear unusually tortuous or exacting, but
he insisted upon violent contrasts from his singers as well as from his
orchestra, and the great length of his operas, a point in which he
anticipated Meyerbeer and Wagner, probably reduced to exhaustion the
artists who were trained on Gluck and Mozart. 'La Vestale' was followed
in 1809 by 'Fernand Cortez,' and in 1819 by 'Olympie,' both of which
were extremely successful, the latter in a revised form which was
produced at Berlin in 1821. Spontini's operas are now no longer
performed, but the influence which his music exercised upon men so
different as Wagner and Meyerbeer makes his name important in the
history of opera.

Although Paris was the nursery of all that was best in opera at this
period, to Germany belongs the credit of producing the one work dating
from the beginning of the nineteenth century which deserves to rank with
the masterpieces of the previous generation--Beethoven's 'Fidelio.'
Beethoven's (1770-1827) one contribution to the lyric stage was written
in 1804 and 1805, and was produced at Vienna in the latter year, during
the French occupation. The libretto is a translation from the French,
and the story had already formed the basis of more than one opera;
indeed, it was a performance of Paer's 'Eleonora' which originally led
Beethoven to think of writing his work. Simple as it is, the plot has
true nobility of design, and the purity of its motive contrasts
favourably with the tendency of the vast majority of lyric dramas.
Florestan, a Spanish nobleman, has fallen into the power of his
bitterest enemy, Pizarro, the governor of a state prison near Madrid.
There the unfortunate Florestan is confined in a loathsome dungeon
without light or air, dependent upon the mercy of Pizarro for the merest
crust of bread. Leonore, the unhappy prisoner's wife, has discovered his
place of confinement, and, in the hope of rescuing him, disguises
herself in male attire and hires herself as servant to Rocco, the head
gaoler, under the name of Fidelio. In this condition she has to endure
the advances of Marcelline, the daughter of Rocco, who neglects her
lover Jaquino for the sake of the attractive new-comer. Before Leonore
has had time to mature her plans, news comes to the prison of the
approaching visit of the Minister Fernando on a tour of inspection.
Pizarro's only chance of escaping the detection of his crime is to put
an end to Florestan's existence, and he orders Rocco to dig a grave in
the prisoner's cell. Leonore obtains leave to help the gaoler in his
task, and together they descend to the dungeon, where the unfortunate
Florestan is lying in a half inanimate condition. When their task is
finished Pizarro himself comes down, and is on the point of stabbing
Florestan, when Leonore throws herself between him and his victim, a
pistol in her hand, and threatens the assassin with instant death if he
advance a step. At that moment a flourish of trumpets announces the
arrival of Fernando. Pizarro is forced to hurry off to receive his
guest, and the husband and wife rush into each other's arms. The closing
scene shows the discomfiture and disgrace of Pizarro, and the
restoration of Florestan to his lost honours and dignity.

The form of 'Fidelio,' like that of "Die Zauberfloete," is that of the
Singspiel. In the earlier and lighter portions of the work the
construction of the drama does not differ materially from that of the
generality of Singspiele, but in the more tragic scenes the spoken
dialogue is employed with novel and extraordinary force. So far from
suggesting any feeling of anti-climax, the sudden relapse into agitated
speech often gives an effect more thrilling than any music
could command. At two points in the drama this is especially
remarkable--firstly, in the prison quartet, after the flourish of
trumpets, when Jaquino comes in breathless haste to announce the arrival
of the Minister; and secondly, in the brief dialogue between the husband
and wife which separates the quartet from the following duet. Leonore's
famous words, 'Nichts, nichts, mein Florestan,' in particular, if
spoken with a proper sense of their exquisite truth and beauty, sum up
the passionate devotion of the true-hearted wife, and her overflowing
happiness at the realisation of her dearest hopes, in a manner which for
genuine pathos can scarcely be paralleled upon the operatic stage.

It is hardly necessary to point out to the student of opera the steady
influence which Mozart's music exercised upon Beethoven's development.
Yet although Beethoven learnt much from the composer of 'Don Giovanni,'
there is a great deal in 'Fidelio' with which Mozart had nothing to do.
The attitude of Beethoven towards opera--to go no deeper than questions
of form--was radically different from that of Mozart. Beethoven's talent
was essentially symphonic rather than dramatic, and magnificent as
'Fidelio' is, it has many passages in which it is impossible to avoid
feeling that the composer is forcing his talent into an unfamiliar if
not uncongenial channel. This is especially noticeable in the concerted
pieces, in which Beethoven sometimes seems to forget all about opera,
characters, dramatic situation and everything else in the sheer delight
of writing music. No one with an ounce of musical taste in his
composition would wish the canon-quartet, the two trios or the two
finales, to take a few instances at random, any shorter or less
developed than they are, but one can imagine how Mozart would have
smiled at the lack of dramatic feeling displayed in their construction.

'Fidelio,' as has already been said, is the only opera produced in
Germany at this period which is deserving of special mention. Mozart's
success had raised up a crop of imitators, of whom the most meritorious
were Suessmayer, his own pupil; Winter, who had the audacity to write a
sequel to 'Die Zauberfloete'; Weigl, the composer of the popular
'Schweizerfamilie' the Abbe Vogler, who, though now known chiefly by his
organ music, was a prolific writer for the stage; and Dittersdorf, a
writer of genuine humour, whose spirited Singspiel, 'Doktor und
Apotheker,' carried on the traditions of Hiller successfully. But though
the lighter school of opera in Germany produced nothing of importance,
upon the more congenial soil of France opera comique, in the hands of a
school of earnest and gifted composers, was acquiring a musical
distinction which it was far from possessing in the days of Gretry and
Monsigny. Strictly speaking, the operas of Mehul and Cherubini should be
ranked as operas comiques, by reason of the spoken dialogue which takes
the place of the recitative; but the high seriousness which continually
animates the music of these masters makes it impossible to class their
works with operas so different in aim and execution as those of Gretry.
Of the many writers of opera comique at the beginning of this century,
it will be enough to mention two of the most prominent, Nicolo and
Boieldieu. Nicolo Isouard (1777-1818), to give him his full name, shone
less by musical science or dramatic instinct than by a delicate and
pathetic grace which endeared his music to the hearts of his
contemporaries. He had little originality, and his facility often
descends to commonplace, but much of the music in 'Joconde' and
'Cendrillon' lives by grace of its inimitable tenderness and charm.
Nicolo is the Greuze of music. Boieldieu (1775-1834) stands upon a very
different plane. Although he worked within restricted limits, his
originality and resource place him among the great masters of French
music. His earlier works are, for the most, light and delicate trifles;
but in 'Jean de Paris' (1812) and 'La Dame Blanche' (1825), to name only
two of his many successful works, he shows real solidity of style and no
little command of musical invention, combined with the delicate melody
and pathetic grace which rarely deserted him. The real strength and
distinction of 'La Dame Blanche' have sufficed to keep it alive until
the present day, although it has never, in spite of the Scottish origin
of the libretto, won in this country a tithe of the popularity which it
enjoys in France. The story is a combination of incidents taken from
Scott's 'Monastery' and 'Guy Mannering.' The Laird of Avenel, who was
obliged to fly from Scotland after the battle of Culloden, entrusted his
estates to his steward Gaveston. Many years having passed without
tidings of the absentee, Gaveston determines to put the castle and lands
up for sale. He has sedulously fostered a tradition which is current
among the villagers, that the castle is haunted by a White Lady, hoping
by this means to deter any of the neighbouring farmers from competing
with him for the estate. The day before the sale takes place, Dickson,
one of the farmers, is summoned to the castle by Anna, an orphan girl
who had been befriended by the Laird. Dickson is too superstitious to
venture, but his place is taken by George Brown, a young soldier, who
arrived at the village that day. George has an interview with the White
Lady, who is of course Anna in disguise. She recognises George as the
man whose life she saved after a battle, and knowing him to be the
rightful heir of Avenel, promises to help him in recovering his
property. She has discovered that treasure is concealed in a statue of
the White Lady, and with this she empowers George to buy back his
ancestral lands and castle. Gaveston is outbidden at the sale, and
George weds Anna. Boieldieu's music has much melodic beauty, though its
tenderness is apt to degenerate into sentimentality. In its original
form the opera would nowadays be unbearably tiresome, and only a
judicious shortening of the interminable duets and trios can make them
tolerable to a modern audience. In spite of much that is conventional
and old-fashioned, the alternate vigour and grace of 'La Dame Blanche'
and the genuine musical interest of the score make it the most
favourable specimen of this period of French opera comique. It is the
last offspring of the older school. After Boieldieu's time the influence
of Rossini became paramount, and opera comique, unable to resist a spell
so formidable, began to lose its distinctively national characteristics.




CHAPTER VI

WEBER AND THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL


WEBER--SPOHR--MARSCHNER--KREUTZER--LORTZING--
NICOLAI--FLOTOW--MENDELSSOHN--SCHUBERT--SCHUMANN


Although, for the sake of convenience, it is customary to speak of Weber
as the founder of the romantic school in music, it must not be imagined
that the new school sprang into being at the production of 'Der
Freischuetz.' For many years the subtle influence of the romantic school
in literature--the circle which gathered round Tieck, Fichte, and the
Schlegels--had been felt in music. We have seen how the voluptuous
delights of Armida's garden affected even the stately muse of Gluck; and
in the generation which succeeded him, though opera still followed
classic lines of form, in subject and treatment it was tinged with the
prismatic colours of romance. Mehul's curious experiments in
orchestration, and the solemn splendour of Mozart's Egyptian mysteries,
alike show the influence of the romantic spirit as surely as the
weirdest piece of _diablerie_ ever devised by Weber or his followers.
Yet though intimations of the approaching change had for long been
perceptible to the discerning eye, it was not until the days of Weber
that the classical forms and methods which had ruled the world of opera
since the days of Gluck gave way before the newer and more vivid passion
of romance. Even then it must not be forgotten that the romantic school
differed from the classic more in view of life and treatment of subject
than in actual subject itself. The word romance conjures up weird
visions of the supernatural or glowing pictures of chivalry; but
although it is true that Weber and his followers loved best to treat of
such themes as these, they had by no means been excluded from the
repertory of their classical predecessors. The supernatural terrors of
'Der Freischuetz' must not make us forget the terrific finale to 'Don
Giovanni,' nor can the most glowing picture from 'Euryanthe' erase
memories of Rinaldo and the Crusaders in 'Armide.' The romantic
movement, however, as interpreted by Weber, aimed definitely at certain
things, which had not previously come within the scope of music, though
for many years they had been the common property of art and literature.
The romantic movement was primarily a revolt against the tyranny of man
and his emotions. It claimed a wider stage and an ampler air. Nature was
not henceforth to be merely the background against which man played his
part. The beauty of landscape, the glory of the setting sun, the
splendour of the sea, the mystery of the forest--all these the romantic
movement taught men to regard not merely as the accessories of a scene
in which man was the predominant figure, but as subjects in themselves
worthy of artistic treatment. The genius of Weber (1786-1826) was a
curious compound of two differing types. In essence it was thoroughly
German--sane in inspiration, and drawing its strength from the homely
old Volkslieder, so dear to every true German heart. Yet over this solid
foundation there soared an imagination surely more delicate and ethereal
than has ever been allotted to mortal musician before or since, by the
aid of which Weber was enabled to treat all subjects beneath heaven with
equal success. He is equally at home in the eerie horrors of the Wolf's
Glen, in the moonlit revels of Oberon, and in the knightly pomp and
circumstance of the Provencal court.

Weber's early years were a continual struggle against defeat and
disappointment. His musical education was somewhat superficial, and his
first works, 'Sylvana' and 'Peter Schmoll,' gave little promise of his
later glory. 'Abu Hassan,' a one-act comic opera, which was produced in
1811, at Munich, was his first real success. Slight as the story is, it
is by no means unamusing, and the music, which is a piece of the
daintiest filagree-work imaginable, has helped to keep the little work
alive to the present day. Such plot as there is describes the shifts of
Hassan and Fatima, his wife, to avoid paying their creditors, who are
unduly pressing in their demands. Finally they both pretend to be dead,
and by this means excite the regret of their master and mistress, the
Sultan and Sultana, a regret which takes the practical form of
releasing them from their embarrassments.

In 'Der Freischuetz' Weber was at last in his true element. The plot of
the opera is founded upon an old forest legend of a demon who persuades
huntsmen to sell their souls in exchange for magic bullets which never
miss their mark. Caspar, who is a ranger in the service of Prince
Ottokar of Bohemia, had sold himself to the demon Samiel. The day is
approaching when his soul will become forfeit to the powers of evil,
unless he can bring a fresh victim in his place. He looks around him for
a possible substitute, and his choice falls upon Max, another ranger,
who had been unlucky in the preliminary contest for the post of chief
huntsman, and is only too ready to listen to Caspar's promise of
unerring bullets. Max loves Agathe, the daughter of Kuno, the retiring
huntsman, and unless he can secure the vacant post, he has little hope
of being able to marry her. He agrees eagerly to Caspar's proposal, and
promises to meet him at midnight in the haunted Wolf's Glen, there to go
through the ceremony of casting the magic bullets. Meanwhile Agathe is
oppressed by forebodings of coming evil. The fall of an old picture
seems to her a presage of woe, and her lively cousin Aennchen can do
little to console her. The appearance of Max on his way to the Wolf's
Glen, cheers her but little. He too has been troubled by strange
visions, and as the moment of the rendezvous approaches his courage
begins to fail. Nevertheless he betakes himself to the Glen, and there,
amidst scenes of the wildest supernatural horror, the bullets are cast
in the presence of the terrible Samiel himself. Six of them are for Max,
to be used by him in the approaching contest, while the seventh will be
at the disposal of the demon. In the third act Agathe is discovered
preparing for her wedding. She has dreamed that, in the shape of a dove,
she was shot by Max, and she cannot shake off a sense of approaching
trouble. Her melancholy is not dissipated by the discovery that, instead
of a bridal crown, a funeral wreath has been prepared for her; however,
to console herself, she determines to wear a wreath of sacred roses,
which had been given her by the hermit of the forest. The last scene
shows the shooting contest on which the future of Max and Agathe
depends. Max makes six shots in succession, all of which hit the mark.
At last, at the Prince's command, he fires at a dove which is flying
past. Agathe falls with a shriek, but is protected by her wreath, while
Samiel directs the bullet to Caspar's heart. At the sight of his
associate's fate Max is stricken with remorse, and tells the story of
his unholy compact. The Prince is about to banish him from his service,
when the hermit appears and intercedes for the unfortunate youth. The
Prince is mollified, and it is decided that Max shall have a year's
probation, after which he shall be permitted to take the post of chief
huntsman and marry Agathe.

'Der Freischuetz' is, upon the whole, the most thoroughly characteristic
of Weber's works. The famous passage for the horns, with which the
overture opens, strikes the note of mystery and romance which echoes
through the work. The overture itself is a notable example of that new
beauty which Weber infused into the time-honoured form. If he was not
actually the first--for Beethoven had already written his 'Leonore'
overtures--to make the overture a picture in brief of the incidents of
the opera, he developed the idea with so much picturesque power and
imagination that the preludes to his operas remain the envy and despair
of modern theatrical composers. The inspiration of 'Der Freischuetz' is
drawn so directly from the German Volkslied, that at its production
Weber was roundly accused of plagiarism by many critics. Time has shown
the folly of such charges. 'Der Freischuetz' is German to the core, and
every page of it bears the impress of German inspiration, but the
glamour of Weber's genius transmuted the rough material he employed into
a fabric of the richest art. Of the imaginative power of such scenes as
the famous incantation it is unnecessary to speak. It introduced a new
element into music, and one which was destined to have an almost
immeasurable influence upon modern music. Weber's power of
characterisation was remarkable, as shown particularly in the music
assigned to Agathe and Aennchen, but in this respect he was certainly
inferior to some of his predecessors, notably to Mozart. But in
imaginative power and in the minute knowledge of orchestral detail,
which enabled him to translate his conceptions into music, he has never
been surpassed among writers for the stage. Modern opera, if we may
speak in general terms, may be said to date from the production of 'Der
Freischuetz.'

Operatic composers are too often dogged by a fate which seems to compel
them to wed their noblest inspirations to libretti of incorrigible
dulness, and Weber was even more unfortunate in this respect than his
brethren of the craft. After 'Der Freischuetz,' the libretti which he
took in hand were of the most unworthy description, and even his genius
has not been able to give them immortality. 'Euryanthe' was the work of
Helmine von Chezy, the authoress of 'Rosamunde,' for which Schubert
wrote his entrancing incidental music. Weber was probably attracted by
the romantic elements of the story, the chivalry of mediaeval France, the
marches and processions, the pomp and glitter of the court, and
overlooked the weak points of the plot. To tell the truth, much of the
libretto of 'Euryanthe' borders upon the incomprehensible. The main
outline of the story is as follows. At a festival given by the King of
France, Count Adolar praises the beauty and virtue of his betrothed
Euryanthe, and Lysiart, who also loves her, offers to wager all he
possesses that he will contrive to gain her love. Adolar accepts the
challenge, and Lysiart departs for Nevers, where Euryanthe is living.
The second act discovers Euryanthe and Eglantine, an outcast damsel whom
she has befriended. Eglantine secretly loves Adolar, but extracts a
promise from Lysiart, who has arrived at Nevers, that he will marry
her. In return for this she gives him a ring belonging to Euryanthe,
which she has stolen, and tells him a secret relating to a mysterious
Emma, a sister of Adolar, which Euryanthe has incautiously revealed to
her. Armed with these Lysiart returns to the court, and quickly
persuades Adolar and the King that he has won Euryanthe's affection. No
one listens to her denials; she is condemned to death, and Adolar's
lands and titles are given to Lysiart. Euryanthe is led into the desert
to be killed by Adolar. On the way he is attacked by a serpent, which he
kills, though not before Euryanthe has proved her devotion by offering
to die in her lover's place. Adolar then leaves Euryanthe to perish,
declaring that he has not the heart to kill her. She is found in a dying
condition by the King, whom she speedily convinces of her innocence.
Meanwhile Adolar has returned to Nevers, to encounter the bridal
procession of Eglantine and Lysiart. Eglantine confesses that she helped
to ruin Euryanthe in the hope of winning Adolar, and is promptly stabbed
by Lysiart. Everything being satisfactorily cleared up, Euryanthe
conveniently awakes from a trance into which she had fallen, and the
lovers are finally united. Puerile as the libretto is, it inspired Weber
with some of the finest music he ever wrote. The spectacular portions of
the opera are animated by the true spirit of chivalry, while all that is
connected with the incomprehensible Emma and her secret is unspeakably
eerie. The characters of the drama are such veritable puppets, that no
expenditure of talent could make them interesting; but the resemblance
between the general scheme of the plot of 'Euryanthe' and that of
'Lohengrin' should not be passed over, nor the remarkable way in which
Weber had anticipated some of Wagner's most brilliant triumphs, notably
in the characters of Eglantine and Lysiart, who often seem curiously to
foreshadow Ortrud and Telramund, and in the finale to the second act, in
which the single voice of Euryanthe, like that of Elisabeth in
'Tannhaeuser,' is contrasted with the male chorus.

Weber's last opera, 'Oberon,' is one of the few works written in recent
times by a foreign composer of the first rank for the English stage. The
libretto, which was the work of Planche, is founded upon an old French
romance, 'Huon of Bordeaux,' and though by no means a model of lucidity,
it contains many scenes both powerful and picturesque, which must have
captivated the imagination of a musician so impressionable as Weber. The
opera opens in fairyland, where a bevy of fairies is watching the
slumbers of Oberon. The fairy king has quarrelled with Titania, and has
vowed never to be reconciled to her until he shall find two lovers
constant to each other through trial and temptation. Puck, who has been
despatched to search for such a pair, enters with the news that Sir Huon
of Bordeaux, who had accidentally slain the son of Charlemagne, has been
commanded, in expiation of his crime, to journey to Bagdad, to claim the
Caliph's daughter as his bride, and slay the man who sits at his right
hand. Oberon forthwith throws Huon into a deep sleep, and in a vision
shows him Rezia, the daughter of the Caliph, of whom the ardent knight
instantly becomes enamoured. He then conveys him to the banks of the
Tigris, and giving him a magic horn, starts him upon his dangerous
enterprise. In the Caliph's palace Huon fights with Babekan, Rezia's
suitor, rescues the maiden, and with the aid of the magic horn carries
her off from the palace, while his esquire Sherasmin performs the same
kind office for Fatima, Rezia's attendant. On their way home they
encounter a terrific storm, raised by the power of Oberon to try their
constancy. They are ship-wrecked, and Rezia is carried off by pirates to
Tunis, whilst Huon is left for dead upon the beach. At Tunis more
troubles are in store for the hapless pair. Huon, who has been
transported by the fairies across the sea, finds his way into the house
of the Emir, where Rezia is in slavery. There he is unlucky enough to
win the favour of Roshana, the Emir's wife, and before he can escape
from her embraces he is discovered by the Emir himself, and condemned to
be burned alive. Rezia proclaims herself his wife, and she also is
condemned to the stake; but at this crisis Oberon intervenes. The lovers
have been tried enough, and their constancy is rewarded. They are
transported to the court of Charlemagne, where a royal welcome awaits
them.

Although written for England, 'Oberon' has never achieved much
popularity in this, or indeed in any country. The fairy music is
exquisite throughout, but the human interest of the story is after all
slight, and Weber, on whom the hand of death was heavy as he wrote the
score, failed to infuse much individuality into his characters. 'Oberon'
was his last work, and he died in London soon after it was produced.
During the last few years of his life he had been engaged in a desultory
way upon the composition of a comic opera, 'Die drei Pintos,' founded
upon a Spanish subject. He left this in an unfinished state, but some
time after his death it was found that the manuscript sketches and notes
for the work were on a scale sufficiently elaborate to give a proper
idea of what the composer's intentions with regard to the work really
were. The work of arrangement was entrusted to Herr G. Mahler, and under
his auspices 'Die drei Pintos' was actually produced, though with little
success.

At the present time the only opera of Weber which can truthfully be said
to belong to the current repertory is 'Der Freischuetz,' and even this is
rarely performed out of Germany. The small amount of favour which
'Euryanthe' and 'Oberon' enjoy is due, as has been already pointed out,
chiefly to the weakness of their libretti, yet it seems strange that the
man to whom the whole tendency of modern opera is due should hold so
small a place in our affections. The changes which Weber and his
followers effected, though less drastic, were in their results fully as
important as those of Gluck. In the orchestra as well as on the stage
he introduced a new spirit, a new point of view. What modern music owes
to him may be summed up in a word. Without Weber, Wagner would have been
impossible.

Louis Spohr (1784-1859) is now almost forgotten as an operatic composer,
but at one time his popularity was only second to that of Weber. Many
competent critics have constantly affirmed that a day will come when
Spohr's operas, now neglected, will return to favour once more; but
years pass, and there seems no sign of a revival of interest in his
work. Yet he has a certain importance in the history of opera; for, so
far as chronology is concerned, he ought perhaps to be termed the
founder of the romantic school rather than Weber, since his 'Faust' was
produced in 1818, and 'Der Freischuetz' did not appear until 1821. But
the question seems to turn not so much upon whether Spohr or Weber were
first in the field, as whether Spohr is actually a romantic composer at
all. If the subjects which he treated were all that need be taken into
account, the matter could easily be decided. No composer ever dealt more
freely in the supernatural than Spohr. His operas are peopled with
elves, ghosts, and goblins. Ruined castles, midnight assassins, and
distressed damsels greet us on every page. But if we go somewhat deeper,
we find that the real qualities of romanticism are strangely absent from
his music. His form differs little from that of his classical
predecessors, and his orchestration is curiously arid and unsuggestive;
in a word, the breath of imagination rarely animates his pages. Yet the
workmanship of his operas is so admirable, and his vein of melody is so
delicate and refined, that it is difficult to help thinking that Spohr
has been unjustly neglected. His 'Faust,' which has nothing to do with
Goethe's drama, was popular in England fifty years ago; and 'Jessonda,'
which contains the best of his music, is still occasionally performed in
Germany. The rest of his works, with the exception of a few scattered
airs, such as 'Rose softly blooming,' from 'Zemire und Azor,' seem to be
completely forgotten.

Heinrich Marschner (1796-1861), though not a pupil of Weber, was
strongly influenced by his music, and carried on the traditions of the
romantic school worthily and well. He was a man of vivid imagination,
and revelled in uncanny legends of the supernatural. His works are
performed with tolerable frequency in Germany, and still please by
reason of their inexhaustible flow of melody and their brilliant and
elaborate orchestration. 'Hans Heiling,' his masterpiece, is founded
upon a sombre old legend of the Erzgebirge. The king of the gnomes has
seen and loved a Saxon maiden, Anna by name, and to win her heart he
leaves his palace in the bowels of the earth and masquerades as a
village schoolmaster under the name of Hans Heiling. Anna is flattered
by his attentions, and promises to be his wife; but she soon tires of
her gloomy lover, and ends by openly admitting her preference for the
hunter Conrad. Her resolution to break with Hans is confirmed by an
apparition of the queen of the gnomes, Hans Heiling's mother, surrounded
by her attendant sprites, who warns her under fearful penalties to
forswear the love of an immortal. Hans Heiling is furious at the perfidy
of Anna, and vows terrible vengeance upon her and Conrad, which he is
about to put into execution with the aid of his gnomes. At the last
moment, however, his mother appears, and persuades him to relinquish all
hopes of earthly love and to return with her to their subterranean home.
There is much in this strange story which suggests the legend of the
Flying Dutchman, and, bearing in mind the admiration which in his early
days Wagner felt for the works of Marschner, it is interesting to trace
in 'Hans Heiling' the source of much that is familiar to us in the score
of 'Der Fliegende Hollaender.' Of Marschner's other operas, the most
familiar are 'Templer und Juedin,' founded upon Sir Walter Scott's
'Ivanhoe,' a fine work, suffering from a confused and disconnected
libretto; and 'Der Vampyr,' a tale of unmitigated gloom and horror.

Weber and Marschner show the German romantic school at its best; for the
lesser men, such as Hoffmann and Lindpaintner, did little but reproduce
the salient features of their predecessors more or less faithfully. The
romantic school is principally associated with the sombre dramas, in
which the taste of that time delighted; but there was another side to
the movement which must not be neglected. The Singspiel, established by
Hiller and perfected by Mozart, had languished during the early years
of the century, or rather had fallen into the hands of composers who
were entirely unable to do justice to its possibilities. The romantic
movement touched it into new life, and a school arose which contrived by
dint of graceful melody and ingenious orchestral device to invest with
real musical interest the simple stories in which the German
middle-class delights. The most successful of these composers were
Kreutzer and Lortzing.

Conradin Kreutzer (1782-1849) was a prolific composer, but the only one
of his operas which can honestly be said to have survived to our times
is 'Das Nachtlager von Granada.' This tells the tale of an adventure
which befell the Prince Regent of Spain. While hunting in the mountains
he falls in with Gabriela, a pretty peasant maiden who is in deep
distress. She confides to him that her affairs of the heart have gone
awry. Her lover, Gomez the shepherd, is too poor to marry, and her
father wishes her to accept the Croesus of the village, a man whom she
detests. The handsome huntsman--for such she supposes him to
be--promises to intercede for her with his patron the Prince, and when
her friends and relations, a band of arrant smugglers and thieves,
appear, he tries to buy their consent to her union with Gomez by means
of a gold chain which he happens to be wearing. The sight of so much
wealth arouses the cupidity of the knaves, and they at once brew a plot
to murder the huntsman in his sleep. Luckily Gabriela overhears their
scheming, and puts the Prince upon his guard. The assassins find him
prepared for their assault, and ready to defend himself to the last
drop of blood. Fortunately matters do not come to a climax. A body of
the Prince's attendants arrive in time to prevent any bloodshed, and the
opera ends with the discomfiture of the villains and the happy
settlement of Gabriela's love affairs. Kreutzer's music is for the most
part slight, and occasionally borders upon the trivial, but several
scenes are treated in the true romantic spirit, and some of the
concerted pieces are admirably written. Lortzing (1803-1852) was a more
gifted musician than Kreutzer, and several of his operas are still
exceedingly popular in Germany. The scene of 'Czar und Zimmermann,'
which is fairly well known in England as 'Peter the Shipwright,' is laid
at Saardam, where Peter the Great is working in a shipyard under the
name of Michaelhoff. There is another Russian employed in the same yard,
a deserter named Peter Ivanhoff, and the very slight incidents upon
which the action of the opera hinges arise from the mistakes of a
blundering burgomaster who confuses the identity of the two men. The
music is exceedingly bright and tuneful, and much of it is capitally
written. Scarcely less popular in Germany than 'Czar und Zimmermann' is
'Der Wildschuetz' (The Poacher), a bustling comedy of intrigue and
disguise, which owes its name to the mistake of a foolish old village
schoolmaster, who fancies that he has shot a stag in the baronial
preserves. The chief incidents in the piece arise from the humours of a
vivacious baroness, who disguises herself as a servant in order to make
the acquaintance of her _fiance_, unknown to him. The music of 'Der
Wildschuetz' is no less bright and unpretentious than that of 'Czar und
Zimmermann'; in fact, these two works may be taken as good specimens of
Lortzing's engaging talent. His strongest points are a clever knack of
treating the voices contrapuntally in concerted pieces, and a humorous
trick of orchestration, two features with which English audiences have
become pleasantly familiar in Sir Arthur Sullivan's operettas, which
works indeed owe not a little to the influence of Lortzing and Kreutzer.

Inferior even to the slightest of the minor composers of the romantic
school was Flotow, whose 'Martha' nevertheless has survived to our time,
while hundreds of works far superior in every way have perished
irretrievably. Flotow (1812-1883) was a German by birth, but his music
is merely a feeble imitation of the popular Italianisms of the day.
'Martha' tells the story of a freakish English lady who, with her maid,
disguises herself as a servant and goes to the hiring fair at Richmond.
There they fall in with an honest farmer of the neighbourhood named
Plunket, and his friend Lionel, who promptly engage them. The two
couples soon fall in love with each other, but various hindrances arise
which serve to prolong the story into four weary acts. Flotow had a
certain gift of melody, and the music of 'Martha' has the merit of a
rather trivial tunefulness, but the score is absolutely devoid of any
real musical interest, and the fact that performances of such a work as
'Martha' are still possible in London gives an unfortunate impression of
the standard of musical taste prevailing in England. Otto Nicolai
(1810-1849) began by imitating Italian music, but in 'Die lustigen
Weiber von Windsor,' a capital adaptation of Shakespeare's 'Merry Wives
of Windsor,' which was only produced a few months before his death, he
returned to the type of comic opera which was popular at that time in
Germany. He was an excellent musician, and the captivating melody of
this genial little work is supplemented by excellent concerted writing
and thoroughly sound orchestration.

To this period belong the operas written by three composers who in other
branches of music have won immortality, although their dramatic works
have failed to win lasting favour.

Mendelssohn's (1809-1847) boyish opera 'Die Hochzeit des Camacho' is too
inexperienced a work to need more than a passing word, and his
Liederspiel 'Heimkehr aus der Fremde' is little more than a collection
of songs; but the finale to his unfinished 'Lorelei' shows that he
possessed genuine dramatic power, and it must be a matter for regret
that his difficulties in fixing on a libretto prevented his giving
anything to the permanent repertory of the stage.

Schubert (1797-1828) wrote many works for the stage--romantic operas
like 'Fierrabras' and 'Alfonso und Estrella,' operettas like 'Der
haeusliche Krieg,' and farces like 'Die Zwillingsbrueder.' Most of them
were saddled by inane libretti, and though occasionally revived by
enthusiastic admirers of the composer, only prove that Schubert's talent
was essentially not dramatic, however interesting his music may be to
musicians.

Schumann's (1810-1856) one contribution to the history of opera,
'Genoveva,' is decidedly more important, and indeed it seems possible
that after many years of neglect it may at last take a place in the
modern repertory. It is founded upon a tragedy by Hebbel, and tells of
the passion of Golo for Genoveva, the wife of his patron Siegfried, his
plot to compromise her, and the final triumph of the constant wife. The
music cannot be said to be undramatic; on the contrary, Schumann often
realises the situations with considerable success: but he had little
power of characterisation, and all the characters sing very much the
same kind of music. This gives a feeling of monotony to the score, which
is hardly dispelled even by the many beauties with which it is adorned.
Nevertheless 'Genoveva' has been revived in several German towns of late
years, and its music has always met with much applause from
connoisseurs, though it is never likely to be generally popular.




CHAPTER VII

ROSSINI, DONIZETTI, AND BELLINI


While Weber was reconstructing opera in Germany and laying the
foundations upon which the vast structure of modern lyrical drama was
afterwards reared by the composers of our own day, reforms, or at any
rate innovations, were being introduced into Italian opera by a musician
scarcely less gifted even than the founder of the romantic school
himself. Rossini (1792-1868) owed but little of his fame to instruction
or study. As soon as he had been assured by his master that he knew
enough of the grammar of music to write an opera, he relinquished his
studies once for all, and started life as a composer. In this perhaps he
showed his wisdom, for his natural gifts were of such a nature as could
scarcely have been enhanced by erudition, and the mission which he so
amply fulfilled in freeing his national art from eighteenth-century
convention was certainly not one which depended upon a profound
knowledge of counterpoint. Nature had fortunately endowed him with
precisely the equipment necessary for the man who was to reform Italian
opera. The school of Paisiello, notwithstanding its many merits, had
several grievous weaknesses, of which the most prominent were
uniformity of melodic type, nerveless and conventional orchestration,
and intolerable prolixity. Rossini brought to his task a vein of melody
as inexhaustible in inspiration as it was novel in form, a natural
instinct for instrumental colour, and a firm conviction that brevity was
the soul of wit. He leapt into fame with 'Tancredi,' which was produced
in 1813 and established his reputation as a composer of opera seria. In
opera buffa, a field in which his talents shone even more brilliantly,
his earliest success was made with 'L'Italiana in Algeri' (1813), which
was followed in 1815 by the world-famous 'Barbiere di Siviglia.' This
was originally produced in Rome under the name of 'Almaviva,' and
strangely enough, proved an emphatic failure. For this, however, the
music was scarcely responsible. The people of Rome were at that time
devotees of the music of Paisiello, and resented the impertinence of the
upstart Rossini in venturing to borrow a subject which had already been
treated by the older master. 'Il Barbiere' soon recovered from the shock
of its unfriendly reception, and is now one of the very few of Rossini's
works which have survived to the present day. The story is bright and
amusing and the music brilliant and exhilarating, but it is to be feared
that the real explanation of the continued success of the little opera
lies in the opportunity which it offers to the prima donna of
introducing her favourite _cheval de bataille_ in the lesson scene. The
scene of the opera is laid at Seville. Count Almaviva has fallen in
love with Rosina, a fascinating damsel, whose guardian, Bartolo, keeps
her under lock and key, in the hope of persuading her to marry himself.
Figaro, a ubiquitous barber, who is in everybody's confidence, takes the
Count under his protection, and contrives to smuggle him into the house
in the disguise of a drunken soldier. Unfortunately this scheme is
frustrated by the arrival of the guard, who arrest the refractory hero
and carry him off to gaol. In the second act the Count succeeds in
getting into the house as a music-master, but in order to gain the
suspicious Bartolo's confidence he has to show him one of Rosina's
letters to himself, pretending that it was given him by a mistress of
Almaviva. Bartolo is delighted with the news of the Count's infidelity
and hastens to tell the scandal to Rosina, whose jealousy and
disappointment nearly bring Almaviva's deep-laid schemes to destruction.
Happily he finds an opportunity of persuading her of his constancy while
her guardian's back is turned, and induces her to elope before Bartolo
has discovered the fraud practised upon him. The music is a delightful
example of Rossini in his gayest and merriest mood. It sparkles with wit
and fancy, and is happily free from those concessions to the vanity or
idiosyncrasy of individual singers which do so much to render his music
tedious to modern ears. Of Rossini's lighter works, 'Il Barbiere' is
certainly the most popular, though, musically speaking, it is perhaps
not superior to 'La Gazza Ladra,' which, however, is saddled with an
idiotic libretto. None of his tragic operas except 'Guillaume Tell,'
which belongs to a later period, have retained their hold upon the
affections of the public. Nevertheless there is so much excellent music
in the best of them, that it would not be strange if the course of time
should bring them once more into favour, provided always that singers
were forthcoming capable of singing the elaborate _fioriture_ with which
they abound. Perhaps the finest of the serious operas of Rossini's
Italian period is 'Semiramide' a work which is especially interesting as
a proof of the strong influence which Mozart exercised upon him. The
plot is a Babylonian version of the story of Agamemnon, telling of the
vengeance taken by Arsaces, the son of Ninus and Semiramis, upon his
guilty mother, who, with the help of her paramour Assur, had slain her
husband. Much of the music is exceedingly powerful, notably that which
accompanies the apparition of the ghost of Ninus (although this is
evidently inspired by 'Don Giovanni'), and the passionate scene in which
the conscience-stricken Assur pours forth his soul in tempest. More
thoroughly Italian in type is 'Mose in Egitto,' a curious though
effective version of the Biblical story, which is still occasionally
performed as an oratorio in this country, a proceeding which naturally
gives little idea of its real merits. In 1833 it was actually given
under the proper conditions, as a sacred opera, strengthened by a
generous infusion of Handel's 'Israel in Egypt,' under the direction of
Mr. Rophino Lacy. It would be an idle task to give even the names of
Rossini's many operas. Suffice it to say that between 1810 and 1828 he
produced upwards of forty distinct works. In 1829 came his last and
greatest work, 'Guillaume Tell,' which was written for the Grand Opera
in Paris. The libretto was the work of many hands, and Rossini's own
share in it was not a small one. It follows Schiller with tolerable
closeness. In the first act Tell saves the life of Leuthold, who is
being pursued by Gessler's soldiers; and Melchthal, the patriarch of the
village, is put to death on a charge of insubordination. His son Arnold
loves Matilda, the sister of Gessler, and hesitates between love and
duty. Finally, however, he joins Tell, who assembles the men of the
three forest cantons, and binds them with an oath to exterminate their
oppressors or perish in the attempt. In the third act comes the famous
archery scene. Tell refuses to bow to Gessler's hat, and is condemned to
shoot the apple from his son's head. This he successfully accomplishes,
but the presence of a second arrow in his quiver arouses Gessler's
suspicions. Tell confesses that had he killed his son, the second arrow
would have despatched the tyrant, and is at once thrown into prison. In
the last act we find Arnold raising a band of followers and himself
accomplishing the rescue of Tell; Gessler is slain, and Matilda is
united to her lover.

'Guillaume Tell' is not only indisputably Rossini's finest work, but it
also give convincing proof of the plasticity of the composer's genius.
Accustomed as he had been for many years to turning out Italian operas
by the score--graceful trifles enough, but too often flimsy and
conventional--it says much for the character of the man that, when the
occasion arrived, he could attack such a subject as that of Tell with
the proper seriousness and reserve. He took what was best in the style
and tradition of French opera and welded it to the thoroughly Italian
fabric with which he was familiar. He put aside the excessive
ornamentation with which his earlier works had been overladen, and
treated the voices with a simplicity and dignity thoroughly in keeping
with the subject. The choral and instrumental parts of the opera are
particularly important; the latter especially have a colour and variety
which may be considered to have had a large share in forming the taste
for delicate orchestral effects for which modern French composers are
famous. 'Guillaume Tell' was to have been the first of a series of five
operas written for the Paris Opera by special arrangement with the
government of Charles X. The revolution of 1830 put an end to this
scheme, and a few years later, finding himself displaced by Meyerbeer in
the affections of the fickle Parisian public, Rossini made up his mind
to write no more for the stage. He lived for nearly forty years after
the production of 'Guillaume Tell,' but preferred a life of ease and
leisure to entering the lists once more as a candidate for fame. What
the world lost by this decision, it is difficult to say; but if we
remember the extraordinary development which took place in the style and
methods of Wagner and Verdi, we cannot think without regret of the
composer of 'Guillaume Tell' making up his mind while still a young man
to abandon the stage for ever. Nevertheless, although much of his music
soon became old-fashioned, Rossini's work was not unimportant. The
invention of the cabaletta, or quick movement, following the cavatina or
slow movement, must be ascribed to him, an innovation which has affected
the form of opera, German and French, as well as Italian, throughout
this century. Even more important was the change which he introduced
into the manner of singing _fioriture_ or florid music. Before his day
singers had been accustomed to introduce cadenzas of their own, to a
great extent when they liked. Rossini insisted upon their singing
nothing but what was set down for them. Naturally he was compelled to
write cadenzas for them as elaborate and effective as those which they
had been in the habit of improvising, so that much of his Italian music
sounds empty and meaningless to our ears. But he introduced the thin
edge of the wedge, and although even to the days of Jenny Lind singers
were occasionally permitted to interpolate cadenzas of their own, the
old tradition that an opera was merely an opportunity for the display of
individual vanity was doomed.

The music of Donizetti (1798-1848) is now paying the price of a long
career of popularity by enduring a season of neglect. His tragic operas,
which were the delight of opera-goers in the fifties and sixties, sound
cold and thin to modern ears. There is far more genuine life in his
lighter works, many of which still delight us by their unaffected
tunefulness and vivacity. Donizetti had little musical education, and
his spirit rebelled so strongly against the rules of counterpoint that
he preferred to go into the army rather than to devote himself to church
music. His first opera, 'Enrico di Borgogna,' was produced in 1818, and
for the next five-and-twenty years he worked assiduously, producing in
all no fewer than sixty-five operas.

'Lucia di Lammermoor' (1835), which was for many years one of the most
popular works in the Covent Garden repertory, has now sunk to the level
of a mere prima donna's opera, to be revived once or twice a year in
order to give a popular singer an opportunity for vocal display. Yet
there are passages in it of considerable dramatic power, and many of the
melodies are fresh and expressive. The plot is founded upon 'The Bride
of Lammermoor,' but it is Scott's tragic romance seen through very
Italian spectacles indeed. Henry Ashton has promised the hand of his
sister Lucy to Lord Arthur Bucklaw, hoping by means of this marriage to
recruit the fallen fortunes of his house. Lucy loves Edgar Ravenswood,
the hereditary foe of her family, and vows to be true to him while he is
away on an embassy in France. During his absence Ashton contrives to
intercept Ravenswood's letters to his sister, and finally produces a
forged paper, which Lucy accepts as the proof of her lover's infidelity.
She yields to the pressure of her brother's entreaties, and consents to
marry Lord Arthur. No sooner has she set her name to the contract than
the door opens and Edgar appears. Confronted with the proof of Lucy's
inconstancy, he curses the house of Lammermoor and rushes away. Ashton
follows him, and, after a stormy interview, challenges him to mortal
combat. Meanwhile, on her bridal night Lucy has lost her reason and in
her frenzy stabbed her unfortunate bridegroom. On coming once more to
her senses, she puts an end to her own life; while Edgar, on hearing of
the tragedy, betakes himself to the tombs of his ancestors and there
commits suicide. Much of the music suffers from the conventionality to
which Donizetti was a slave, notably the ridiculous mad scene, a
delightfully suave melody ending with an elaborate cadenza divided
between the voice and flute; but there are passages of real power, such
as the fine sextet in the contract scene, and the gloomy air in which
the hero calls upon the spirits of his forefathers.

Less sombre than 'Lucia,' and quite as tuneful, is 'Lucrezia Borgia,'
once a prime favourite at Covent Garden, but now rarely heard. Lucrezia
Borgia, the wife of Alfonso of Ferrara, has recognised Gennaro, a young
Venetian, as an illegitimate son of her own, and watches over him with
tender interest, though she will not disclose the real relation in which
they stand to one another. Gennaro, taunted by his friends with being a
victim of Lucrezia's fascinations, publicly insults her, and is
thereupon condemned to death by the Duke, who is glad of the opportunity
of taking vengeance upon the man whom he believes to be his wife's
paramour. Gennaro is poisoned in the presence of his mother, who,
however, directly the Duke's back is turned, gives him an antidote which
restores him to health. In the last act Lucrezia takes comprehensive
vengeance upon the friends of Gennaro, whose taunts still rankle in her
bosom, by poisoning all the wine at a supper party. Unfortunately
Gennaro happens to be present, and as this time he refuses to take an
antidote, even though Lucrezia reveals herself as his mother, he expires
in her arms.

There is little attempt at dramatic significance in the music of
'Lucrezia Borgia,' but the score bubbles over with delicious and wholly
inappropriate melodies. Occasionally, as in the final scene, there is a
touch of pathos, and sometimes some rather effective concerted music;
but, for the most part, Donizetti was content to write his charming
tunes, and to leave all expression to the singers. The orchestration of
his Italian operas is primitive in the extreme, and amply justifies
Wagner's taunt about the 'big guitar.' In works written for foreign
theatres Donizetti took more pains, and 'La Favorite,' produced in Paris
in 1840, is in many ways the strongest of his tragic works. The story is
more than usually repulsive. Fernando, a novice at the convent of St.
James of Compostella, is about to take monastic vows, when he catches
sight of a fair penitent, and bids farewell to the Church in order to
follow her to court. She turns out to be Leonora, the mistress of the
King, for whose _beaux yeux_ the latter is prepared to repudiate the
Queen and to brave all the terrors of Rome. Fernando finds Leonora
ready to reciprocate his passion, and by her means he obtains a
commission in the army. He returns covered with glory, and is rewarded
by the King, who has discovered his connection with Leonora, with the
hand of his cast-off mistress. After the marriage ceremony is over,
Fernando hears for the first time of Leonora's past. He flies to the
convent for consolation, followed by his unfortunate wife, who dies in
his arms after she has obtained forgiveness. 'La Favorite' is more
carefully written than was Donizetti's wont, and some of the concerted
music is really dramatic. There is a tradition that the last act, which
was an after-thought, was written in an incredibly short space of time,
but it is significant that the beautiful romanza 'Spirto gentil,' to
which the act and indeed the whole opera owes most of its popularity,
was transferred from an earlier and unperformed work, 'Le Duc d'Albe.'
It would be waste of time to describe the plots of any other serious
works by this composer. Many of them, such as 'Betly,' 'Linda di
Chamonix,' and 'Anna Bolena,' were successful when produced; but
Donizetti aimed merely at satisfying the prevailing taste of the day,
and when a new generation sprang up with different sympathies from that
which had preceded it, the operas which had seemed the most secure of
popularity were soon consigned to oblivion. It is a significant fact
that Donizetti's lighter works have stood the test of time more
successfully than his more serious efforts. Though the grandiose airs
and sham tragedy of 'Lucia' have long since ceased to impress us, we can
still take pleasure in the unaffected gaiety of 'La Fille du Regiment'
and 'Don Pasquale.' These and many similar works were written _currente
calamo_, and though their intrinsic musical interest is of course very
slight, they are totally free from the ponderous affectations of the
composer's serious operas. Here we see Donizetti at his best, because
here he writes according to the natural dictates of his imagination, not
in accordance with the foolish or depraved taste of fashionable
connoisseurs.

The scene of 'La Fille du Regiment' is laid in the Tyrol, where Tonio, a
peasant, has had the good fortune to save the life of Marie, the
vivandiere of a French regiment. Many years before the opening of the
story, Marie had been found upon the battle-field by Sergeant Sulpice,
and adopted by the regiment whose name she bears. The regiment, as a
body, has the right of disposing of her hand in marriage, and when Tonio
presses his claim, which is not disallowed by the heroine, it is decided
that he shall be allowed to marry her if he will consent to join the
regiment. Everything goes well, when a local grandee in the shape of the
Marchioness Berkenfeld suddenly appears, identifies Marie as her niece
by means of a letter which was found upon her by the Sergeant, and
carries her off to her castle hard by, leaving the unfortunate Tonio to
the bitterest reflections. In the second act Marie is at the castle of
Berkenfeld though by no means at ease in her unaccustomed surroundings.
Her efforts to imbibe the principles of etiquette are pleasantly
interrupted by the unexpected arrival of the regiment, with Tonio now as
Colonel at its head. But even his promotion will not soften the
Marchioness's heart. She discloses the fact that she is in reality
Marie's mother, and adjures her by her filial respect to give up the
thought of her low-born lover. Marie consents in an agony of grief. The
lovers part with many tears, and at the psychological moment the
Marchioness relents, and all ends happily.

Even slighter in scope is 'Don Pasquale,' a brilliant trifle, written
for the Theatre des Italiens in Paris, and there sung for the first time
in 1843, by Grisi, Mario, Tamburini, and Lablache. The story turns upon
a trick played by Ernesto and Norina, two young lovers, upon the uncle
and guardian of the former, Don Pasquale. Ernesto will not marry to
please his uncle, so the old gentleman determines to marry himself.
Norina is introduced to Don Pasquale as his sister by a certain Dr.
Malatesta, a friend of Ernesto, and the amorous old gentleman at once
succumbs to her charms. No sooner is the marriage contract signed than
Norina, acting upon her instructions, launches forth upon a career of
unexampled shrewishness, extravagance, and flirtation. Her poor old
lover is distracted by her wild vagaries, and in the end is only too
thankful to hand her over bag and baggage to his nephew, who generously
consents to relieve his uncle of his unlucky bargain.

The music of 'L'Elisir d'Amore' is not inferior to that of 'Don
Pasquale' in sparkle and brilliancy, but the plot is tame and childish
compared to the bustle and intrigue of the latter work. It turns upon a
sham love potion sold by a travelling quack to Nemorino, a country lout
who is in love with Adina, the local beauty. Adina is divided between
the attractions of Nemorino and those of the Sergeant Belcore, who is
quartered in the village. In order to get money to pay for the potion
Nemorino joins the army, and this proof of his devotion has so
convincing an effect upon the affections of Adina that she discards the
soldier and bestows her hand upon Nemorino. To this silly plot is allied
some of the most delightful music Donizetti ever wrote. Fresh, graceful,
and occasionally tender, it forms the happiest contrast to the grandiose
nonsense which the composer was in the habit of turning out to suit the
vitiated taste of the day, and is a convincing proof that if he had been
permitted to exercise his talent in a congenial sphere, Donizetti would
be entitled to rank with the most successful followers of Cimarosa and
Paisiello, instead of being degraded to the rank of a mere purveyor to
the manufacturers of barrel-organs.

Different as was the talent of Bellini (1802-1835) from that of
Donizetti, his fate has been the same. After holding the ear of Europe
for many years, he has fallen at the present time completely into the
background, and outside the frontiers of Italy his works are rarely
heard. Bellini had no pretensions to dramatic power. His genius was
purely elegiac in tone, and he relied entirely for the effect which he
intended to produce upon the luscious beauty of his melodies, into
which, it must be admitted, the great singers of his time contrived to
infuse a surprising amount of dramatic force.

The story of 'La Sonnambula' is rather foolish, but it suited Bellini's
idyllic style, and the work is perhaps the happiest example of his
_naif_ charm. Amina, a rustic damsel, betrothed to Elvino, is a
confirmed somnambulist, and her nocturnal peregrinations have given the
village in which she dwells the reputation of being haunted by a
spectre. One night, Amina, while walking in her sleep, enters the
chamber in the inn where Rodolfo, the young lord of the village, happens
to be located. There she is discovered by Lisa, the landlady, to the
scandal of the neighbourhood and the shame of her lover Elvino, who
casts her from him and at once makes over his affections to the
landlady. Amina's sorrow and despair make her more restless than ever,
and the following night she is seen walking out of a window of the mill
in which she lives, and crossing the stream by a frail bridge which
totters beneath her weight. Providence guards her steps, and she reaches
solid earth in safety, where Elvino is waiting to receive her, fully
convinced of her innocence. Bellini's music is quite the reverse of
dramatic, but the melodies throughout 'La Sonnambula' are graceful and
tender, and in the closing scene he rises to real pathos.

In 'Norma' Bellini had the advantage of treating a libretto of great
power and beauty, the work of the poet Romani, a tragedy which, both in
sentiment and diction, contrasts very strongly with the ungrammatical
balderdash which composers are so often called upon to set to music.
Norma, the high priestess of the Druids, forgetting her faith and the
traditions of her race, has secretly wedded Pollio, a Roman general, and
borne him two children. In spite of the sacrifices which she has made
for his sake, he proves faithless, and seduces Adalgisa, one of the
virgins of the temple, who has consented to abandon her people and her
country and to fly with him to Rome. Before leaving her home, Adalgisa,
ignorant of the connection between Norma and Pollio, reveals her secret
to the priestess, and begs for absolution from her vows. At the news of
her husband's faithlessness Norma's fury breaks forth, and her
indignation is equalled by that of Adalgisa, who is furious at finding
herself the mere plaything of a profligate. Pollio, maddened by passion,
endeavours to tear Adalgisa from the altar of the temple, but is checked
by Norma, who strikes the sacred shield and calls the Druids to arms.
Pollio, now a prisoner, is brought before her for judgment, and she
gives him a last choice, to renounce Adalgisa or to die. He refuses to
give up his love, whereupon Norma, in a passion of self-sacrifice, tears
the sacred wreath from her own brow and declares herself the guilty one.
Pollio is touched by her magnanimity, and together they ascend the
funeral pyre, in its flames to be cleansed from earthly sin.

It would be too much to assert that Bellini has risen to the level of
this noble subject, but parts of his score have a fervour and a dignity
which might scarcely have been expected from the composer of 'La
Sonnambula.' We may smile now at the trio between Pollio and his two
victims, in which the extremes of fury and indignation are expressed by
a lilting tune in 9-8 time, but it is impossible to deny the truth and
beauty of Norma's farewell to her children, and in several other scenes
there are evidences of real dramatic feeling, if not of the power to
express it. It is important to remember, in discussing the works of
Bellini and the other composers of his school, that in their day the art
of singing was cultivated to a far higher pitch of perfection than is
now the case. Consequently the composer felt that he had done his duty
if, even in situations of the most tragic import, he provided his
executant with a broad, even melody. Into this the consummate art of the
singer could infuse every gradation of feeling. The composer presented a
blank canvas, upon which the artist painted the required picture.

Unlike that of 'Norma,' the libretto of 'I Puritani,' Bellini's last
opera, is a dull and confused affair. The scene is laid in England,
apparently at the time of the Civil War, but the history and chronology
throughout are of the vaguest description. Queen Henrietta Maria is
imprisoned in the fortress of Plymouth, under the guardianship of Lord
Walton, the Parliamentary leader, whose daughter Elvira loves Lord
Arthur Talbot, a young Cavalier, Elvira's tears and entreaties have so
far softened her stern parent that Arthur is to be admitted into the
castle in order that the nuptials may be celebrated. He takes advantage
of the situation to effect the escape of the Queen, disguising her in
Elvira's bridal veil. When his treachery is discovered Arthur is at once
proscribed, and Elvira, believing him to be faithless, loses her reason.
Later in the opera Arthur contrives to meet Elvira and explains his
conduct satisfactorily, but their interview is cut short by a party of
Puritans, who arrest him. He is condemned to be shot on the spot, but,
before the sentence can be carried out, a messenger arrives with the
news of the king's defeat and the pardon of Arthur. Elvira, whose
insanity has throughout been of an eminently harmless description, at
once recovers her reason, and everything ends happily.

'I Puritani' is in some respects Bellini's best work. Foolish as the
libretto is, the bitterest opponent of Italian _cantilena_ could
scarcely refuse to acknowledge the pathetic beauty of many of the songs.
It is a matter for regret, as well as for some surprise, that Bellini's
works should now be entirely banished from the Covent Garden repertory,
while so many inferior operas are still retained. In an age of fustian
and balderdash, Bellini stood apart, a tender and pathetic figure, with
no pretensions to science, but gifted with a command of melody as
copious, unaffected, and sincere as has ever fallen to the lot of a
composer for the stage.

The other Italian writers of this period may be briefly dismissed,
since they did little but reproduce the salient features of their more
famous contemporaries in a diluted form. Mercadante (1797-1870) lived to
an advanced age, and wrote many operas, comic and serious, of which the
most successful was 'Il Giuramento,' a gloomy story of love and revenge,
treated with a certain power of the conventional order, and a good deal
of facile melody. Pacini (1796-1867) is principally known by his
'Saffo,' an imitation of Rossini, which achieved a great success. Vaccai
(1790-1848) also imitated Rossini, but his 'Giulietta e Romeo' has
intrinsic merits, which are not to be despised.

After the days of Rossini, opera buffa fell upon evil days. Although the
most famous musicians of the day did not disdain occasionally to follow
in the footsteps of Cimarosa, for the most part the task of purveying
light operas for the smaller theatres of Italy fell into the hands of
second and third rate composers. Donizetti, as we have seen, enriched
the repertory of opera buffa with several masterpieces of gay and
brilliant vivacity, but few of the lighter works of his contemporaries
deserve permanent record.

The brothers Ricci, Luigi (1805-1859) and Federico (1809-1877), wrote
many operas, both singly and in collaboration, but 'Crispino e la
Comare' is the only one of their works which won anything like a
European reputation. The story is a happy combination of farce and
_feerie_. Crispino, a half-starved cobbler, is about to throw himself
into a well, when La Comare, a fairy, rises from it and bids him
desist. She gives him a purse of gold, and orders him to set up as a
doctor, telling him that when he goes to visit a patient he must look to
see whether she is standing by the bedside. If she is not there, the
sick man will recover. Crispino follows her directions, and speedily
becomes famous, but success turns his head, and he is only brought back
to his senses by a strange dream, in which the fairy takes him down to a
subterranean cavern where the lamp of each man's life is burning and he
sees his own on the point of expiring. After this uncomfortable vision
he is thankful to find himself still in the bosom of his family, and the
opera ends with his vows of amendment. The music is brilliant and
sparkling, and altogether the little opera is one of the best specimens
of opera buffa produced in Italy after the time of Rossini. The other
men who devoted themselves to opera buffa during this period my be
briefly dismissed. Carlo Pedrotti (1817-1893), whose comic opera 'Tutti
in Maschera,' after a brilliant career in Italy, was successfully
produced in Paris, and Antonio Cagnoni (1828-1896), were perhaps the
best of them. A version of the latter's 'Papa Martin' was performed in
London in 1875, under the name of 'The Porter of Havre.'




CHAPTER VIII

MEYERBEER AND FRENCH OPERA

HEROLD--MEYERBEER--BERLIOZ--HALEVY--AUBER


The romantic movement was essentially German in its origin, but its
influence was not bounded by the Rhine. As early as 1824 Weber's
'Freischuetz' was performed in Paris, followed a few years later by
'Oberon' and 'Euryanthe.' French musicians, always susceptible to
external influences, could not but acknowledge the fascination of the
romantic school, and the works of Herold (1791-1833) show how powerfully
the new leaven had acted. But Weber was not the only foreigner at this
time who helped to shape the destiny of French music. The spell of
Rossini was too potent for the plastic Gauls to resist, and to his
influence may be traced the most salient features of the school of opera
comique which is best represented by Auber. Herold, though divided
between the camps of Germany and Italy, had individuality enough to
write music which was independent of either. Yet it is significant
that his last two works--the only two, in fact, which have
survived--represent with singular completeness the two influences which
affected French music most potently during his day. 'Zampa' has been
called a French 'Don Giovanni,' but the music owes far more to Weber
than to Mozart, while the fantastic and absurd incidents of the plot
have little of the supernatural terror of Mozart's opera. Zampa is a
famous pirate, who, after having dissipated his fortune and made Italy,
generally speaking, too hot to hold him, has taken to the high seas in
self-defence. In his early days he had seduced a girl named Alice
Manfredi, who after his desertion found a home in the house of a
Sicilian merchant named Lugano. There she died, and there Lugano caused
a statue to be set up in her honour. When the story of the opera begins,
Lugano is a prisoner in the hands of the redoubtable Zampa. The pirate
himself comes to Sicily to obtain his prisoner's ransom, bringing
directions to Lugano's daughter Camilla to pay him whatever he may ask.
Zampa at once falls a victim to the _beaux yeux_ of Camilla, and demands
her hand as the price of her father's safety. Camilla loves Alfonso, a
Sicilian officer, but is prepared to sacrifice herself to save her
father. At the marriage feast, Zampa, recognising the statue of the
betrayed Alice, jokingly puts his ring upon her finger, which
immediately closes upon it. The opera ends by the statue claiming Zampa
as her own, snatching him from the arms of Camilla, and descending with
him into the abyss.

It would be in vain to look in Herold's score for an echo of the passion
and variety of Mozart, but much of the music of 'Zampa' is picturesque
and effective. Herold's tunes sound very conventional after Weber, but
there is a good deal of skill in the way they are presented. His
orchestration is of course closely modelled on that of his German
prototype, and if it is impossible to say much for his originality, we
can at any rate admire his taste in choosing a model.

'Le Pre aux Clercs' is more popular at the present moment than 'Zampa,'
though it is far inferior in musical interest. If 'Zampa' showed the
influence of Weber, 'Le Pre aux Clercs' is redolent of Rossini. The
overture, with its hollow ring of gaiety, strikes the note of Italianism
which echoes throughout the opera. The plot is full of intrigues and
conspiracies, and is decidedly confusing. Mergy, a young Bernese
gentleman, aspires to the hand of Isabelle, who is one of the Queen of
Navarre's maids of honour. The Queen favours their love, but the King
wishes Isabelle to marry Comminges, a favourite of his own. The young
couple gain their point, and are married secretly in the chapel of the
Pre aux Clercs, but only at the expense of as much plotting and as many
disguises as would furnish the stock-in-trade of half-a-dozen detective
romances.

French music, as has often been pointed out, owes much to foreign
influence, but very few of the strangers to whom the doors of Parisian
opera-houses were opened left a deeper impression upon the music of
their adopted country than Meyerbeer (1791-1864). Giacomo Meyerbeer, to
give him the name by which he is now best known, underwent the same
influence as Herold. As a youth he was intimate with Weber, and his
first visit to Italy introduced him to Rossini, whose brilliant style he
imitated successfully in a series of Italian works which are now
completely forgotten. From Italy Meyerbeer came to Paris, and there
identified himself with the French school so fully that he is now
regarded with complete propriety as a French composer pure and simple.
Meyerbeer's music is thoroughly eclectic in type. He was a careful
student of contemporary music, and the various phases through which he
passed during the different stages of his career left their impress upon
his style. It says much for the power of his individuality that he was
able to weld such different elements into something approaching an
harmonious whole. Had he done more than he did, he would have been a
genius; as it is, he remains a man of exceptional talent, whose
influence on the history of modern music is still important, though his
own compositions are now slightly superannuated. 'Robert le Diable,' the
first work of his third or French period, was produced in 1831. The
libretto, which, like those of all the composer's French operas, was by
Eugene Scribe, is a strange tissue of absurdities, though from the
merely scenic point of view it may be thought fairly effective. Robert,
Duke of Normandy, the son of the Duchess Bertha by a fiend who donned
the shape of man to prosecute his amour, arrives in Sicily to compete
for the hand of the Princess Isabella, which is to be awarded as the
prize at a magnificent tournament. Robert's daredevil gallantry and
extravagance soon earn him the sobriquet of 'Le Diable,' and he puts the
coping-stone to his folly by gambling away all his possessions at a
single sitting, even to his horse and the armour on his back. Robert has
an _ame damnee_ in the shape of a knight named Bertram, to whose malign
influence most of his crimes and follies are due. Bertram is in reality
his demon-father, whose every effort is directed to making a
thorough-paced villain of his son, so that he may have the pleasure of
enjoying his society for all eternity. In strong contrast to the
fiendish malevolence of Bertram stands the gentle figure of Alice,
Robert's foster-sister, who has followed him from Normandy with a
message from his dead mother. Isabella supplies Robert with a fresh
horse and arms; nevertheless he is beguiled away from Palermo by some
trickery of Bertram's, and fails to put in an appearance at the
tournament. The only means, therefore, left to him of obtaining the hand
of Isabella is to visit the tomb of his mother, and there to pluck a
magic branch of cypress, which will enable him to defeat his rivals. The
cypress grows in a deserted convent haunted by the spectres of
profligate nuns, and there, amidst infernal orgies, Robert plucks the
branch of power. By its aid he sends the guards of the Princess into a
deep sleep, and is only prevented by her passionate entreaties from
carrying her off by force. Yielding to her prayers, he breaks the
branch, and his magic power at once deserts him. He seeks sanctuary from
his enemies in the cathedral, and there the last and fiercest strife
for the possession of his soul is waged between the powers of good and
evil. On the one hand is Bertram, whose term of power on earth expires
at midnight. He has now discovered himself as Robert's father, and
produces an infernal compact of union which he entreats his son to sign.
On the other is Alice, pleading and affectionate, bearing the last words
of Robert's dead mother, warning him against the fiend who had seduced
her. While Robert is hesitating between the two, midnight strikes, and
Bertram sinks with thunder into the pit. The scene changes, and a
glimpse is given of the interior of the cathedral, where the marriage of
Robert and Isabella is being celebrated.

'Robert le Diable' was an immense success when first produced. The
glitter and tinsel of the story suited Meyerbeer's showy style, and
besides, even when the merely trivial and conventional had been put
aside, there remains a fair proportion of the score which has claims to
dramatic power. The triumph of 'Robert' militated against the success of
'Les Huguenots' (1836), which was at first rather coldly received.
Before long, however, it rivalled the earlier work in popularity, and is
now generally looked upon as Meyerbeer's masterpiece. The libretto
certainly compares favourably with the fatuities of 'Robert le Diable.'

Marguerite de Valois, the beautiful Queen of Navarre, who is anxious to
reconcile the bitterly hostile parties of Catholics and Huguenots,
persuades the Comte de Saint Bris, a prominent Catholic, to allow his
daughter Valentine to marry Raoul de Nangis, a young Huguenot noble.
Valentine is already betrothed to the gallant and amorous Comte de
Nevers, but she pays him a nocturnal visit in his own palace, and
induces him to release her from her engagement. During her interview
with Nevers she is perceived by Raoul, and recognised as a lady whom he
lately rescued from insult and has loved passionately ever since. In his
eyes there is only one possible construction to be put upon her presence
in Nevers' palace, and he hastens to dismiss her from his mind.
Immediately upon his decision comes a message from the Queen bidding him
hasten to her palace in Touraine upon important affairs of state. When
he arrives she unfolds her plan, and he, knowing Valentine only by
sight, not by name, gladly consents. When, in the presence of the
assembled nobles, he recognises in his destined bride the presumed
mistress of Nevers, he casts her from him, and vows to prefer death to
such intolerable disgrace.

The scene of the next act is in the Pre aux Clercs, in the outskirts of
Paris. Valentine, who is to be married that night to Nevers, obtains
leave to pass some hours in prayer in a chapel. While she is there she
overhears the details of a plot devised by Saint Bris for the
assassination of Raoul, in order to avenge the affront put upon himself
and his daughter. Valentine contrives to warn Marcel, Raoul's old
servant, of this, and he assembles his Huguenot comrades hard by, who
rush in at the first clash of steel and join the combat. The fight is
interrupted by the entrance of the Queen. When she finds out who are the
principal combatants, she reproves them sharply and tells Raoul the real
story of Valentine's visit to Nevers. The act ends with the marriage
festivities, while Raoul is torn by an agony of love and remorse.

In the next act Raoul contrives to gain admittance to Nevers' house, and
there has an interview with Valentine. They are interrupted by the
entrance of Saint Bris and his followers, whereupon Valentine conceals
Raoul behind the arras. From his place of concealment he hears Saint
Bris unfold the plan of the massacre of Saint Bartholomew, which is to
be carried out that night. The conspirators swear a solemn oath to
exterminate the Huguenots, and their daggers are consecrated by
attendant priests. Nevers alone refuses to take part in the butchery.
When they all have left, Raoul comes out of his hiding-place, and in
spite of the prayers and protestations of Valentine, leaps from the
window at the sound of the fatal tocsin, and hastens to join his
friends. In the last act, which is rarely performed in England, Raoul
first warns Henry of Navarre and the Huguenot nobles, assembled at the
Hotel de Sens, of the massacre, and then joins the _melee_ in the
streets. Valentine has followed him, and after vainly endeavouring to
make him don the white scarf which is worn that night by all Catholics,
she throws in her lot with his, and dies in his arms, after they have
been solemnly joined in wedlock by the wounded and dying Marcel.

'Les Huguenots' shows Meyerbeer at his best Even Wagner, his bitterest
enemy, admitted the dramatic power of the great duet in the fourth act,
and several other scenes are scarcely inferior to it in sustained
inspiration. The opera is marred as a whole by Meyerbeer's invincible
self-consciousness. He seldom had the courage to give his genius full
play. He never lost sight of his audience, and wrote what he thought
would be effective rather than what he knew was right. Thus his finest
moments are marred by lapses from sincerity into the commonplace
conventionality of the day. Yet the dignity and power of 'Les Huguenots'
are undeniable, and it is unfortunate that its excessive length should
prevent it from ever being heard in its entirety.

In 'Le Prophete' Meyerbeer chose a subject which, if less rich in
dramatic possibility than that of 'Les Huguenots,' has a far deeper
psychological interest. Unfortunately, Scribe, with all his cleverness,
was quite the worst man in the world to deal with the story of John of
Leyden. In the libretto which he constructed for Meyerbeer's benefit the
psychological interest is conspicuous only by its absence, and the
character of the young leader of the Anabaptists is degraded to the
level of the merest puppet. John, an innkeeper of Leyden, loves Bertha,
a village maiden who dwells near Dordrecht. Unfortunately, her liege
lord, the Count of Oberthal, has designs upon the girl himself, and
refuses his consent to the marriage. Bertha escapes from his clutches
and flies to the protection of her lover, but Oberthal secures the
person of Fides, John's old mother, and by threats of putting her to
death, compels him to give up Bertha. Wild with rage against the vice
and lawlessness of the nobles, John joins the ranks of the Anabaptists,
a revolutionary sect pledged to the destruction of the powers that be.
Their leaders recognise him as a prophet promised by Heaven, and he is
installed as their chief. The Anabaptists lay siege to Munster, which
falls into their hands, and in the cathedral John is solemnly proclaimed
the Son of God. During the ceremony he is recognised by Fides, who,
believing him to have been slain by the false prophet, has followed the
army to Munster in hopes of revenge. She rushes forward to claim her
son, but John pretends not to know her. To admit an earthly relationship
would be to prejudice his position with the populace, and he compels her
to confess that she is mistaken. The coronation ends with John's
triumph, while the hapless Fides is carried off to be immured in a
dungeon. John visits her in her cell, and obtains her pardon by
promising to renounce his deceitful splendour and to fly with her. Later
he discovers that a plot against himself has been hatched by some of the
Anabaptist leaders, and he destroys himself and them by blowing up the
palace of Munster. Meyerbeer's music, fine as much of it is, suffers
chiefly from the character of the libretto. The latter is merely a
string of conventionally effective scenes, and the music could hardly
fail to be disjointed and scrappy. Meyerbeer had little or no feeling
for characterisation, so that the opportunities for really dramatic
effect which lay in the character of John of Leyden have been almost
entirely neglected. Once only, in the famous cantique 'Roi du Ciel,' did
the composer catch an echo of the prophetic rapture which animated the
youthful enthusiast. Meyerbeer's besetting sin, his constant search for
the merely effective, is even more pronounced in 'Le Prophete' than in
'Les Huguenots.' The coronation scene has nothing of the large
simplicity necessary for the proper manipulation of a mass of sound. The
canvas is crowded with insignificant and confusing detail, and the
general effect is finicking and invertebrate rather than solid and
dignified.

Meyerbeer was constantly at work upon his last opera, 'L'Africaine,'
from 1838 until 1864, and his death found him still engaged in
retouching the score. It was produced in 1865. With a musician of
Meyerbeer's known eclecticism, it might be supposed that a work of which
the composition extended over so long a period would exhibit the
strangest conglomeration of styles and influences. Curiously enough,
'L'Africaine' is the most consistent of Meyerbeer's works. This is
probably due to the fact that in it the personal element is throughout
outweighed by the picturesque, and the exotic fascination of the story
goes far to cover its defects.

Vasco da Gama, the famous discoverer, is the betrothed lover of a maiden
named Inez, the daughter of Don Diego, a Portuguese grandee. When the
opera opens he is still at sea, and has not been heard of for years. Don
Pedro, the President of the Council, takes advantage of his absence to
press his own suit for the hand of Inez, and obtains the King's sanction
to his marriage on the ground that Vasco must have been lost at sea. At
this moment the long-lost hero returns, accompanied by two swarthy
slaves, Selika and Nelusko, whom he has brought home from a distant isle
in the Indian Ocean. He recounts the wonders of the place, and entreats
the government to send out a pioneer expedition to win an empire across
the sea. His suggestions are rejected, and he himself, through the
machinations of Don Pedro, is cast into prison. There he is tended by
Selika, who loves her gentle captor passionately, and has need of all
her regal authority--for in the distant island she was a queen--to
prevent the jealous Nelusko from slaying him in his sleep. Inez now
comes to the prison to announce to Vasco that she has purchased his
liberty at the price of giving her hand to Don Pedro. In the next act,
Don Pedro, who has stolen a march on Vasco, is on his way to the African
island, taking with him Inez and Selika. The steering of the vessel is
entrusted to Nelusko. Vasco da Gama, who has fitted out a vessel at his
own expense, overtakes Don Pedro in mid-ocean, and generously warns his
rival of the treachery of Nelusko, who is steering the vessel upon the
rocks of his native shore. Don Pedro's only reply is to order Vasco to
be tied to the mast and shot, but before the sentence can be carried out
the vessel strikes upon the rocks, and the aborigines swarm over the
sides. Selika, once more a queen, saves the lives of Vasco and Inez from
the angry natives. In the next act the nuptials of Selika and Vasco are
on the point of being celebrated with great pomp, when the hero, who has
throughout the opera wavered between the two women who love him, finally
makes up his mind in favour of Inez. Selika thereupon magnanimously
despatches them home in Vasco's ship, and poisons herself with the
fragrance of the deadly manchineel tree. The characters of
'L'Africaine,' with the possible exception of Selika and Nelusko, are
the merest shadows, but the music, though less popular as a rule than
that of 'Les Huguenots,' or even 'Le Prophete,' is undoubtedly
Meyerbeer's finest effort. In his old age Meyerbeer seems to have looked
back to the days of his Italian period, and thus, though occasionally
conventional in form, the melodies of 'L'Africaine' have a dignity and
serenity which are rarely present in the scores of his French period.
There is, too, a laudable absence of that ceaseless striving after
effect which mars so much of Meyerbeer's best work.

Besides the great works already discussed, Meyerbeer wrote two works for
the Opera Comique, 'L'Etoile du Nord' and 'Le Pardon de Ploermel.'
Meyerbeer was far too clever a man to undertake anything he could not
carry through successfully, and in these operas he caught the trick of
French opera comique very happily.

'L'Etoile du Nord' deals with the fortunes of Peter the Great, who, when
the opera opens, is working as a shipwright at a dockyard in Finland. He
wins the heart of Catherine, a Cossack maiden, who has taken up her
quarters there as a kind of vivandiere. Catherine is a girl of
remarkable spirit, and after repulsing an incursion of Calmuck Tartars
single-handed, goes off to the wars in the disguise of a recruit, in
order to enable her brother to stay at home and marry Prascovia, the
daughter of the innkeeper. The next act takes place in the Russian camp.
Catherine, whose soldiering has turned out a great success, is told off
to act as sentry outside the tent occupied by two distinguished officers
who have just arrived. To her amazement she recognises them as Peter and
his friend Danilowitz, a former pastry-cook, now raised by the Czar to
the rank of General. Catherine's surprise and pleasure turn to
indignation when she sees her lover consoling himself for her absence
with the charms of a couple of pretty vivandieres, and when her senior
officer reprimands her for eavesdropping, she bestows upon him a sound
box on the ears. For this misdemeanour she is condemned to be shot, but
she contrives to make her escape, first sending a letter to Peter
blaming him for his inconstancy, and putting in his hand the details of
a conspiracy against his person which she has been fortunate enough to
discover. Peter's anguish at the loss of his loved one is accentuated by
the nobility of her conduct. At first it is supposed that Catherine is
dead, but by the exertions of Danilowitz she is at length discovered,
though in a lamentable plight, for her troubles have cost her her
reason. She is restored to sanity by the simple method of reconstructing
the scene of the Finnish dockyard in which she first made Peter's
acquaintance, and peopling it with the familiar forms of the workmen.
Among the latter are Peter and Danilowitz, in their old dresses of
labourer and pastry-cook, and, to crown all, two flutes are produced
upon which Peter and her brother play a tune known to her from
childhood. The last charm proves effectual, and all ends happily.

The lighter parts of 'L'Etoile du Nord' are delightfully arch and
vivacious, and much of the concerted music is gay and brilliant. The
weak point of the opera is to be found in the tendency from which
Meyerbeer was never safe, to drop into mere pretentiousness when he
meant to be most impressive. In some of the choruses in the camp scene
there is a great pretence at elaboration, with very scanty results, and
the closing scena, which is foolish and wearisome, is an unfortunate
concession to the vanity of the prima donna. But on the whole 'L'Etoile
du Nord' is one of Meyerbeer's most attractive works, besides being an
extraordinary example of his inexhaustible versatility.

'Le Pardon de Ploermel,' known in Italy and England as 'Dinorah,' shows
Meyerbeer in a pastoral and idyllic vein. The story is extremely silly
in itself, and most of the incidents take place before the curtain
rises. The overture is a long piece of programme music, which is
supposed to depict the bridal procession of Hoel and Dinorah, two Breton
peasants, to the church where they are to be married. Suddenly a
thunderstorm breaks over their heads and disperses the procession, while
a flash of lightning reduces Dinorah's homestead to ashes. Hoel, in
despair at the ruin of his hopes, betakes himself to the village
sorcerer, who promises to tell him the secret of the hidden treasure of
the local gnomes or Korriganes if he will undergo a year of trial in a
remote part of the country. On hearing that Hoel has abandoned her
Dinorah becomes insane, and spends her time in roving through the woods
with her pet goat in search of her lover. The overture is a picturesque
piece of writing enough, though much of it would be entirely meaningless
without its programme. When the opera opens, Hoel has returned from his
probation in possession of the important secret. His first care is to
find some one to do the dirty work of finding the treasure, for the
oracle has declared that the first man who shall lay hands upon it will
die. His choice falls upon Corentin, a country lout, whom he persuades
to accompany him to the gorge where the treasure lies hidden. Corentin
is not so stupid as he seems, and, suspecting something underhand, he
persuades the mad Dinorah to go down into the ravine in his place.
Dinorah consents, but while she is crossing a rustic bridge, preparatory
to the descent, it is struck by lightning, and she tumbles into the
abyss. She is saved by Hoel in some inexplicable way, and, still more
inexplicably, regains her reason. The music is bright and tuneful, and
the reaper's and hunter's songs (which are introduced for no apparent
reason) are delightful; but the libretto is so impossibly foolish that
the opera has fallen into disrepute, although the brilliant music of the
heroine should make it a favourite role with competent singers.

Meyerbeer was extravagantly praised during his lifetime; he is now as
bitterly decried. The truth seems to lie, as usual, between the two
extremes. He was an unusually clever man, with a strong instinct for the
theatre. He took immense pains with his operas, often rewriting the
entire score; but his efforts were directed less towards ideal
perfection than to what would be most effective, so that there is a
hollowness and a superficiality about his best work which we cannot
ignore, even while we admit the ingenuity of the means employed. His
influence upon modern opera has been extensive. He was the real founder
of the school of melodramatic opera which is now so popular. Violent
contrasts with him do duty for the subtle characterisation of the older
masters. His heroes rant and storm, and his heroines shriek and rave,
but of real feeling, and even of real expression, there is little in his
scores.

The career of Hector Berlioz (1803-1869) was in striking contrast to
that Meyerbeer. While Meyerbeer was earning the plaudits of crowded
theatres throughout the length and breadth of Europe, Berlioz sat alone,
brooding over the vast conceptions to which it taxed even his gigantic
genius to give musical shape. Even now the balance has scarcely been
restored. Though Meyerbeer's popularity is on the wane, the operas of
Berlioz are still known for the most part only to students. Before the
Berlioz cycle at Carlsruhe in 1893, 'La Prise de Troie' had never been
performed on any stage, and though the French master's symphonic works
now enjoy considerable popularity, his dramatic works are still looked
at askance by managers. There is a reason for this other than the
hardness of our hearts. Berlioz was essentially a symphonic writer. He
had little patience with the conventions of the stage, and his attempts
to blend the dramatic and symphonic elements, as in 'Les Troyens,' can
scarcely be termed a success. Yet much may be pardoned for the sake of
the noble music which lies enshrined in his works. 'Benvenuto Cellini'
and 'Beatrice et Benedict,' which were thought too advanced for the
taste of their day, are now perhaps a trifle old-fashioned for our
times. The first is a picturesque story of Rome in Carnival time. The
interest centres in the casting of the sculptor's mighty Perseus, which
wins him the hand of the fair Teresa. The Carnival scenes are gay and
brilliant, but the form of the work belongs to a bygone age, and it is
scarcely possible that a revival of it would meet with wide acceptance.
'Beatrice et Benedict' is a graceful setting of Shakespeare's 'Much Ado
about Nothing.' It is a work of the utmost delicacy and refinement.
Though humour is not absent from the score, the prevailing impression is
one of romantic charm, passing even to melancholy. Very different is the
double drama 'Les Troyens.' Here Berlioz drew his inspiration directly
from Gluck, and the result is a work of large simplicity and austere
grandeur, which it is not too much to hope will some day take its place
in the world's repertory side by side with the masterpieces of Wagner.
The first part, 'La Prise de Troie,' describes the manner in which the
city of Priam fell into the hands of the Greeks. The drama is dominated
by the form of the sad virgin Cassandra. In vain she warns her people of
their doom. They persist in dragging up the wooden horse from the
sea-beach, where it was left by the Greeks. The climax of the last act
is terrific. AEneas, warned by the ghost of Hector of the approaching
doom of Troy, escapes; but the rest of the Trojans fall victims to the
swords of the Greeks in a scene of indescribable carnage and terror.
Cassandra and the Trojan women, driven to take shelter in the temple of
Cybele, slay themselves rather than fall into the hands of their
captors. 'La Prise de Troie' is perhaps epic rather than dramatic, but
as a whole it leaves an impression of severe and spacious grandeur,
which can only be paralleled in the finest inspirations of Gluck. In
the second division of the work, 'Les Troyens a Carthage,' human
interest is paramount. Berlioz was an enthusiastic student of Virgil,
and he follows the tragic tale of the AEneid closely. The appearance of
AEneas at Carthage, the love of Dido, the summons of Mercury, AEneas'
departure and the passion and death of Dido, are depicted in a series of
scenes of such picturesqueness and power, such languor and pathos, as
surely cannot be matched outside the finest pages of Wagner. A time will
certainly come when this great work, informed throughout with a
passionate yearning for the loftiest ideal of art, will receive the
recognition which is its due. Of late indeed there have been signs of a
revival of interest in Berlioz's mighty drama, and the recent
performances of 'Les Troyens' in Paris and Brussels have opened the eyes
of many musicians to its manifold beauties. Some years ago the
experiment was made of adapting Berlioz's cantata, 'La Damnation de
Faust,' for stage purposes. The work is of course hopelessly undramatic,
but the beauty of the music and the opportunities that it affords for
elaborate spectacular effects have combined to win the work a certain
measure of success, especially in Italy where Gounod's 'Faust' has never
won the popularity that it enjoys north of the Alps. 'La Damnation de
Faust' is hardly more than a string of incidents, with only the most
shadowy semblance of connection, but several of the scenes are effective
enough on the stage, notably that in Faust's study with the march of
Hungarian warriors in the distance, the exquisite dance of sylphs and
the ride to the abyss. Nevertheless, when the success of curiosity is
over, the work is hardly likely to retain its place in the repertory.

Unperformed as he was, Berlioz of course could not be expected to found
a school; but Meyerbeer's success soon raised him up a host of
imitators. Halevy (1799-1862) drew his inspiration in part from Herold
and Weber; but 'La Juive,' the work by which he is best known, owes much
to Meyerbeer, whose 'Robert le Diable' had taken the world of music in
Paris by storm a few years before the production of Halevy's work. In
turn Halevy reacted upon Meyerbeer. Many passages in 'Les Huguenots'
reflect the sober dignity of 'La Juive'; indeed, it is too often
forgotten that the production of Halevy's opera preceded its more famous
contemporary by a full year.

The scene of 'La Juive' is laid in Constance, in the fifteenth century.
Leopold, a Prince of the Empire, in the disguise of a young Israelite,
has won the heart of Rachel, the daughter of the rich Jew Eleazar. When
the latter discovers the true nationality of his prospective son-in-law
he forbids him his house, but Rachel consents, like another Jessica, to
fly with her lover. Later she discovers that Leopold is a Prince, and
betrothed to the Princess Eudoxia. Her jealousy breaks forth, and she
accuses him of having seduced her--a crime which in those days was
punishable by death. Rachel, Leopold, and Eleazar are all thrown into
prison. There Rachel relents, and retracts her accusation. Leopold is
accordingly released, but the Jew and his daughter are condemned to be
immersed in a cauldron of boiling oil. There is a rather meaningless
underplot which results in a confession made by Eleazar on the scaffold,
that Rachel is not a Jewess at all, but the daughter of a Cardinal who
has taken a friendly interest in her fortunes throughout the drama.

Halevy's music is characterised by dignity and sobriety, but it rarely
rises to passion. He represents to a certain extent a reaction towards
the pre-Rossinian school of opera, but, to be frank, most of 'La Juive'
is exceedingly long-winded and dull. Besides his serious operas, Halevy
wrote works of a lighter cast, which enjoyed popularity in their time.
But the prince of opera comique at this time was Auber (1782-1871).
Auber began his career as a musician comparatively late in life, but _en
revanche_ age seemed powerless to check his unflagging industry. His
last work, 'Le Reve d'Amour,' was produced in the composer's
eighty-eighth year. Auber is a superficial Rossini. He borrowed from the
Italian master his wit and gaiety; he could not catch an echo of his
tenderness and passion. Auber has never been so popular in England as
abroad, and the only two works of his which are now performed in this
country--'Fra Diavolo' and 'Masaniello'--represent him, curiously
enough, at his best and worst respectively. The scene of 'Fra Diavolo'
is laid at a village inn in Italy. Lord and Lady Rocburg, the
conventional travelling English couple, arrive in great perturbation,
been stopped by brigands and plundered of some of their property. At the
inn they fall in with a distinguished personage calling himself the
Marquis di San Marco, who is none other than the famous brigand chief
Fra Diavolo. He makes violent love to the silly Englishwoman, and soon
obtains her confidence. Meanwhile Lorenzo, the captain of a body of
carabineers, who loves the innkeeper's daughter Zerlina, has hurried off
after the brigands. He comes up with them and kills twenty, besides
getting back Lady Rocburg's stolen jewels. Fra Diavolo is furious at the
loss of his comrades, and vows vengeance on Lorenzo. That night he
conceals himself in Zerlina's room, and, when all is still, admits two
of his followers into the house. Their nocturnal schemes are frustrated
by the return of Lorenzo and his soldiers, who have been out in search
of the brigand chief. Fra Diavolo is discovered, but pretends that
Zerlina has given him an assignation. Lorenzo is furious at this
accusation, and challenges the brigand to a duel. Before this comes off,
however, Fra Diavolo's identity is discovered, and he is captured by
Lorenzo and his band. 'Fra Diavolo' shows Auber in his happiest vein.
The music is gay and tuneful, without dropping into commonplace; the
rhythms are brilliant and varied, and the orchestration neat and
appropriate.

'La Muette de Portici,' which is known in the Italian version as
'Masaniello,' was written for the Grand Opera. Here Auber vainly
endeavoured to suit his style to its more august surroundings. The
result is entirely unsatisfactory; the more serious parts of the work
are pretentious and dull, and the pretty little tunes, which the
composer could not keep out of his head, sound absurdly out of place in
a serious drama. Fenella, the dumb girl of Portici, has been seduced by
Alfonso, the son of the Spanish Viceroy of Naples. She escapes from the
confinement to which she had been subjected, and denounces him on the
day of his marriage to the Spanish princess Elvira. Masaniello, her
brother, maddened by her wrongs, stirs up a revolt among the people, and
overturns the Spanish rule. He contrives to save the lives of Elvira and
Alfonso, but this generous act costs him his life, and in despair
Fenella leaps into the stream of boiling lava from an eruption of
Vesuvius. The part of Fenella gives an opportunity of distinction to a
clever pantomimist, and has been associated with the names of many
famous dancers; but the music of the opera throughout is one of the
least favourable examples of Auber's skill. Auber had many imitators,
among whom perhaps the most successful was Adolphe Adam (1803-1856),
whose 'Chalet' and 'Postillon de Longjumeau' are still occasionally
performed. They reproduce the style of Auber with tolerable fidelity,
but have no value as original work. The only other composer of this
period who deserves to be mentioned is Felicien David (1810-1876). His
'Lalla Rookh,' a setting of Moore's story, though vastly inferior to his
symphonic poem 'Le Desert,' is a work of distinction and charm. To
David belongs the credit of opening the eyes of musicians to the
possibilities of Oriental colour. Operas upon Eastern subjects have
never been very popular in England, but in France many of them have been
successful. 'Le Desert' founded the school, of which 'Les Pecheurs de
Perles,' 'Djamileh,' 'Le Roi de Lahore,' and 'Lakme' are well-known
representatives. The career of the other musicians--many in number--of
this facile and thoughtless epoch may be summed up in a few words. They
were one and all imitators; Clapisson (1808-1866), Grisar (1808-1869),
and Maillart (1817-1871), clung to the skirts of Auber; Niedermeyer
(1802-1861), threw in his lot with Halevy. So far as they succeeded in
reproducing the external and superficial features of the music of their
prototypes, they enjoyed a brief day of popularity. But with the first
change of public taste they lapsed into oblivion, and their works
nowadays sound far more old-fashioned than those of the generation which
preceded them.




CHAPTER IX

WAGNER'S EARLY WORKS


Richard Wagner (1813-1883) is by far the most important figure in the
history of modern opera. With regard to the intrinsic beauty of his
works, and the artistic value of the theories upon which they are
constructed, there have been, and still are, two opinions; but his most
bigoted opponents can scarcely refuse to acknowledge the extent of the
influence which he has had upon contemporary and subsequent music--an
influence, in fact, which places him by the side of Monteverde and Gluck
among the great revolutionists of musical history. As in their case, the
importance of his work rests upon the fact that, although to a certain
extent an assimilation and development of the methods of his
predecessors, it embodied a deliberate revolt against existing musical
conditions.

From one point of view Wagner's revolt is even more important than that
of either of his forerunners, for they were men who, having failed to
win success under the existing conditions of music, revolted--so to
speak--in self-preservation, while he was an accomplished musician, and
the author of a successful work written in strict accordance with the
canons of art which then obtained. Had Wagner pleased, there was
nothing to hinder his writing a succession of 'Rienzis,' and ending his
days, like Spontini, rich and ennobled. To his eternal honour he
rejected the prospect, and chose the strait and narrow way which led,
through poverty and disgrace, to immortality. In spite of the
acknowledged success of 'Rienzi,' Wagner's enemies were never tired of
repeating that, like Monteverde, he had invented a new system because he
could not manipulate the old. It seems hardly possible to us that
musicians could ever have been found to deny that the composer of 'Die
Meistersinger' was a consummate master of counterpoint. Fortunately the
discovery of his Symphony in C finally put an end to all doubts relative
to the thoroughness of Wagner's musical education. In this work, which
was written at the age of eighteen, the composer showed a mastery of the
symphonic form which many of his detractors might have envied. The fact
is, that Wagner was a man of a singularly flexible habit of mind. He was
a careful student of both ancient and modern music, and a study of his
works shows us that, so far from despising what had been done by his
predecessors, he greedily assimilated all that was best in their
productions, only rejecting the narrow conventions in which so many of
them had contentedly acquiesced. His music is the logical development of
that of Gluck and Weber, purified by a closer study of the principles of
declamation, and enriched by a command of orchestral resource of which
they had never dreamed.

Wagner's first opera, 'Die Feen,' was written in 1833, when the
composer was twenty years old. Wagner always wrote his own libretti,
even in those days. The story of 'Die Feen' was taken from one of
Gozzi's fairy-tales, 'La Donna Serpente.' Wagner himself, in his
'Communication to my Friends,' written in 1851, has given us a _resume_
of the plot: 'A fairy, who renounces immortality for the sake of a human
lover, can only become a mortal through the fulfilment of certain hard
conditions, the non-compliance wherewith on the part of her earthly
swain threatens her with the direst penalties; her lover fails in the
test, which consists in this, that, however evil and repulsive she may
appear to him (in the metamorphosis which she has to undergo), he shall
not reject her in his unbelief. In Gozzi's tale the fairy is changed
into a snake; the remorseful lover frees her from the spell by kissing
the snake, and thus wins her for his wife. I altered this denouement by
changing the fairy into a stone, and then releasing her from the spell
by her lover's passionate song; while the lover, instead of being
allowed to carry off his bride into his own country, is himself admitted
by the fairy king to the immortal bliss of fairyland, together with his
fairy wife.'

When Wagner wrote 'Die Feen' he was under the spell of Weber, whose
influence is perceptible in every page of the score. Marschner, too,
whose 'Vampyr' and 'Templer und Juedin' had been recently produced at
Leipzig, which was then Wagner's headquarters, also appealed very
strongly to the young musician's plastic temperament. 'Die Feen'
consequently has little claim to originality, but the work is
nevertheless interesting to those who desire to trace the master's
development _ab ovo_. Both in the melodies and rhythms employed it is
possible to trace the germs of what afterwards became strongely marked
characteristics. Wagner himself never saw 'Die Feen' performed. In 1833
he could not persuade any German manager to produce it, and, in the
changes which soon came over his musical sympathies, 'Die Feen' was laid
upon the shelf and probably forgotten. It was not until 1888, five years
after the composer's death, that the general enthusiasm for everything
connected with Wagner induced the authorities at Munich to produce it.
Since then it has been performed with comparative frequency, and formed
a part of the cycles of Wagner's works which were given in 1894 and
1895. Wagner's next work was of a very different nature. 'Das
Liebesverbot' was a frank imitation of the Italian school. He himself
confesses that 'if any one should compare this score with that of "Die
Feen" he would find it difficult to understand how such a complete
change in my tendencies could have been brought about in so short a
time.' The incident which turned his thoughts into this new channel was
a performance of Bellini's 'Capuletti e Montecchi,' in which Madame
Schroeder-Devrient sang the part of Romeo. This remarkable woman
exercised in those days an almost hypnotic influence upon Wagner, and
the beauty and force of this particular impersonation impressed him so
vividly that he relinquished his admiration of Weber and the Teutonic
school and plunged headlong into the meretricious sensuousness of Italy.
The libretto of 'Das Liebesverbot' is founded upon Shakespeare's
'Measure for Measure,' It was performed for the first and only time at
Magdeburg in 1836, and failed completely; but it is only just to say
that its failure seems to have been due more to insufficient rehearsal
than to the weakness of the score. After the success of 'Die Feen' at
Munich, it naturally occurred to the authorities there to revive
Wagner's one other juvenile opera. The score of 'Das Liebesverbot' was
accordingly unearthed, and the parts were allotted. The first rehearsal,
however, decided its fate. The opera was so ludicrous and unblushing an
imitation of Donizetti and Bellini, that the artists could scarcely sing
for laughter. Herr Vogl, the eminent tenor, and one or two others were
still in favour of giving it as a curiosity, but in the end it was
thought better to drop it altogether, less on account of the music than
because of the licentious character of the libretto.

'Rienzi,' the next in order of Wagner's operas, was written on the lines
of French opera. Wagner hoped to see it performed in Paris, and
throughout the score he kept the methods of Meyerbeer and Spontini
consistently in his mind's eye. There is very little attempt at
characterisation, but the opportunities for spectacular display are many
and various. In later years Meyerbeer paid Wagner the compliment of
saying that the libretto of 'Rienzi' was the best he had ever read.
'Rienzi' was produced at Dresden in 1842.

The opera opens at night. The scene is laid in a street near the Lateran
Church in Rome. Orsini, a Roman nobleman, and his friends are attempting
to abduct Irene, the sister of Rienzi, a Papal notary. They are
disturbed by the entrance of Colonna, another Roman noble, and his
adherents. The two ruffians quarrel over the unfortunate girl; their
followers eagerly join in the fray; and in a moment, as it seems, the
quiet street is alive with the _cliquetis_ of steel and the flash of
sword-blades. Adriano, Colonna's son, loves Irene, and when he discovers
who the trembling victim of patrician lust really is, he hastens to
protect her. The tumult soon attracts a crowd to the spot. Last comes
Rienzi, indignant at the insult offered to his sister, and bent upon
revenge. Adriano, torn by conflicting emotions, decides to throw in his
lot with Rienzi, and the act ends with the appointment of the latter to
the post of Tribune--- he refuses the title of King--and the marshalling
of the plebeians against the recreant aristocracy. The arms of the
people carry the day, and in the second act the nobles appear at the
Capitol to sue for pardon. Rienzi, though warned of their treachery by
Adriano, accepts their promise of submission. During the festivities
which celebrate the reconciliation Orsini attempts to assassinate
Rienzi, who is only saved by the steel breastplate which he wears
beneath his robes. For this outrage the nobles are condemned to death.
Adriano begs for his father's life, and Rienzi weakly relents, and
grants his prayer on condition of the nobles taking an oath of
submission.

In the third act the struggle between the nobles and the people advances
another stage. The nobles have once more broken their oath, and are
drawn up in battle array at the gates of Rome. Rienzi marshals his
forces and prepares to march forth against them. In vain Adriano pleads
once more for pardon. The fortune of war goes in favour of the
plebeians. The nobles are routed, Colonna is slain, and the scene closes
as Adriano vows vengeance over his father's body upon his murderer.

In the fourth act the tide has turned against Rienzi. The citizens
suspect him of treachery to their cause. Adriano joins the ranks of
malcontents, and does all in his power to fire them to vengeance. Rienzi
appears, and is at once surrounded by the conspirators, but in a speech
of noble patriotism he convinces them of their mistakes, and wins them
once more to allegiance. Suddenly the doors of the Lateran Church are
thrown open; the Papal Legate appears, and reads aloud the Bull of
Rienzi's excommunication. Horror-stricken at the awful sentence, the
Tribune's friends forsake him and fly, all save Irene, who, deaf to the
wild entreaties of Adriano, clings to her brother in passionate
devotion.

In the fifth act, Rienzi, after a last vain attempt to arouse the
patriotism of the people, seeks refuge in the Capitol, which is fired by
the enraged mob. The Tribune and Irene perish in the flames, together
with Adriano, whose love for Irene proves stronger than death.

Wagner himself has described the frame of mind in which he began to work
at 'Rienzi': "To do something grand, to write an opera for whose
production only the most exceptional means should suffice...this is
what resolved me to resume, and carry out with all my might, my former
plan of 'Rienzi.' In the preparation of this text I took no thought for
anything but the writing of an effective operatic libretto." In the
light of this confession, it is best to look upon 'Rienzi' merely as a
brilliant exercise in the Grand Opera manner. Much of the music is showy
and effective; there is a masculine vigour about the melodies, and the
concerted pieces are skilfully treated, but, except to the student of
Wagner's development, its intrinsic value is very small.

Appropriately enough, the idea of writing an opera upon the legend of
the Flying Dutchman first occurred to Wagner during his passage from
Riga to London in the year 1839. The voyage was long and stormy, and the
tempestuous weather which he encountered, together with the fantastic
tales which he heard from the lips of the sailors, made so deep an
impression upon his mind, that he determined to make his experiences the
groundwork of an opera dealing with the fortunes of the 'Wandering Jew
of the Ocean.' When he was in Paris, the stress of poverty compelled him
to treat the sketch, which he had made for a libretto, as a marketable
asset. This he sold to a now forgotten composer named Dietsch, who wrote
an opera upon the subject, which failed completely. The disappearance of
this work left Wagner's hands free once more, and some years later he
returned _con amore_ to his original idea. 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' was
produced at Dresden in 1843.

The legend of the Flying Dutchman is, of course, an old one. The idea of
the world-wearied wanderer driven from shore to shore in the vain search
for peace and rest dates from Homer. Heine was the first to introduce
the motive of the sinner's redemption through the love of a faithful
woman, which was still further elaborated by Wagner, and really forms
the basis of his drama. The opera opens in storm and tempest. The ship
of Daland, a Norwegian mariner, has just cast anchor at a wild and
rugged spot upon the coast not far from his own home, where his daughter
Senta is awaiting him. He can do nothing but wait for fair weather, and
goes below, leaving his steersman to keep watch. The lad drops asleep,
singing of his home, and through the darkness the gloomy vessel of the
Dutchman is seen approaching with its blood-red sails. The Dutchman
anchors his ship close to the Norwegian barque, and steps ashore. Seven
years have passed since he last set foot upon earth, and he comes once
more in search of a true woman who will sacrifice herself for his
salvation, for this alone can free him from the curse under which he
suffers. But hope of mortal aid is dead within his breast. In wild and
broken accents he tells of his passionate longing for death, and calls
upon the Judgment Day to put an end to his pilgrimage. 'Annihilation be
my lot,' he cries in his madness, and from the depths of the black
vessel the weird crew echoes his despairing cry. Daland issues from his
own vessel and gives the stranger a hearty greeting. The name of Senta
arrests the Dutchman's attention, and after a short colloquy and a
glimpse of the untold wealth which crams the coffers of the Dutchman,
the old miser consents to give his daughter to the stranger. The wind
meanwhile has shifted, and the two captains hasten their departure for
the port.

In the second act we are at Daland's house. Mary, the old housekeeper,
and a bevy of chattering girls are spinning by the fireside, while
Senta, lost in gloomy reverie, sits apart gazing at a mysterious picture
on the wall, the portrait of a pale man clad in black, the hero of the
mysterious legend of the Flying Dutchman. The girls rally Senta upon her
abstraction, and as a reply to their idle prattle she sings them the
ballad of the doomed mariner. Throughout the song her enthusiasm has
been waxing, and at its close, like one inspired, she cries aloud that
she will be the woman to save him, that through her the accursed wretch
shall find eternal peace. Erik, her betrothed lover, who enters to
announce the approach of Daland, hears her wild words, and in vain
reminds her of vows and promises made long ago. When Daland brings the
Dutchman in, and Senta sees before her the hero of her romance, the
living embodiment of the mysterious picture, she gazes spell-bound at
the weird stranger, and seems scarcely to hear her father's hasty
recommendation of the new suitor's pretensions. Left alone with the
Dutchman, Senta rapturously vows her life to his salvation, and the
scene ends with the plighting of their troth.

In the last act we are once more on the seashore. The Dutch and
Norwegian vessels are moored side by side, but while the crew of the
latter is feasting and making merry, the former is gloomy and silent as
the grave. A troop of damsels runs on with baskets of food and wine;
they join with the Norwegian sailors in calling upon the Dutchmen to
come out and share their festivities, but not a sound proceeds from the
phantom vessel. Suddenly the weird mariners appear upon the deck, and
while blue flames hover upon the spars and masts of their fated vessel,
they sing an uncanny song taunting their captain with his failure as a
lover. The Norwegian sailors in terror hurry below, the girls beat a
hasty retreat, and silence descends once more upon the two vessels.
Senta issues from Daland's house, followed by Erik. In spite of his
importunity, her steadfast purpose remains unmoved; but the Dutchman
overhears Erik's passionate appeal and, believing Senta to be untrue to
himself, rushes on board his ship and hastily puts out to sea. Senta's
courage rises to the occasion. Though the Dutchman has cast her off,
she remains true to her vows. She hastens to the edge of the cliff hard
by, and with a wild cry hurls herself into the sea. Her solemn act of
renunciation fulfils the promise of her lips. The gloomy vessel of the
Dutchman, its mission accomplished, sinks into the waves, while the
forms of Senta and the Dutchman transfigured with unearthly light are
seen rising from the bosom of the ocean.

The music of 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' may be looked at from two points
of view. As a link in the chain of Wagner's artistic development, it is
of the highest interest. In it we see the germs of those theories which
were afterwards to effect so formidable a revolution in the world of
opera. In 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' Wagner first puts to the proof the
_Leit-Motiv_, or guiding theme, the use of which forms, as it were, the
base upon which the entire structure of his later works rests. In those
early days he employed it with timidity, it is true, and with but a
half-hearted appreciation of the poetical effect which it commands; but
from that day forth each of his works shows a more complete command of
its resources, and a subtler instinct as to its employment. The
intrinsic musical interest of 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' is unequal.
Wagner had made great strides since the days of 'Rienzi,' but he had
still a vast amount to unlearn. Side by side with passages of vital
force and persuasive beauty there are dreary wastes of commonplace and
the most arid conventionality. The strange mixture of styles which
prevails in 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' makes it in some ways even less
satisfactory as a work of art than 'Rienzi,' which at any rate has the
merit of homogeneity. Wagner is most happily inspired by the sea. The
overture, as fresh and picturesque a piece of tone-painting as anything
he ever wrote, is familiar to all concert-goers, and the opening of the
first act is no less original. But perhaps the most striking part of the
opera, certainly the most characteristic, is the opening of the third
act, with its chain of choruses between the girls and the sailors. A
great deal of 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' might have been written by any
operatic composer of the time, but this scene bears upon it the
hall-mark of genius.

If 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' proved that the descriptive side of
Wagner's genius had developed more rapidly than the psychological, the
balance was promptly re-established in 'Tannhaeuser,' his next work. Much
of the music is picturesque and effective, even in the lowest sense, but
its strength lies in the extraordinary power which the composer displays
of individualising his characters--a power of which in 'Der Fliegende
Hollaender' there was scarcely a suggestion.

So far as mere form is concerned, 'Tannhaeuser' (1845) is far freer from
the conventionalities of the Italian school than 'Der Fliegende
Hollaender,' but this would not have availed much if Wagner's
constructive powers had not matured in so remarkable a way. It would
have been useless to sweep away the old conventions if he had had
nothing to set in their place. Apart from the strictly musical side of
the question, Wagner had in 'Tannhaeuser' a story of far deeper human
interest than the weird legend of the Dutchman, the tale which never
grows old of the struggle of good and evil for a human soul, the tale of
a remorseful sinner won from the powers of hell by the might of a pure
woman's love.

There is a legend which tells that when the gods and goddesses fled from
their palace on Olympus before the advance of Christianity, Venus betook
herself to the North, and established her court in the bowels of the
earth, beneath the hill of Hoerselberg in Thuringia. There we find the
minstrel Tannhaeuser at the opening of the opera. He has left the world
above, its strifes and its duties, for the wicked delights of the grotto
of Venus. There he lies in the embraces of the siren goddess, while life
passes in a ceaseless orgy of sinful pleasure. But the poet wearies of
his amorous captivity, and would fain return to the earth once more. In
vain the goddess pleads, in vain she calls up new scenes of ravishing
delight, he still prays to be gone. Finally he calls on the sainted name
of Mary, and Venus with her nymphs, grotto, palace and all, sink into
the earth with a thunder-clap, while Tannhaeuser, when he comes to his
senses once more, finds himself kneeling upon the green grass on the
slope of a sequestered valley, lulled by the tinkling bells of the flock
and the piping of a shepherd from a rock hard by. The pious chant of
pilgrims, passing on their way to Rome, wakens his slumbering
conscience, and bids him expiate his guilt by a life of abstinence and
humiliation. His meditations are interrupted by the appearance of the
Landgrave of Thuringia, his liege lord, who is hunting with Wolfram von
Eschinbach, Walther von der Vogelweide, and other minstrel-knights of
the Wartburg; but his newly awakened sense of remorse forbids him to
return with them to the castle, until Wolfram breathes the name of the
Landgrave's niece Elisabeth, the saintly maiden who has drooped and
pined since Tannhaeuser disappeared from the singing contests at the
Wartburg. The thought of human love touches his heart with warm
sympathy, and he gladly hastens to the castle with his newly found
friends.

In the second act we are at the Wartburg, in the Hall of Song in which
those tournaments of minstrelsy were held, for which the castle was
celebrated in the middle ages. Elisabeth enters, bringing a greeting to
the hall, whose threshold she has not crossed since Tannhaeuser's
mysterious departure. Her joyous tones have scarcely ceased when
Tannhaeuser, led by Wolfram, appears and falls at the feet of the
youthful Princess. Her pure spirit cannot conceive aught of dishonour in
his absence, and she welcomes him back to her heart with girlish trust.
Now the guests assemble and, marshalled in order, take their places for
the singers' tourney. The Landgrave announces the subject of the
contest--the power Of love--and more than hints that the hand of
Elisabeth is to be the victor's prize. The singers in turn take their
harps and pour forth their improvisations; Wolfram sings of the chaste
ideal which he worships from afar, Walther of the pure fount of virtue
from which he draws his inspiration, and the warrior Biterolf praises
the chivalrous passion of the soldier.

Each in turn is interrupted by Tannhaeuser, who, with ever-growing
vehemence, scoffs at the pale raptures of his friends. A kind of madness
possesses him, and as the hymns in praise of love recall to his memory
the amorous orgies of the Venusberg, he gradually loses all
self-control, and ends by bursting out with a wild hymn in praise of the
goddess herself. The horror-stricken women rush from the hall, and the
men, sword in hand, prepare to execute summary justice upon the
self-convicted sinner; but Elisabeth dashes in before the points of
their swords, and in broken accents begs pardon for her recreant lover
in the name of the Saviour of them all. Touched by her agonised pleading
the angry knights let fall their weapons, while Tannhaeuser, as his
madness slips from him and he realises all that he has lost, falls
repentant and prostrate upon the earth. The Landgrave bids him hasten to
Rome, where alone he may find pardon for a sin so heinous. Far below in
the valley a band of young pilgrims is passing, and the sound of their
solemn hymn rises to the castle windows; the pious strains put new life
into the despairing Tannhaeuser, and crying 'To Rome, to Rome,' he
staggers from the hall.

The scene of the third act is the same as that of the first, a wooded
valley beneath the towers of the Wartburg; but the fresh beauty of
spring has given place to the tender melancholy of autumn. No tidings of
the pilgrim have reached the castle, and Elisabeth waits on in patient
hope, praying that her lost lover may be given back to her arms free and
forgiven. While she pours forth her agony at the foot of a rustic cross,
the faithful Wolfram watches silently hard by. Suddenly the distant
chant of the pilgrims is heard. Elisabeth rises from her knees in an
agony of suspense. As the pilgrims file past one by one, she eagerly
scans their faces, but Tannhaeuser is not among them. With the failure of
her hopes she feels that the last link which binds her to earth is
broken. Committing her soul to the Virgin, she takes her way slowly back
to the castle, the hand of death already heavy upon her, after bidding
farewell to Wolfram in a passage which, though not a word is spoken, is
perhaps more poignantly pathetic than anything Wagner ever wrote. Alone
amid the gathering shades of evening, Wolfram sings the exquisite song
to the evening star which is the most famous passage in the opera. The
last strains have scarcely died away when a gloomy figure slowly enters
upon the path lately trodden by the rejoicing pilgrims. It is Tannhaeuser
returning from Rome, disappointed and despairing. His pilgrimage has
availed him nothing. The Pope bade him hope for no pardon for his sin
till the staff which he held in his hand should put forth leaves and
blossom. With these awful words ringing in his ears, Tannhaeuser has
retraced his weary steps. He has had enough of earth, and thinks only of
returning to the embraces of Venus. In response to his cries Venus
appears, in the midst of a wild whirl of nymphs and sirens. In vain
Wolfram urges and appeals; Tannhaeuser will not yield his purpose. He
breaks from his friend, and is rushing to meet the extended arms of the
goddess, when Wolfram adjures him once more by the sainted memory of
Elisabeth. At the sound of that sinless name Venus and her unhallowed
crew sink with a wild shriek into the earth. The morning breaks, and the
solemn hymn of the procession bearing the corpse of Elisabeth sounds
sweetly through the forest. As the bier is carried forward Tannhaeuser
sinks lifeless by the dead body of his departed saint, while a band of
young pilgrims comes swiftly in, bearing the Pope's staff, which has put
forth leaves and blossomed--the symbol of redemption and pardon for the
repentant sinner.

It will generally be admitted that the story of 'Tannhaeuser' is better
suited for dramatic purposes than that of 'Der Fliegende Hollaender,'
apart from the lofty symbolism which gives it so deeply human an
interest. This would go far to account for the manifest superiority of
the later work, but throughout the score it is easy to note the enhanced
power and certainty of the composer in dealing even with the less
interesting parts of the story. Much of 'Tannhaeuser' is conventional,
but it nevertheless shows a great advance on 'Der Fliegende Hollaender,'
in the disposal of the scenes as much as in the mere treatment of the
voices. But in the orchestra the advance is even more manifest. The
guiding theme, which in 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' only makes fitful and
timid appearances, is used with greater boldness, and with increased
knowledge of its effect. Wagner had as yet, it is true, but little
conception of the importance which this flexible instrument would assume
in his later works; but such passages as the orchestral introduction to
the third act, and Tannhaeuser's narration, give a foretaste of what the
composer was afterwards to achieve by this means. So far as orchestral
colour is concerned, too, the score of Tannhaeuser is deeply interesting
to the student of Wagner's development. Here we find Wagner for the
first time consistently associating a certain instrument or group of
instruments with one of the characters, as, for instance, the trombones
with the pilgrims, and the wood-wind with Elisabeth. This plan--which is
in a certain sense the outcome of the guiding theme system--he was
afterwards to develop elaborately. It had of course been employed
before, notably by Gluck, but Wagner with characteristic boldness
carried it at once to a point of which his predecessor can scarcely have
dreamed. As an illustration, the opening of the third act may be quoted,
in which Elisabeth is represented by the wood-wind--by the clarinets and
bassoons in the hour of her deep affliction and abasement, and by the
flutes and hautboys when her soul has finally cast off all the trammels
of earth--and Wolfram by the violoncello. The feelings of the two are so
exquisitely portrayed by the orchestra, that the scene would be easily
comprehensible if it were carried on--as indeed much of it is--without
any words at all.

'Lohengrin' (1850) was the first of Wagner's operas which won general
acceptance, and still remains the most popular. The story lacks the deep
human interest of 'Tannhaeuser,' but it has both power and
picturesqueness, while the prominence of the love-interest, which in the
earlier work is thrust into the background, is sufficient to explain the
preference given to it. Elsa of Brabant is charged by Frederick of
Telramund, at the instigation of his wife Ortrud, with the murder of her
brother Godfrey, who has disappeared. King Henry the Fowler, who is
judging the case, allows Elsa a champion; but the signal trumpets have
sounded twice, and no one comes forward to do battle on her behalf.
Suddenly there appears, in a distant bend of the river Scheldt, a boat
drawn by a swan, in which is standing a knight clad in silver armour.
Amidst the greatest excitement the knight gradually approaches, and
finally disembarks beneath the shadow of the king's oak. He is accepted
by Elsa as her champion and lover on the condition that she shall never
attempt to ask his name. If she should violate her promise,
Lohengrin--for it is he--must return at once to his father's kingdom.
Telramund is worsted in the fight, having no power to fight against
Lohengrin's sacred sword, and the act ends with rejoicings over the
approaching marriage of Lohengrin and Elsa.

In the second act it is night; Telramund and Ortrud are crouching upon
the steps of the Minster, opposite the palace, plotting revenge.
Suddenly Elsa steps out upon the balcony of the Kemenate, or women's
quarters, and breathes out the tale of her happiness to the breezes of
night. Ortrud accosts her with affected humility, and soon succeeds in
establishing herself once more in the good graces of the credulous
damsel. She passes into the Kemenate with Elsa, first promising to use
her magic powers so as to secure for ever for Elsa the love of her
unknown lord. Elsa rejects the offer with scorn, but it is evident that
the suggestion has sown the first seeds of doubt in her foolish heart.
As the day dawns the nobles assemble at the Minster gate, and soon the
long bridal procession begins to issue from the Kemenate. But before
Elsa has had time to set foot upon the Minster steps, Ortrud dashes
forward and claims precedence, taunting the hapless bride with ignorance
of her bridegroom's name and rank. Elsa has scarcely time to reply in
passionate vindication of her love, when the King and Lohengrin approach
from the Pallas, the quarters of the knights. Lohengrin soothes the
terror of his bride, and the procession starts once more. Once more it
is interrupted. Telramund appears upon the threshold of the cathedral
and publicly accuses Lohengrin of sorcery. The King, however, will not
harbour a suspicion of his spotless knight. Telramund is thrust aside,
though not before he has had time to whisper fresh doubts and suspicions
to the shuddering Elsa, and the procession files slowly into the
Minster.

A solemn bridal march opens the next act, while the maids of honour
conduct Elsa and Lohengrin to the bridal chamber. There, after a love
scene of enchanting beauty, her doubts break forth once more. 'How is
she to know,' she cries, 'that the swan will not come some day as
mysteriously as before and take her beloved from her arms?' In vain
Lohengrin tries to soothe her; she will not be appeased, and in frenzied
excitement puts to him the fatal question, 'Who art thou?' At that
moment the door is burst open, and Telramund rushes in followed by four
knights with swords drawn. Lohengrin lifts his sacred sword, and the
false knight falls dead at his feet. The last scene takes us back to the
banks of the Scheldt. Before the assembled army Lohengrin answers Elsa's
question. He is the son of Parsifal, the lord of Monsalvat, the keeper
of the Holy Grail. His mission is to succour the distressed, but his
mystic power vanishes if the secret of its origin be known. Even as he
speaks the swan appears once more, drawing the boat which is to bear him
away. Lohengrin bids a last farewell to the weeping Elsa, and turns once
more to the river. Now is the moment of Ortrud's triumph. She rushes
forward and proclaims that the swan is none other than Godfrey, Elsa's
brother, imprisoned in this shape by her magic arts. But Lohengrin's
power is not exhausted; he kneels upon the river bank, and in answer to
his prayer the white dove of the Grail wheels down from the sky,
releases the swan, and, while Elsa clasps her restored brother to her
breast, bears Lohengrin swiftly away over the waters of the Scheldt.

The interest of 'Lohengrin' lies rather in the subtle treatment of the
characters than in the intrinsic beauty of the story itself. Lohengrin's
love for Elsa, and his apparent intention of settling in Brabant for
life, seem scarcely consistent with his duties as knight of the Grail,
and, save for their mutual love, neither hero nor heroine have much
claim upon our sympathies. But the grouping of the characters is
admirable; the truculent witch Ortrud is a fine foil to the ingenuous
Elsa, and Lohengrin's spotless knighthood is cast into brilliant relief
by the dastardly treachery of Telramund. The story of 'Lohengrin' lacks
the deep human interest of 'Tannhaeuser,' and the music never reaches the
heights to which the earlier work sometimes soars. But in both respects
'Lohengrin' has the merit of homogeneity; the libretto is laid out by a
master hand, and the music, though occasionally monotonous in rhythm,
has none of those strange relapses into conventionality which mar the
beauty of 'Tannhaeuser.' Musically 'Lohengrin' marks the culminating
point of Wagner's earlier manner. All the links with the Italian school
are broken save one, the concerted finale. Here alone he adheres to the
old tradition of cavatina and cabaletta--the slow movement followed by
the quick. The aria in set form has completely disappeared, while the
orchestra, though still often used merely as an accompaniment, is never
degraded, as occasionally happens in 'Tannhaeuser,' to the rank of a 'big
guitar.'

The opening notes of 'Lohengrin' indeed prove incontestably the
increased power and facility with which Wagner had learnt to wield his
orchestra since the days of 'Tannhaeuser.' The prelude to 'Lohengrin'--a
mighty web of sound woven of one single theme--is, besides being a
miracle of contrapuntal ingenuity, one of the most poetical of Wagner's
many exquisite conceptions. In it he depicts the bringing to earth by
the hands of angels of the Holy Grail, the vessel in which Joseph of
Arimathea caught the last drops of Christ's blood upon the cross. With
the opening chords we seem to see the clear blue expanse of heaven
spread before us in spotless radiance. As the Grail motive sounds for
the first time _pianissimo_ in the topmost register of the violins, a
tiny white cloud, scarcely perceptible at first, but increasing every
moment, forms in the zenith. Ever descending as the music gradually
increases in volume, the cloud resolves itself into a choir of angels
clad in white, the bearers of the sacred cup. Nearer and still nearer
they come, until, as the Grail motive reaches a passionate _fortissimo_,
they touch the earth, and deliver the Holy Grail to the band of faithful
men who are consecrated to be its earthly champions. Their mission
accomplished the angels swiftly return. As they soar up, the music
grows fainter. Soon they appear once more only as a snowy cloud on the
bosom of the blue. The Grail motive fades away into faint chords, and
the heaven is left once more in cloudless radiance.

A noticeable point in the score of 'Lohengrin' is the further
development of the beautiful idea which appears in 'Tannhaeuser,' of
associating a certain instrument or group of instruments with one
particular character. The idea itself, it may be noticed in passing,
dates from the time of Bach, who used the strings of the orchestra to
accompany the words of Christ in the Matthew Passion, much as the old
Italian painters surrounded his head with a halo. In 'Lohengrin' Wagner
used this beautiful idea more systematically than in 'Tannhaeuser';
Lohengrin's utterances are almost always accompanied by the strings of
the orchestra, while the wood-wind is specially devoted to Elsa. This
plan emphasises very happily the contrast, which is the root of the
whole drama, between spiritual and earthly love, typified in the persons
of Lohengrin and Elsa, which the poem symbolises in allegorical fashion.




CHAPTER X

WAGNER'S LATER WORKS


The attempt to divide the life and work of a composer into fixed periods
is generally an elusive and unsatisfactory experiment, but to this rule
the case of Wagner is an exception. His musical career falls naturally
into two distinct divisions, and the works of these two periods differ
so materially in scope and execution that the veriest tyro in musical
matters cannot fail to grasp their divergencies. In the years which
elapsed between the composition of 'Lohengrin' and 'Das Rheingold,'
Wagner's theories upon the proper treatment of lyrical drama developed
in a surprising manner. Throughout his earlier works the guiding theme
is used with increasing frequency, it is true, so that in 'Lohengrin'
its employment adds materially to the poetical interest of the score;
but in 'Das Rheingold' we are in a different world. Here the guiding
theme is the pivot upon which the entire work turns. The occasional use
of some characteristic musical phrase to illustrate the recurrence of a
special personality or phase of thought has given way to a deliberate
system in which not only each of the characters in the drama, but also
their thoughts, feelings, and aspirations are represented by a distinct
musical equivalent. These guiding themes are by no means the mere labels
that hostile critics of Wagner would have us believe. They are subject,
as much as the characters and sentiments which they represent, to
organic change and development. By this means every incident in the
progress of the drama, the growth of each sentiment or passion, the play
of thought and feeling, all find a close equivalent in the texture of
the music, and the connection between music and drama is advanced to an
intimacy which certainly could not be realised by any other means.

The difference in style between 'Lohengrin' and 'Das Rheingold' is so
very marked that it is only natural to look for some explanation of the
sudden change other than the natural development of the composer's
genius. Wagner's social position at this point in his career may have
reacted to a certain extent upon his music. An exile from his country,
his works tabooed in every theatre, he might well be pardoned if he felt
that all chance of a career as a popular composer was over for him, and
decided for the future to write for himself alone. This may explain the
complete renunciation of the past which appears in 'Das Rheingold,' the
total severance from the Italian tradition which lingers in the pages of
'Lohengrin,' and the brilliant unfolding of a new scheme of lyric drama
planned upon a scale of unexampled magnificence and elaboration.

Intimately as Wagner's theory of the proper scope of music drama is
connected with the system of guiding themes which he elaborated, it
need hardly be said that he was very far from being the first to
recognise the importance of their use in music. There are several
instances of guiding themes in Bach. Beethoven, too, and even Gretry
used them occasionally with admirable effect. But before Wagner's day
they had been employed with caution, not to say timidity. He was the
first to realise their full poetic possibility.

'Das Rheingold,' the first work in which Wagner put his matured musical
equipment to the proof, is the first division of a gigantic tetralogy,
'Der Ring des Nibelungen,' The composition of this mighty work extended
over a long period of years. It was often interrupted, and as often
recommenced. In its completed form it was performed for the first time
at the opening of the Festspielhaus at Bayreuth in 1876, but the first
two divisions of the work, 'Das Rheingold' and 'Die Walkuere,' had
already been given at Munich, in 1869 and 1870 respectively. It will be
most convenient in this place to treat 'Der Ring des Nibelungen' as a
complete work, although 'Tristan und Isolde' and 'Die Meistersinger'
were written and performed before 'Siegfried' and 'Goetterdaemmerung.'

Wagner took the main incidents of his drama from the old Norse sagas,
principally from the two Eddas, but in many minor points his tale varies
from that of the original authorities. Nevertheless he grasped the
spirit of the myth so fully, that his version of the Nibelung story
yields in harmony and beauty to that of none of his predecessors. There
is one point about the Norse mythology which is of the utmost importance
to the proper comprehension of 'Der Ring des Nibelungen.' The gods of
Teutonic legend are not immortal. In the Edda the death of the gods is
often mentioned, and distinct reference is made to their inevitable
downfall. Behind Valhalla towers the gigantic figure of Fate, whose
reign is eternal. The gods rule for a limited time, subject to its
decrees. This ever-present idea of inexorable doom is the guiding idea
of Wagner's great tragedy. Against the inevitable the gods plot and
scheme in vain.

The opening scene of 'Das Rheingold' is in the depths of the Rhine.
There, upon the summit of a rock, lies the mysterious treasure of the
Rhine, the Rhine-gold, guarded night and day by the three Rhine-maidens
Wellgunde, Woglinde, and Flosshilde, who circle round the rock in an
undulating dance, joyous and light-hearted 'like troutlets in a pool.'
Alberich, the prince of the Nibelungs, the strange dwarf-people who
dwell in the bowels of the earth, now appears. Clumsily he courts the
maidens, trying unsuccessfully to catch first one, then another.
Suddenly the rays of the rising sun touch the treasure on the rock and
light it into brilliant splendour. The maidens, in delight at its
beauty, incautiously reveal the secret of the Rhine-gold to the
inquisitive dwarf. The possessor of it, should he forge it into a ring,
will become the ruler of the world. But, to that end, he must renounce
the delights of love for ever. Alberich, fired with the lust of power,
hastily climbs the rock, tears away the shining treasure, and plunges
with it into the abyss, amidst the cries of the maidens, who vainly
endeavour to pursue him. The scene now changes, the waves gradually
giving place to clouds and vapour, which in turn disclose a lofty
mountainous region at the foot of which is a grassy plateau. Here lie
the sleeping forms of Wotan, the king of the gods, and Fricka, his wife.
Behind them, upon a neighbouring mountain, rise the towers of Valhalla,
Wotan's new palace, built for him by the giants Fafner and Fasolt in
order to ensure him in his sovereignty of the world. In exchange for
their labours Wotan has promised to give them Freia, the goddess of love
and beauty, but he hopes by the ingenuity of Loge, the fire-god, to
escape the fulfilment of his share of the contract. While Fricka is
upbraiding him for his rash promise Freia enters, pursued by the giants,
who come to claim their reward. Wotan refuses to let Freia go, and Froh
and Donner come to the protection of their sister. The giants are
prepared to fight for their rights, but the entrance of Loge fortunately
effects a diversion. He has searched throughout the world for something
to offer to the giants instead of the beautiful goddess, but has only
brought back the news of Alberich's treasure-trove, and his forswearing
of love in order to rule the world. The lust of power now invades the
minds of the giants, and they agree to take the treasure in place of
Freia, if Wotan and Loge can succeed in stealing it from Alberich. On
this quest therefore the two gods descended through a cleft in the earth
to Nibelheim, the abode of the Nibelungs. There they find Alberich, by
virtue of his magic gold, lording it over his fellow-dwarfs. He has
compelled his brother Mime, the cleverest smith of them all, to fashion
him a Tarnhelm, or helmet of invisibility, and the latter complains
peevishly to the gods of the overbearing mastery which Alberich has
established in Nibelheim. When Alberich appears, Wotan and Loge
cunningly beguile him to exhibit the powers of his new treasures. The
confiding dwarf, in order to display the quality of the Tarnhelm, first
changes himself into a snake and then into a toad. While he is in the
shape of the latter, Wotan sets his foot upon him, Loge snatches the
Tarnhelm from his head, and together they bind him and carry him off to
the upper air. When he has conveyed his prisoner in safety to the
mountain-top, Wotan bids him summon the dwarfs to bring up his treasures
from Nibelheim. Alberich reluctantly obeys. His treasure is torn from
him, his Tarnhelm, and last of all the ring with which he hoped to rule
the world. Bereft of all, he utters a terrible curse upon the ring,
vowing that it shall bring ruin and death upon every one who wears it,
until it returns to its original possessor. The giants now appear to
claim their reward. They too insist upon taking the whole treasure.
Wotan refuses to give up the ring until warned by the goddess Erda, the
mother of the Fates, who rises from her subterranean cavern, that to
keep it means ruin. The ring passes to the giants, and the curse at once
begins to work. Fafner slays Fasolt in a quarrel for the gold, and
carries off the treasure alone. Throughout this scene the clouds have
been gathering round the mountain-top. Donner, the god of thunder, now
ascends a cliff, and strikes the rock with his hammer. Thunder rolls and
lightning flashes, the dark clouds are dispelled, revealing a rainbow
bridge thrown across the chasm, over which the gods solemnly march to
Valhalla, while from far below rise the despairing cries of the
Rhine-maidens lamenting their lost treasure.

'Das Rheingold' is conspicuous among the later works of Wagner for its
brevity and concentration. Although it embraces four scenes, the music
is continuous throughout, and the whole makes but one act. Wagner's aim
seems to have been to set forth in a series of brilliant pictures the
medium in which his mighty drama was to unfold itself. Human interest of
course there is none, but the supernatural machinery is complete. The
denizens of the world are grouped in four divisions--the gods in heaven,
the giants on the earth, the dwarfs beneath, and the water-sprites in
the bosom of the Rhine. 'Das Rheingold' has a freshness and an open-air
feeling which are eminently suitable to the prologue of a work which
deals so much with the vast forces of nature as Wagner's colossal drama.
There is little scope in it for the delicate psychology which enriches
the later divisions of the tetralogy, but, on the other hand, Wagner
has reproduced the 'large utterance of the early gods' with exquisite
art. Musically it can hardly rank with its successors, partly no doubt
because the plot has not their absorbing interest, partly also because
'Das Rheingold' is the first work in which Wagner consciously worked in
accordance with his theory of guiding themes, and consequently he had
not as yet gained that complete mastery of his elaborate material which
he afterwards attained. Yet some of the musical pictures in 'Das
Rheingold' would be difficult to match throughout the glowing gallery of
'Der Ring des Nibelungen,' such as the beautiful opening scene in the
depths of the Rhine, and the magnificent march to Valhalla with which it
closes.

Before the opening of 'Die Walkuere,' the next work of the series, much
has happened. Wotan has begotten the nine Valkyries (_Walkueren_, or
choosers of the slain), whose mission is to bring up dead heroes from
the battle-field to dwell in Valhalla, and, if need be, help to defend
it. He determines, too, since he may not possess the ring himself, to
beget a hero of the race of men who shall win it from Fafner (who has
changed himself into a dragon in order to guard the treasure more
securely), and so prevent it falling into the hands of an enemy of the
gods. For this purpose he descends to earth and, under the name of
Volse, unites himself with a mortal woman, who bears him the Volsung
twins, Siegmund and Sieglinde. Bound by his oath to Fafner, Wotan may
not openly assist Siegmund in the enterprise, but he dwells with him on
the earth, and trains him in all manly exercises. Sieglinde is carried
off by enemies and given as wife to Hunding, and Siegmund returning one
day from the chase finds his father gone, and nothing but an empty
wolf-skin left in the hut. Alone he has to wage continual war with the
enemies who surround him. One day, in defending a woman from wrong, he
is overpowered by numbers, and losing his sword, has to fly for his
life. With this 'Die Walkuere' opens. A violent storm is raging when
Siegmund reaches Hunding's hut. Exhausted by fatigue, he throws himself
down by the hearth, and is soon fast asleep. Sieglinde entering offers
him food and drink. Soon Hunding appears, and, after hearing his guest's
name and history, discovers in him a mortal foe. Nevertheless the rights
of hospitality are sacred. He offers Siegmund shelter for the night, but
bids him be ready at dawn to fight for his life. Left alone, Siegmund
muses in the dying firelight on the promise made him by his father, that
at the hour of his direst need he should find a sword. His reverie is
interrupted by the entrance of Sieglinde, who has drugged Hunding's
night draught, and now urges Siegmund to flee. Each has read in the
other's eyes the sympathy which is akin to love, and Siegmund refuses to
leave her. Thereupon she tells him of a visit paid to the house upon the
day of her marriage to Hunding by a mysterious stranger, who thrust a
sword into the stem of the mighty ash-tree which supports the roof,
promising it to him who could pull it out. Siegmund draws the sword
(which he greets with the name of Nothung) in triumph from the tree, and
the brother and sister, now united by a yet closer tie, fall into each
other's arms as the curtain falls.

The scene of the next act is laid in a wild, mountainous region. Wotan
has summoned his favourite daughter, the Valkyrie Bruennhilde, and
directs her to protect Siegmund in the fight with Hunding which is soon
to take place. Bruennhilde departs with her wild Valkyrie cry, and Fricka
appears in a car drawn by two rams. She is the protectress of marriage
rites, and come to complain of Siegmund's unlawful act in carrying off
Sieglinde. A long altercation ensues between the pair. In the end Fricka
is triumphant. She extorts an oath from Wotan that he will not protect
Siegmund, and departs satisfied. Bruennhilde again appears, and another
interminable scene follows between her and Wotan. The father of the gods
is weighed down by the sense of approaching annihilation. He now
realises that the consequences of his lawless lust of power are
beginning to work his ruin. He tells Bruennhilde the whole story ot his
schemes to avert destruction by the help of Siegmund and the Valkyries,
ending by commanding her, under dreadful penalties, to leave the Volsung
hero to his fate. Siegmund and Sieglinde now appear, flying from the
vengeful Hunding. Sieglinde's strength is almost spent, and she sinks
exhausted in a death-like swoon. While Siegmund is tenderly watching
over her, Bruennhilde advances. She tells Siegmund of his approaching
doom, and bids him prepare for the delights of Valhalla. He refuses to
leave Sieglinde, and, rather than that they should be separated, he is
ready to plunge his sword into both their hearts. His noble words melt
Bruennhilde's purpose, and, in defiance of Wotan's commands, she promises
to protect him. Hunding's horn is now heard in the distance, and
Siegmund leaves Sieglinde still unconscious and rushes to the encounter.
Amid the gathering storm-clouds the two men meet upon a rocky ridge.
Bruennhilde protects Siegmund with her shield, but just as he is about to
deal Hunding a fatal blow, Wotan appears in thunder and lightning and
thrusts his spear between the combatants. Siegmund's sword is shivered
to fragments upon it, and Hunding strikes him dead. Bruennhilde hastily
collects the splinters of the sword, and escapes with Sieglinde upon her
horse, while Hunding falls dead before a contemptuous wave of Wotan's
hand.

The third act shows a rocky mountain-top in storm and tempest. One by
one the Valkyries appear riding on their horses through the driving
clouds. Last comes Bruennhilde, with the terrified and despairing
Sieglinde. Sieglinde wishes to die, but Bruennhilde entreats her to live
for the sake of her child that is to be, and giving her the splintered
fragments of Siegmund's sword, bids her escape to the forest, where
Fafner watches over his treasure. The voice of the wrathful Wotan is now
heard in the distance. He appears, indignant at Bruennhilde's
disobedience, dismisses the other Valkyries, and tells Bruennhilde what
her punishment is to be. She is to be banished from the sisterhood of
Valkyries, and Valhalla is to know her no more. Thrown into a deep
sleep, she shall lie upon the mountain-top, to be the bride of the first
man who finds and wakens her. Bruennhilde pleads passionately for a
mitigation of the cruel sentence, or at least that a circle of fire
shall be drawn around her resting-place, so that none but a hero of
valour and determination can hope to win her. Moved by her entreaties,
Wotan consents. He kisses her fondly to sleep, and lays her gently upon
a mossy couch, covered with her shield. Then he strikes the earth with
his spear, calling on the fire-god Loge. Tongues of fire spring up
around them, and leaving her encircled with a rampart of flame, he
passes from the mountain-top with the words, 'Let him who fears my
spear-point never dare to pass through the fire.'

With 'Die Walkuere' the human interest of 'Der Ring des Nibelungen'
begins, and with it Wagner rises to greater heights than he could hope
to reach in 'Das Rheingold.' In picturesque force and variety 'Die
Walkuere' does not yield to its predecessors, while the passion and
beauty of the immortal tale of the Volsungs lifts it dramatically into a
different world. 'Die Walkuere' is the most generally popular of the four
works which make up Wagner's great tetralogy, for the inordinate length
of some of the scenes in the second act is amply atoned for by the
immortal beauties of the first and third. Twenty years ago Wagner's
enemies used to make capital out of the incestuous union of Siegmund
and Sieglinde, but it is difficult to believe in the sincerity of their
virtuous indignation. No sane person would conceivably attempt to judge
the personages of the Edda by a modern code of ethics; nor could any one
with even a smattering of the details of Greek mythology affect to
regard such a union as extraordinary, given the environment in which the
characters of Wagner's drama move. It may be noted in passing that 'Die
Walkuere' is the latest of Wagner's works in which the traces of his
earlier manner are still perceptible. For the most part, as in all his
later works, the score is one vast many-coloured web of guiding themes,
'a mighty maze, but not without a plan!' Here and there, however, occur
passages, such as the Spring Song in the first act and the solemn melody
which pervades Bruennhilde's interview with Siegmund in the second,
which, beautiful in themselves as they are, seem reminiscent of earlier
and simpler days, and scarcely harmonise with the colour scheme of the
rest of the work.

With 'Siegfried' the drama advances another stage. Many years have
elapsed since the tragic close of 'Die Walkuere.' Sieglinde dragged
herself to the forest, and there died in giving birth to a son,
Siegfried, who has been brought up by the dwarf Mime in the hope that
when grown to manhood the boy may slay the dragon and win for him the
Nibelung treasure. The drama opens in Mime's hut in the depths of the
forest. The dwarf is engaged in forging a sword for Siegfried,
complaining the while that the ungrateful boy always dashes the swords
which he makes to pieces upon the anvil as though they were toys.
Siegfried now comes in, blithe and boisterous, and treats Mime's new
sword like its predecessors, blaming the unfortunate smith for his
incompetence. Mime reproaches Siegfried for his ingratitude, reminding
him of the care with which he nursed him in childish days. Siegfried
cannot believe that Mime is his father, and in a fit of passion forces
the dwarf to tell him the real story of his birth. Mime at length
reluctantly produces the fragments of Siegmund's sword, and Siegfried,
bidding him forge it anew, rushes out once more into the forest. The
dwarf is settling down to his task, when his solitude is disturbed by
the advent of a mysterious stranger. It is Wotan, disguised as a
wanderer, who has visited the earth to watch over the offspring of his
Volsung son, and to see how events are shaping themselves with regard to
the Nibelung treasure. The scene between him and Mime is exceedingly
long, and, though of the highest musical interest and beauty, does very
little to advance the plot. The god and the dwarf ask each other a
series of riddles, each staking his head upon the result. Mime breaks
down at the question, 'Who is to forge the sword Nothung anew?' Wotan
tells him the answer, 'He who knows not fear,' and departs with the
contemptuous reminder that the dwarf has forfeited his head to the
fearless hero. Siegfried now returns, and is very angry when he finds
that Mime has not yet forged the sword. The frightened dwarf confesses
that the task is beyond his powers, and finding that Siegfried does not
know what fear is, tells him to forge his sword for himself. Siegfried
then proceeds to business. He files the pieces to dust and melts them in
a melting-pot, singing a wild song as he fans the flames with a huge
bellows. Next he pours the melted steel into a mould and plunges it into
water to cool, heats it red-hot in the furnace, and lastly hammers it on
the anvil. When all is finished he brandishes the sword, and, to the
mingled terror and delight of Mime, with one mighty stroke cleaves the
anvil in twain.

The next act shows a glen in the gloomy forest close to Fafner's lair.
Alberich is watching in the darkness, in the vain hope of finding an
opportunity of recovering his lost treasure. Wotan appears, and taunts
him with his impotence, telling him meanwhile of Siegfried's speedy
arrival. Mime and Siegfried soon appear. The dwarf tries to excite the
feeling of fear in Siegfried's bosom by a blood-curdling description of
the terrible dragon, but finding it useless, leaves Siegfried at the
mouth of Fafner's cave and retires into the brake. Left alone, Siegfried
yields to the fascination of the summer woods. Round him, as he lies
beneath a giant linden-tree, the singing of birds and the murmur of the
forest blend in a mysterious symphony. His thoughts fly back to his dead
mother and his lonely childhood. But his reverie is interrupted by the
awakening of Fafner, who resents his intrusion. Siegfried boldly attacks
his terrible foe, and soon puts an end to him. As he draws his sword
from the dragon's heart, a rush of blood wets his hand. He feels it
burn, and involuntarily puts his hand to his lips. Forthwith, by virtue
of the magic power of the blood, he understands the song of the birds,
and as he listens he hears the warning voice of one of them in the
linden-tree telling him of the Tarnhelm and the ring. Armed with these
he comes forth from the dragon's cave to find Mime, who has come to
offer him a draught from his drinking-horn after his labours. But the
dragon's blood enables him to read the thoughts in the dwarf's heart
under his blandishing words. The draught is poisoned, and Mime hopes by
slaying Siegfried to gain the Nibelung hoard. With one blow of his sword
Siegfried slays the treacherous dwarf, and, guided by his friendly bird,
hastens away to the rock where Bruennhilde lies within the flaming
rampart awaiting the hero who shall release her.

The third act represents a wild landscape at the foot of Bruennhilde's
rock. Wotan once more summons Erda, and bids her prophesy concerning the
doom of the gods. She knows nothing of the future, and Wotan professes
himself resigned to hand over his sovereignty to the youthful Siegfried,
who shall deliver the world from Alberich's curse. Erda sinks once more
into her cavern, and Siegfried appears, led by the faithful bird. Wotan
attempts to bar his passage, but Siegfried will brook no interference,
and he shivers Wotan's spear (the emblem of the older rule of the gods)
with a blow of his sword. Gaily singing, he passes up through the fire,
and finds Bruennhilde asleep upon her rock. Love teaches him the fear
which he could not learn from Fafner. He awakens the sleeper, and would
clasp her in his arms, but Bruennhilde, who fell asleep a goddess, knows
not that she has awaked a woman. She flies from him, but his passion
melts her, and, her godhead slipping from her, she yields to his
embrace.

'Siegfried,' as has been happily observed, is the scherzo of the great
Nibelung symphony. After the sin and sorrow of 'Die Walkuere' the change
to the free life of the forest and the boyish innocence of the youthful
hero is doubly refreshing. 'Siegfried' is steeped in the spirit of
youth. There breathes through it the freshness of the early world.
Wagner loved it best of his works. He called it 'the most beautiful of
my life's dreams.' Though less stirring in incident than 'Die Walkuere,'
it is certainly more sustained in power. It is singularly free from
those lapses into musical aridity which occasionally mar the beauty of
the earlier work. If the poem from time to time sinks to an inferior
level, the music is instinct with so much resource and beauty that there
can be no question of dulness. In 'Siegfried,' in fact, Wagner's genius
reaches its zenith. In power, picturesqueness, and command of orchestral
colour and resource, he never surpassed such scenes as the opening of
the third act, or Siegfried's scaling of Bruennhilde's rock. It is worth
while remarking that an interval of twelve years elapsed between the
composition of the second and third acts of 'Siegfried.' In 1857,
although 'Der Ring des Nibelungen' was well advanced towards completion,
Wagner's courage give way. The possibility of seeing his great work
performed seemed so terribly remote, that he decided for the time being
to abandon it and begin on a work of more practicable dimensions. In
1869 King Ludwig of Bavaria induced him to return to the attack, and
with what delight he did so may easily be imagined. At first sight it
seems strange that there should be such complete harmony between the
parts of the work, which were written at such different times. The
explanation of course lies in the firm fabric of guiding themes, which
is the sure foundation upon which the score of 'Siegfried' is built. Had
Wagner trusted merely to the casual inspiration of the moment, it is
possible that the new work would have harmonised but ill with the old;
as it was, he had but to gather up the broken threads of his unfinished
work to find himself once more under the same inspiration as before. His
theory still held good; his materials were the same; he had but to work
under the same conditions to produce work of the same quality as before.

In 'Goetterdaemmerung' we leave the cool forest once more for the haunts
of men, and exchange the sinless purity of youth for envy, malice, and
all uncharitableness. The prologue takes us once more to the summit of
Bruennhilde's rock. There, in the dim grey of early dawn, sit the three
Norns, unravelling from their thread of gold the secrets of the
present, past, and future. As the morning dawns the thread snaps, and
they hurry away. In the broadening light of day Siegfried and Bruennhilde
appear. The Valkyrie has enriched her husband from her store of hidden
wisdom, and now sends him forth in quest of new adventures. She gives
him her shield and Grane, her horse, and he in turn gives her his ring,
as a pledge of his love and constancy. He hastens down the side of the
mountain, and the note of his horn sounds fainter and fainter as he
takes his way across the Rhine.

The first act shows the hall of the castle of the Gibichungs near the
Rhine. Here dwell Gunther and his sister Gutrune, and their half-brother
Hagen, whose father was the Nibelung Alberich. Hagen knows the story of
the ring, and that its present possessor is Siegfried, and he devises a
crafty scheme for getting Siegfried into his power. Gunther is still
unmarried, and, fired by Hagen's tale of the sleeping Valkyrie upon the
rock of fire, yearns to have Bruennhilde for his wife. Hagen therefore
proposes that Gutrune should be given to Siegfried, and that the latter,
who is the only hero capable of passing through the fire, should in
return win Bruennhilde for Gunther. In the nick of time Siegfried
arrives. Hagen brews him a magic potion, by virtue of which he forgets
all his former life, and his previous love for Bruennhilde is swallowed
up in a burning passion for Gutrune. He quickly agrees to Hagen's
proposal, and assuming the form of Gunther by means of the Tarnhelm, he
departs once more for Bruennhilde's rock. Meanwhile Bruennhilde sits at
the entrance to her cave upon the fire-girt cliff, musing upon
Siegfried's ring. Suddenly she hears the old well-known Valkyrie war-cry
echoing down from the clouds. It is her sister Waltraute, who comes to
tell her of the gloom that reigns in Valhalla, and to entreat her to
give up the ring once more to the Rhine-maidens, that the curse may be
removed and that the gods may not perish. Bruennhilde, however, treasures
the symbol of Siegfried's love more than the glory of heaven, and
refuses to give it up. She defies the gods, and Waltraute takes her way
sadly back to Valhalla. Now Siegfried's horn sounds in the distance far
below. Bruennhilde hurries to meet him, and is horrified to see, not her
beloved hero, but a stranger appear upon the edge of the rocky platform.
The disguised Siegfried announces himself as Gunther, and after a
struggle overcomes Bruennhilde's resistance and robs her of the ring.
This reduces her to submission; he bids her enter her chamber and
follows her, first drawing his sword, which is to lie between them, a
proof of his fidelity to his friend.

The second act begins with the appearance of Alberich, who comes to
incite his son Hagen to further efforts to regain the ring. Siegfried
appears, and announces the speedy arrival of Gunther and Bruennhilde.
Hagen thereupon collects the vassals, and tells them the news of their
lord's approaching marriage, which is received with unbounded delight.
Bruennhilde's horror and amazement at finding Siegfried in the hall of
the Gibichungs, wedded to Gutrune and with the ring so lately torn from
her upon his finger, are profound. She accuses him of treachery,
declaring that she is his real wife. Siegfried, for whom the past is a
blank, protests his innocence, declaring that he has dealt righteously
with Gunther and not laid hands upon his wife. Bruennhilde, however,
convinces Gunther of Siegfried's deceit, and together with Hagen they
agree upon his destruction.

The scene of the third act is laid in a forest on the banks of the
Rhine. The three Rhine-maidens are disporting themselves in the river
while they lament the loss of their beautiful treasure. Siegfried, who
has strayed from his companions in the chase, now appears, and they beg
him for the ring upon his finger, at first with playful banter, and
afterwards in sober earnest, warning him that if he does not give it
back to them he will perish that very day. He laughs at their womanly
wiles, and they vanish as his comrades appear. After the midday halt,
Siegfried tells Gunther and his vassals the story of his life. In the
midst of his tale Hagen gives him a potion which restores his faded
memory. He tells the whole story of his discovery of Bruennhilde, and his
marriage with her, to the horror of Gunther. At the close of his tale
two ravens, the birds of Wotan, fly over his head. He turns to look at
them, and Hagen plunges his spear into his back. The vassals, in silent
grief, raise the dead body upon their shields, and carry it back to the
castle through the moonlit forest, to the immortal strains of the
Funeral March.

At the castle Gutrune is anxiously waiting for news of her husband.
Hagen tells her that he has been slain by a boar. The corpse is brought
in and set down in the middle of the hall, amidst the wild lamentations
of the widowed Gutrune. Hagen claims the ring, and stabs Gunther, who
tries to prevent his taking it; but as he grasps at it, Siegfried's hand
is raised threateningly, and Hagen sinks back abashed. Bruennhilde now
comes in, sorrowful but calm. She understands the whole story of
Siegfried's unwitting treachery, and has pardoned him in his death. She
thrusts the weeping Gutrune aside, claiming for herself the sole right
of a wife's tears. The vassals build a funeral pyre, and place the body
of Siegfried upon it. Bruennhilde takes the ring from his finger, and
with her own hand fires the wood. She then leaps upon her horse Grane,
and with one bound rides into the towering flames. The Rhine, which has
overflowed its banks, now invades the hall. Hagen dashes into the flood
in search of the ring, but the Rhine-maidens have been before him.
Flosshilde, who has rescued the ring from the ashes of the pyre, holds
it exultantly aloft, while Wellgunde and Woglinde drag Hagen down to the
depths. Meanwhile a ruddy glow has overspread the heavens behind.
Valhalla is burning, and the gods in calm resignation await their final
annihilation. The old order yields, giving place to the new. The
ancient heaven, sapped by the lust of gold, has crumbled, and a new
world, founded upon self-sacrificing love, rises from its ashes to usher
in the era of freedom.

'Goetterdaemmerung' is prevented by its portentous length from ever
becoming popular to the same extent as Wagner's other works, but it
contains some of the noblest music he ever wrote. The final scene, for
sublimity of conception and grandeur of execution, remains unequalled in
the whole series of his writings. It fitly gathers together the many
threads of that vast fabric, 'Der Ring des Nibelungen.' Saint Saens says
of it that 'from the elevation of the last act of "Goetterdaemmerung," the
whole work appears, in its almost supernatural grandeur, like the chain
of the Alps seen from the summit of Mont Blanc.'

The literature of 'Der Ring des Nibelungen' is already very large, and
not a year passes without some addition to the long catalogue of works
dealing with Wagner's mighty drama. Readers desirous of studying the
tetralogy more closely, whether from its literary, ethical, or musical
side, must refer to one or more of the many handbooks devoted to its
elucidation for criticism on a more elaborate scale than is possible
within the narrow limits of such a work as the present.

It has already been related how Wagner broke off, when midway through
'Der Ring des Nibelungen,' and devoted himself to the composition of a
work of more conventional dimensions. The latter was 'Tristan und
Isolde.' Produced as it was in 1865, four years before 'Das Rheingold,'
it was the first of Wagner's later works actually to see the light.
Round its devoted head, therefore, the war of controversy raged more
fiercely than in the case of any of Wagner's subsequent works. Those
days are long past, and 'Tristan' is now universally accepted as a work
of supreme musical loveliness, although the lack of exciting incident in
the story must always prevent the _profanum vulgus_ from sharing the
musician's rapture over the deathless beauties of the score.

Isolde, the daughter of the King of Ireland, is sought in marriage by
Marke, the King of Cornwall, and Tristan, his nephew, has been sent to
bring the princess to England. Before the beginning of the drama Tristan
had slain Morold, Isolde's lover, and sent his head to Ireland in place
of the tribute due from Cornwall. He himself had been wounded in the
fight, and when washed by the tide upon the shores of Ireland, had been
tended by Isolde. To conceal his identity he assumed the name of
Tantris, but Isolde had recognised him by a notch in his sword, which
corresponded with a splinter which she had found imbedded in Morold's
head. Finding the murderer of her lover in her power, her first impulse
had been to slay him, but as she lifted the sword she found that love
had conquered hate, and she let Tristan depart unscathed. When he
returned as the ambassador of his uncle, her love changed to indignation
that he who had won her heart should dare to woo her for another. The
scene of the first act is laid on board the vessel which is conveying
her to Cornwall. She vows never to become the bride of Marke, and
opening a casket of magic vials, bids Brangaene, her attendant, pour one
which contains a deadly poison into a goblet. Then she summons Tristan
from his place at the helm, and bids him share the draught with her.
Tristan gladly obeys, for he loves Isolde passionately, and prefers
death to a life of hopeless yearning. But Brangaene has substituted a
love philtre for the poison, and the lovers, instead of the pangs of
death, feel themselves over-mastered by an irresistible wave of passion.
As the shouts of the sailors announce the arrival of the ship, Tristan
and Isolde meet in a long embrace.

The second act is practically one vast love duet. Isolde is waiting in
the castle garden, listening to the distant horns of the King's
hunting-party, and longing for the approach of night, when she may meet
her lover. In spite of the entreaties of Brangaene, she extinguishes the
torch which is to be the signal to Tristan, and soon she is in his arms.
In a tender embrace they sink down among the flowers of the garden,
murmuring their passion in strains of enchanting loveliness. Brangaene's
warning voice falls upon unheeding ears. The King, followed by his
attendants, rushes in, and overwhelmed with sorrow and shame, reproaches
his nephew for his treachery. Tristan can only answer by calling upon
Isolde to follow him to death, whereupon Melot, one of the King's men,
rushes forward, crying treason, and stabs him in the breast.

In the last act Tristan is lying wounded and unconscious in his castle
in Brittany, tended by Kurwenal, his faithful squire. He is roused by
the news of Isolde's approach, and as her ship comes in sight he rises
from his couch and in wild delirium tears the bandages from his wounds.
Isolde rushes in in time to receive his parting sigh. As she bends over
his lifeless body, another ship is seen approaching. It is the King,
come not to chide but to pardon. Kurwenal, however, does not know this,
and defends his master's castle with the last drop of his blood, dying
at last at Tristan's feet, while Isolde chants her death-song over the
fallen hero in strains of celestial loveliness.

'Tristan und Isolde' is the 'Romeo and Juliet' of music. Never has the
poetry and tragedy of love been set to music of such resistless beauty.
But love, though the guiding theme of the work, is not the only passion
that reigns in its pages. The haughty splendour of Isolde's injured
pride in the first act, the beautiful devotion of the faithful Kurwenal,
and the blank despair of the dying Tristan, in the third, are depicted
with a magical touch.

Some years ago it was the fashion, among the more uncompromising
adherents of Wagner, to speak of 'Tristan und Isolde' as the completest
exposition of their master's theories, because the chorus took
practically no share in the development of the drama. Many musicians,
on the other hand, have felt Wagner's wilful avoidance of the
possibilities of choral effect to detract seriously from the musical
interest of the opera, and for that reason have found 'Tristan und
Isolde' less satisfying as a work of art than 'Parsifal' or 'Die
Meistersinger,' in which the chorus takes its proper place. It is
scarcely necessary to point out that, opera being in the first instance
founded upon pure convention, there is nothing more illogical in the
judicious employment of the chorus than in the substitution of song for
speech, which is the essence of the art-form.

Wagner's one comic opera was born under a lucky star. Most of his operas
had to wait many years for production, but the kindly care of Ludwig of
Bavaria secured the performance of 'Die Meistersinger' a few months
after the last note had been written. Unlike many of his other
masterpieces, too, 'Die Meistersinger' (1868) was a success from the
first. There were critics, it is true, who thought the opera 'a
monstrous caterwauling,' but it had not to wait long for general
appreciation, and performances in Berlin, Vienna, and Dresden soon
followed the initial one at Munich.

The scene of 'Die Meistersinger' is laid in sixteenth-century Nuremberg.
Walther von Stolzing, a young Franconian knight, loves Eva, the daughter
of Pogner the goldsmith; but Pogner has made up his mind that Eva shall
marry none but a Mastersinger, that is to say, a member of the guild
devoted to the cultivation of music and poetry, for which the town was
famous. Eva, on the contrary, is determined to marry no one but Walther,
and tells him so in a stolen interview after service in St Catherine's
Church. It remains therefore for Walther to qualify as a master, and
David, the apprentice of Hans Sachs the cobbler, the most popular man in
Nuremberg, is bidden by his sweetheart Magdalena, Eva's servant, to
instruct the young knight in the hundred and one rules which beset the
singer's art. The list of technicalities which David rattles off fills
Walther with dismay, and he makes up his mind to trust to his native
inspiration. The Mastersingers now assemble, and Pogner announces that
Eva's hand is to be the prize of the singing contest next day. Walther
now steps forward as a candidate for admission to the guild. First he
must sing a trial song, and Beckmesser, the malicious little ape of a
town-clerk, is appointed marker, to sit in a curtained box and note down
upon a slate every violation of the rules of singing which may occur in
the candidate's song. Walther sings from his heart of love and spring.
The untutored loveliness of his song fills the hide-bound Mastersingers
with dismay, and Beckmesser's slate is soon covered. Walther, angry and
defeated, rushes out in despair, and the assembly breaks up in
confusion. Only the genial Hans Sachs finds truth and beauty in the
song, and cautions his colleagues against hasty judgment.

The scene of the second act is laid at a delightfully picturesque
street-corner. Sachs is musing before his shop-door when Eva comes to
find out how Walther had fared before the Mastersingers. Hans tells her
of his discomfiture, and, by purposely belittling Walther's claims to
musicianship, discovers what he had before suspected, that she loves the
young knight. Sachs loves Eva himself, but finding out the state of her
affections, nobly determines to help her to win the man of her heart.
Walther now comes to meet his love, and, full of resentment against the
Masters, proposes an elopement. Eva readily agrees, but Sachs, who has
overheard them, frustrates the scheme by opening his window and throwing
a strong light upon the street by which they would have to pass.
Beckmesser, lute in hand, now comes down the street and begins a
serenade under Eva's window. Sachs drowns his feeble piping with a lusty
carol, hammering away meanwhile at a pair of shoes which he must finish
that night for Beckmesser to wear on the morrow. Beckmesser is in
despair. Finally they come to an arrangement. Beckmesser shall sing his
song, and Sachs shall act as 'marker,' noting every technical blunder in
the words and tune with a stroke of his hammer. The result is such a din
as disturbs the slumbers of the neighbours. David, the apprentice, comes
out and recognises his sweetheart Magdalena at Eva's window. He scents a
rival in Beckmesser, and begins lustily to cudgel the unfortunate
musician. Soon the street fills with townsfolk and apprentices, all
crying and shouting together. Eva and Walther, under cover of the
uproar, are making their escape, when Sachs, who has been on the watch,
steps out and stops them. He bids Eva go home, and takes Walther with
him into the house. Suddenly the watchman's horn is heard in the
distance. Every one rushes off, and the street is left to the quiet
moonlight and the quaint old watchman, who paces up the street solemnly
proclaiming the eleventh hour.

In the third act we find Sachs alone in his room, reading an ancient
tome, and brooding over the follies of mankind. David interrupts him
with congratulations on his birthday, and sings a choral in his honour.
Walther now appears, full of a wonderful dream he has had. Sachs makes
him sing it, and writes down the words on a piece of paper. After they
have gone out, Beckmesser creeps in, very lame and sore after his
cudgelling. He finds the paper and appropriates it. Sachs comes in and
discovers the theft, but tells Beckmesser he may keep the poem. The
latter is overjoyed at getting hold of a new song, as he supposes, by
Sachs, and hurries off to learn it in time for the contest. Eva now
comes in under the pretence of something being amiss with one of her
shoes, and, while Sachs is setting it right, Walther sings her the last
verse of his dream-song. The scene culminates in an exquisite quintet in
which David and Magdalena join, after which they all go off to the
festivities in a meadow outside the town. There, after much dancing and
merry-making, the singing contest comes off. Beckmesser tries to sing
Walther's words to the melody of his own serenade, the result being
such indescribable balderdash that the assembled populace hoots him
down, and he rushes off in confusion, Walther's turn then comes, and he
sings his song with such success that the prize is awarded to him with
acclamation. He wins his bride, but he will have nothing to say to the
Mastersingers and their pedantry, until Hans Sachs has shown him that in
them lies the future of German art.

Although it contains comic and even farcical scenes, 'Die Meistersinger'
is in fact not so much a comedy as a satire, with a vein of wise and
tender sentiment running through it. It has also to a certain extent the
interest of autobiography. It is not difficult to read in the story of
Walther's struggles against the prejudice and pedantry of the
Mastersingers a suggestion of Wagner's own life-history, and if
Beckmesser represents the narrow malice of critics who are themselves
composers--and these were always Wagner's bitterest enemies--Sachs may
stand for the enlightened public, which was the first to appreciate the
nobility of the composer's aim. It is not surprising that 'Die
Meistersinger' was one of the first of Wagner's mature works to win
general appreciation. The exquisite songs, some of them easily
detachable from their context, scattered lavishly throughout the work,
together with the important share of the music allotted to the chorus,
constitute a striking contrast to 'Tristan und Isolde' or 'Der Ring des
Nibelungen.' It has been suggested that this was due to a
half-unconscious desire on Wagner's part to write music which should
appeal more to the popular ear than was possible in 'Tristan und
Isolde.' One of the most striking features of the opera is the mastery
with which Wagner has caught and reproduced the atmosphere of
sixteenth-century Nuremberg without sacrificing a jot of the absolute
modernity of his style. 'Die Meistersinger' yields to none of the
composer's work in the complexity and elaboration of the score--indeed,
the prelude may be quoted as a specimen of Wagner's command of all the
secrets of polyphony at its strongest and greatest.

'Parsifal,' Wagner's last and in the opinion of many his greatest work,
was produced in 1882 at the Festspielhaus in Bayreuth. The name by which
the composer designated his work, _Buehnenweihfestspiel_ which may be
translated 'Sacred Festival Drama,' sufficiently indicates its solemn
import, and indeed both in subject and treatment it stands remote from
ordinary theatrical standards. The subject of 'Parsifal' is drawn from
the legends of the Holy Grail, which had already furnished Wagner with
the tale of 'Lohengrin.' Titurel, the earthly keeper of the Holy Grail,
has built the castle of Monsalvat, and there established a community of
stainless knights to guard the sacred chalice, who in their office are
miraculously sustained by its life-giving power. Growing old, he has
delegated his headship to his son Amfortas. Near to the castle of
Monsalvat dwells the magician Klingsor, who, having in vain solicited
entry to that pure company, is now devoted to the destruction of the
knights. He has transformed the desert into a garden of wicked
loveliness, peopled by beautiful sirens, through whose charms many of
the knights have already fallen from their state of good. Lastly
Amfortas, sallying forth in the pride of his heart to subdue the
sorcerer, armed with the sacred spear that clove the Saviour's side, has
succumbed to the charms of the beauteous Kundry, a strange being over
whom Klingsor exercises an hypnotic power. He has lost the spear, and
further has sustained a grievous wound from its point dealt by Klingsor,
which no balm or balsam can heal.

The first scene opens in a cool woodland glade near the castle of
Monsalvat, where Gurnemanz, one of the knights, and two young esquires
of the Grail are sleeping. Their earnest converse is interrupted by
Kundry, who flies in with a healing medicine for the wounded King, which
she has brought from Arabia. This strange woman is that Herodias who
laughed at our Saviour upon the Cross, and thenceforth was condemned to
wander through the world under a curse of laughter, praying only for the
gift of tears to release her weary soul. Klingsor has gained a magic
power over her, and, to use the language of modern theosophy, can summon
her astral shape at will to be the queen of his enchanted garden,
leaving her body stark and lifeless; but when not in his power she
serves the ministers of the Grail in a wild, petulant, yet not wholly
unloving manner. Gurnemanz tells the young esquires the story of the
Grail, and together they repeat the prophecy which promises relief to
their suffering King:--

    Wise through pity,
    The sinless fool.
    Look thou for him
    Whom I have chosen.

Their words are interrupted by loud cries from without, and several
knights and esquires rush in, dragging with them Parsifal, who has slain
one of the sacred swans with his bow and arrow. Gurnemanz protects
Parsifal from their violence, and seeing that the youth, who has lived
all his life in the woods, is as innocent as a child, leads him up to
the castle of the Grail, in the hope that he may turn out to be the
sinless fool of the prophecy. In the vast hall of the Grail the knights
assemble, and fulfil the mystic rites of the love-feast. Amfortas, the
one sinner in that chaste community, pleads to be allowed to forgo his
task of uncovering the Grail, the source to him of heartburning remorse
and anguish; but Titurel, speaking from the tomb where he lies between
life and death, sustained only by the miraculous power of the Grail,
urges his son to the duty. Amfortas uncovers the Grail, which is
illumined with unearthly light, and the solemn ceremony closes in peace
and brotherly love. Parsifal, who has watched the whole scene from the
side, feels a strange pang of sympathy at Amfortas's passionate cry, but
as yet he does not understand what it means. He is not yet 'wise
through pity,' and Gurnemanz, disappointed, turns him from the temple
door.

In the second act we are in Klingsor's magic castle. The sorcerer,
knowing of the approach of Parsifal, summons Kundry to her task, and
with many sighs she has to submit to her master. Parsifal vanquishes the
knights who guard the castle, and enters the enchanted garden, a
wilderness of tropical flowers, vast in size and garish in colour. There
he is saluted by troops of lovely maidens, who play around him until
dismissed by a voice sounding from a network of flowers hard by.
Parsifal turns and sees Kundry, now a woman of exquisite loveliness,
advancing towards him. She tells him of his dead mother, and drawing him
towards her, presses upon his lips the first kiss of love. The touch of
defilement wakens him to a sense of human frailty. The wounded
Amfortas's cry becomes plain to him. He starts to his feet, throbbing
with compassion for a world of sin. No thought of sensual pleasure moves
him. He puts Kundry from him, and her endearments move him but to pity
and horror. Kundry in her discomfiture cries to Klingsor. He appears on
the castle steps, brandishing the sacred spear. He hurls it at Parsifal,
but it stops in the air over the boy's head. He seizes it and with it
makes the sacred sign of the Cross. With a crash the enchanted garden
and castle fall into ruin. The ground is strewn with withered flowers,
among which Kundry lies prostrate, and all that a moment before was
bright with exotic beauty now lies a bare and desert waste.

Many years have passed before the third act opens. Evil days have fallen
upon the brotherhood of the Grail. Amfortas, in his craving for the
release of death, has ceased to uncover the Grail. Robbed of their
miraculous nourishment, the knights are sunk in dejection. Titurel is
dead, and Gurnemanz dwells in a little hermitage in a remote part of the
Grail domain. There one morning he finds the body of Kundry cold and
stiff. He chafes her to life once more, and is surprised to see in her
face and gestures a new and strange humility. A warrior now approaches
clad in black armour. It is Parsifal returned at length after long and
weary wanderings. Gurnemanz recognises the spear which he carries, and
salutes its bearer as the new guardian of the Grail. He pours water from
the sacred spring upon Parsifal's head, saluting him in token of
anointment, while Kundry washes his feet and wipes them with her hair.
The first act of Parsifal in his new office is to baptize the regenerate
Kundry, redeemed at length by love from her perpetual curse. Bowing her
head upon the earth, she weeps tears of repentant joy. The three now
proceed to the temple, where the knights are gathered for Titurel's
burial. Amfortas still obstinately refuses to uncover the Grail, and
calls upon the knights to slay him. Parsifal heals his wound with a
touch of the sacred spear, and taking his place, unveils the sacred
chalice, and kneels before it in silent prayer. Once more a sacred glow
illumines the Grail, and while Parsifal gently waves the mystic cup from
side to side, in token of benediction alike to the pardoned Amfortas
and the ransomed Kundry, a snowy dove flies down from above, and hovers
over his anointed head.

It would be in vain to attempt to treat, within the restricted limits of
these pages, of the manifold beauties of 'Parsifal,' musical, poetical,
and scenical. Many books have already been devoted to it alone, and to
these the reader must be referred for a subtler analysis of this
extraordinary work. It is difficult to compare 'Parsifal' with any of
Wagner's previous works. By reason of its subject it stands apart, and
performed as it is at Bayreuth and there, save for sacrilegious New
York, alone, with the utmost splendour of mounting, interpreted by
artists devoted heart and soul to its cause, and listened to by an
audience of the elect assembled from the four corners of the earth,
'Parsifal,' so to speak, is as yet surrounded by a halo of almost
unearthly splendour. It is difficult to apply to it the ordinary canons
of criticism. One thing however, may safely be said, that it stands
alone among works written for theatrical performance by reason of its
absolute modernity coupled with a mystic fervour such as music has not
known since the days of Palestrina.

Of Wagner's work as a whole it is as yet too early to speak with
certainty. The beauty of his works, and the value of the system upon
which they are founded, must still be to a certain extent a matter of
individual taste. One thing, at any rate, may safely be said: he has
altered the whole course of modern opera. It is inconceivable that a
work should now be written without traces more or less important of the
musical system founded and developed by Richard Wagner.




CHAPTER XI

MODERN FRANCE

GOUNOD--THOMAS--BIZET--SAINT
SAENS--REYER--MASSENET--BRUNEAU--CHARPENTIER--DEBUSSY


If one were set upon paradox, it would not be far from the truth to say
that up to the middle of the nineteenth century the most famous French
composers had been either German or Italian. Certainly if Lulli, Gluck,
Rossini and Meyerbeer--to name only a few of the distinguished aliens
who settled in Paris--had never existed, French opera of the present day
would be a very different thing from what it actually is. Yet in spite
of the strangely diverse personalities of the men who had most influence
in shaping its destiny, modern French opera is an entity remarkable for
completeness and homogeneity, fully alive to tendencies the most
advanced, yet firmly founded upon the solid traditions of the past.

Gounod (1818-1893) was trained in the school of Meyerbeer, but his own
sympathies drew him rather towards the serene perfection of Mozart. The
pure influence of that mighty master, combined with the strange mingling
of sensuousness and mysticism which was the distinguishing trait of his
own character, produced a musical personality of high intrinsic
interest, and historically of great importance to the development of
music. If not the actual founder of modern French opera, Gounod is at
least the source of its most pronounced characteristics.

His first opera, 'Sapho' (1851), a graceful version of the immortal
story of the Lesbian poetess's love and death, has never been really
popular, but it is interesting as containing the germs of much that
afterwards became characteristic in Gounod's style. In the final scene
of Sappho's suicide, the young composer surpassed himself, and struck a
note of sensuous melancholy which was new to French opera. 'La Nonne
Sanglante' (1854), his next work, was a failure; but in 'Le Medecin
malgre lui' (1858), an operatic version of Moliere's comedy, he scored a
success. This is a charming little work, instinct with a delicate
flavour of antiquity, but lacking in comic power. It has often been
played in England as 'The Mock Doctor.' Sganarelle is a drunken
woodcutter, who is in the habit of beating his wife Martine. She is on
the look-out for a chance of paying him back in his own coin. Two
servants of Geronte, the Croesus of the neighbourhood, appear in search
of a doctor to cure their master's daughter Lucinde, who pretends to be
dumb in order to avoid a marriage she dislikes. Martine sends them to
the place where her husband is at work, telling them that they will find
him an able doctor. She adds that he has one peculiarity, namely, that
he will not own to his profession unless he is soundly thrashed. Under
the convincing arguments of the two men, Sganarelle admits that he is a
doctor, and follows them to their master's house. Leandre, Lucinde's
lover, persuades Sganarelle to smuggle him into the house as an
apothecary. The two young people with Sganarelle's help contrive an
elopement, but when the marriage is discovered, Geronte visits his wrath
upon the mock doctor, and is only pacified by the news that Leandre has
just inherited a fortune.

The year 1859 saw the production of 'Faust,' the opera with which
Gounod's name is principally associated. The libretto, by MM. Barbier
and Carre does not of course claim to represent Goethe's play in any
way. The authors had little pretension to literary skill, but they knew
their business thoroughly. They fastened upon the episode of Gretchen,
and threw all the rest overboard. The result was a well-constructed and
thoroughly comprehensible libretto, with plenty of love-making and
floods of cheap sentiment, but as different in atmosphere and suggestion
from Goethe's mighty drama as could well be imagined.

The first act shows us Faust as an old man, sitting in his study weary
and disappointed. He is about to end his troubles and uncertainty in
death, when an Easter hymn sung in the distance by a chorus of villagers
seems to bid him stay his hand. With a quick revulsion of feeling he
calls on the powers below, and, rather to his surprise, Mephistopheles
promptly appears. In exchange for his soul, the devil offers him youth,
beauty, and love, and, as an earnest of what is to come, shows him a
vision of the gentle Margaret sitting at her spinning wheel. Faust is
enraptured, hastily signs the contract, and hurries away with his
attendant fiend.

The next act is taken up with a Kermesse in the market-place of a
country town. Valentine, the brother of Margaret, departs for the wars,
after confiding his sister to the care of his friend Siebel. During a
pause in the dances Faust salutes Margaret for the first time as she
returns from church. The third act takes place in Margaret's garden.
Faust and Mephistopheles enter secretly, and deposit a casket of jewels
upon the doorstep. Margaret, woman-like, is won by their beauty, and
cannot resist putting them on. Faust finds her thus adorned, and wooes
her passionately, while Mephistopheles undertakes to keep Dame Martha,
her companion, out of the way. The act ends by Margaret yielding to
Faust's prayers and entreaties. In the fourth act Margaret is left
disconsolate. Faust has deserted her, and Valentine comes home to find
his sister's love-affair the scandal of the town. He fights a duel with
Faust, whom he finds lurking under his sister's window, and dies cursing
Margaret with his last breath. During this act occurs the church scene,
which is sometimes performed after Valentine's death and sometimes
before it. Margaret is kneeling in the shadowy minster, striving to
pray, but the voice of conscience stifles her half-formed utterances. In
Gounod's libretto, the intangible reproaches which Margaret addresses
to herself are materialised in the form of Mephistopheles, a proceeding
which is both meaningless and inartistic, though perhaps dramatically
unavoidable. In the,' last act, after a short scene on the Brocken and a
conventional ballet, which are rarely performed in England, we are taken
to the prison where Margaret lies condemned to death for the murder of
her child. Faust is introduced by the aid of Mephistopheles, and tries
to persuade her to fly with him. Weak and wandering though she is, she
refuses, and dies to the chant of an angelic choir, while Faust is
dragged down to the abyss by Mephistopheles. Gounod's music struggles
nobly with the tawdriness and sentimentality of the libretto. A good
deal of the first and last acts is commonplace and conventional, but the
other three contain beauties of a high order. The life and gaiety of the
Kermesse scene in the second act, the sonorous dignity of Valentine's
invocation of the cross, and the tender grace of Faust's salutation--the
last a passage which might have been written by Mozart--are too familiar
to need more than a passing reference. In the fourth act also there is
much noble music. Gounod may be forgiven even for the soldiers' chorus,
in consideration of the masculine vigour of the duel terzetto--a
purified reminiscence of Meyerbeer--and the impressive church scene. But
the most characteristic part of the work is, after all, the love music
in the third act. The dreamy languor which pervades the scene, the
cloying sweetness of the harmonies, the melting beauty of the
orchestration, all combine to produce an effect; which was at that time
entirely new to opera, and had no little share in forming the modern
school. With all his admiration of Mozart, Gounod possessed little of
his idol's genius for characterisation. The types in 'Faust' do not
stand out clearly. Margaret, for instance, is merely a sentimental
school-girl; she has none of the girlish freshness and innocence of
Goethe's Gretchen, and Mephistopheles is much more of a tavern bully
than a fallen angel. Yet with all its faults 'Faust' remains a work of a
high order of beauty. Every page of the score tells of a striving after
a lofty ideal, and though as regards actual form Gounod made no attempt
to break new ground, the aim and atmosphere of 'Faust,' no less than the
details of its construction, contrast so strongly with the conventional
Italianism of the day, that it may well be regarded as the inauguration
of a new era in French music.

'Faust' marks the zenith of Gounod's career. After 1859 he was content
for the most part merely to repeat the ideas already expressed in his
_chef-d'oevre_, while in form his later works show a distinctly
retrograde movement. He seems to have known nothing of the inward
impulse of development which led Wagner and Verdi from strength to
strength.

Philemon et Baucis' (1860) is a charming modernisation of a classical
legend. Jupiter and Vulcan, visiting earth for the purpose of punishing
the impiety of the Phrygians, are driven by a storm to take refuge in
the cottage of an aged couple, Philemon and Baucis. Pleased with the
hospitable treatment which he receives at their hands, and touched by
the mutual affection of the old people, which time has done nothing to
impair, Jupiter restores their lost youth to them. This leads to
dangerous complications. The rejuvenated Baucis is so exceedingly
attractive that Jupiter himself falls a victim to her charms, and
Philemon becomes jealous and quarrelsome. Baucis finally persuades
Jupiter to promise her whatever she wishes, and having extorted the oath
compels him to return to Olympus, leaving Philemon and herself to enjoy
another lifetime of uninterrupted happiness. 'Philemon et Baucis'
adheres strictly to the conventional lines of opera comique, and has
little beyond its tuneful grace and delicate orchestration to recommend
it. Nevertheless it is a charming trifle, and has survived many of
Gounod's more pretentious works. 'La Reine de Saba' (1862) and 'La
Colombe' (1866) are now forgotten, but 'Mireille' (1864), one of the
composer's most delightful works, still enjoys a high degree of
popularity. The story, which is founded upon Mistral's Provencal romance
'Mireio,' is transparently simple. Vincent, a young basket-maker, loves
the fair Mireille, who is the daughter of a rich farmer named Raymond.
Raymond will have nothing to say to so humble a suitor, and favours the
pretensions of Ourrias, a herdsman. While making a pilgrimage to a
church in the desert of Crau, Mireille has a sunstroke, and her life is
despaired of. In an access of grief and remorse her father promises to
revoke his dismissal of Vincent, whereupon Mireille speedily recovers
and is united to her lover. Gounod's music seems to have borrowed the
warm colouring of the Provencal poet's romance. 'Mireille' glows with
the life and sunlight of the south. There is little attempt at dramatic
force in it, and the one scene in which the note of pathos is attempted
is perhaps the least successful in the whole opera. But the lighter
portions of the work are irresistible. 'Mireille' has much of the charm
of Daudet's Provencal stories, the charm of warmth and colour,
independent of subject. More than one version of the opera exists. That
which is now most usually played is in three acts. In the first version
of the work there is a curious scene, in which Ourrias is drowned by a
spectral ferryman in the waters of the Rhone, but this is now rarely
performed.

In 1869 was produced 'Romeo et Juliette,' an opera which, in the
estimation of the majority of Gounod's admirers, ranks next to 'Faust'
in the catalogue of his works. The libretto, apart from one or two
concessions to operatic convention, is a fair piece of work, and at any
rate compares favourably with the parodies of Shakespeare which so often
do duty for libretti. The opening scene shows the ball in Capulet's
house and the first meeting of the lovers. The second act is the balcony
scene. The third includes the marriage of Romeo and Juliet in Friar
Laurence's cell, with the duels in the streets of Verona, the death of
Mercutio, and the banishment of Romeo. The fourth act opens with the
parting of the lovers in Juliet's chamber, and ends with Friar Laurence
giving Juliet the potion. The last act, after an elaborate orchestral
movement describing the sleep of Juliet, takes place in the tomb of the
Capulets. MM. Barbier and Carre could not resist an opportunity of
improving upon Shakespeare, and prolonged Romeo's death agony, in order
to enable him to join in a final duet with Juliet.

The composer of the third act of 'Faust' could hardly fail to be
attracted by 'Romeo and Juliet.' Nevertheless Gounod was too pronounced
a mannerist to do justice to Shakespeare's immortal love-story. He is,
of all modern composers, the one whose method varies least, and
throughout 'Romeo et Juliette' he does little more than repeal in an
attenuated form the ideas already used in 'Faust.' Yet there are
passages in the opera which stand out in salient contrast to the
monotony of the whole, such as the exquisite setting of Juliet's speech
in the balcony scene, beginning--

    'Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,'

which conveys something more than an echo of the virginal innocence and
complete self-abandonment of Shakespeare's lines, or the more
commonplace but still beautiful passage at the close of the act;
suggested by Romeo's line--

    'Sleep dwell upon thine eyes.'

The duel scene is vigorous and effective, and the song allotted to
Romeo's page--an impertinent insertion of the librettists--is
intrinsically delightful. It is typical of the musician that he should
put forth his full powers in the chamber duet, while he actually omits
the potion scene altogether, which is the legitimate climax of the act.
In the original version of the opera there was a commonplace cavatina
allotted to Juliet at this point, set to words which had but a remote
connection with Shakespeare's immortal lines, but it was so completely
unworthy of the situation that it was usually omitted, and when the
opera was revised for production at the Grand Opera in 1888, Gounod
thought it wiser to end the act with the Friar's discourse to Juliet,
rather than attempt once more to do justice to a scene which he knew to
be beyond his powers. The last act is perhaps the weakest part of the
opera. MM. Barbier and Carre's version of Shakespeare's magnificent
poetry is certainly not inspiring; but in any case it is difficult to
believe that Gounod's suave talent could have done justice to the
piteous tragedy of that terrible scene. Gounod's last three operas did
not add to his reputation. 'Cinq Mars' (1877) made little impression
when it was first produced, but it has recently been performed by the
Carl Rosa Company in English with some success. The libretto is a poor
one. It deals in conventional fashion with the conspiracy of Cinq Mars
against Richelieu, but the incidents are not well arranged and the
characters are the merest shadows. Much of the music is tuneful and
attractive, though cast in a stiff and old-fashioned form, and the
masquemusic in the second act is as fresh and melodious as anything
Gounod ever wrote. In 'Polyeucte' (1878) he attempted a style of severe
simplicity in fancied keeping with Corneille's tragedy. There are some
noble pages in the work, but as a whole it is distressingly dull, and
'Le Tribut de Zamora' (1881) was also an emphatic failure.

Gounod's later works, as has already been pointed out, show a distinct
falling off from the standard attained in 'Faust,' as regards form as
well as in ideas. As he grew older he showed a stronger inclination to
return to obsolete models. 'Le Tribut de Zamora' reproduces the type of
opera which was popular in the days of Meyerbeer. It is cut up into airs
and recitatives, and the accompaniment is sedulously subordinated to the
voices. Without desiring to discredit the beauties of 'Mireille' or
'Romeo et Juliette,' one cannot help thinking that it would have been
better for Gounod's reputation if he had written nothing for the stage
after 'Faust.'

Very soon after its production Gounod's masterpiece began to exert a
potent influence upon his contemporaries. One of the first French
composers to admit its power was Ambroise Thomas (1811-1896). Thomas was
an older man than Gounod, and had already written much for the stage
without achieving any very decisive success. He was a man of plastic
mind, and was too apt to reproduce in his own music the form and even
the ideas which happened to be popular at the time he wrote. Most of his
early works are redolent of Auber or Halevy. Gounod's influence acted
upon him like a charm, and in 'Mignon' (1866) he produced a work which,
if not strictly original, has an element of personality too distinctive
to be ignored.

If we can dismiss all thoughts of Goethe and his 'Wilhelm Meister' from
our minds, it will be possible to pronounce MM. Barbier and Carre's
libretto a creditable piece of work. Mignon is a child who was stolen in
infancy by a band of gipsies. She travels with them from town to town,
dancing in the streets to the delight of the crowd. One day in a German
city she refuses to dance, and Jarno the gipsy chief threatens her with
his whip. Wilhelm Meister, who happens to be passing, saves her from a
beating, and, pitying the half-starved child, buys her from the gipsies.
Among the spectators of this scene are Laertes, the manager of a troupe
of strolling players, and Philine, his leading lady. Philine is an
accomplished coquette, and determines to subjugate Wilhelm. In this she
easily succeeds, and he joins the company as poet, proceeding with them
to the Castle of Rosenberg, where a grand performance of 'A Midsummer
Night's Dream' is to be given. Mignon, at her earnest request,
accompanies him, disguised as a page. While at the castle Mignon is
distracted by Wilhelm's infatuation for Philine, and when Wilhelm,
prompted by Philine, tries to dismiss her, she puts on her old gipsy
clothes and rushes away. Outside the walls of the castle she meets with
an old half-witted harper, Lothario, who soothes the passion of her
grief. In a moment of jealous fury at the thought of Philine she utters
a wish that the castle were in flames. Lothario hears her words and
proves his devotion by setting fire to the theatre while the performance
is in progress. Mignon had been sent by Philine to fetch her bouquet
from the green-room. The fire breaks out while the unfortunate girl is
in the building, and she is given up for lost, but is saved by Wilhelm.
The last act takes place in Italy. Mignon's devotion has won Willielm's
heart, and the opera ends by the discovery that she is the long-lost
daughter of Lothario, who is actually the Count of Cipriani, but after
the disappearance of his daughter had lost his reason, and wandered
forth in the guise of a harper to search for her. The score of 'Mignon'
reveals the hand of a sensitive and refined artist upon every page. It
has no claims to greatness, and few to real originality, but it is full
of graceful melody, and is put together with a complete knowledge of
stage effect.

Thomas's 'Hamlet' (1868) is accepted as a masterpiece in Paris, where
the absurdities of the libretto are either ignored or condoned. In
England Shakespeare's tragedy is fortunately so familiar that such a
ridiculous parody of it as MM. Barbier and Carre's libretto has not been
found endurable. Much of Thomas's music is grandiose rather than grand,
but in the less exacting scenes there is not a little of the plaintive
charm of 'Mignon,' Ophelia's mad scene, which occupies most of the last
act, is dramatically ludicrous, but the music is brilliant and
captivating, and the ghost scene, earlier in the opera, is powerful and
effective. Thomas employs several charming old Scandinavian tunes in the
course of the work, which give a clever tinge of local colour to the
score.

With Bizet (1838-1875), the influence of Wagner is felt in French music
for the first time. 'Les Pecheurs de Perles' (1863), his first work,
follows traditional models pretty closely for the most part, and though
containing music of charm and originality, does not, of course,
represent Bizet's genius in its most characteristic aspects. It tells
the story of the love of two Cingalese pearl-fishers for the priestess
Leila. There are only three characters in the piece, and very little
incident. The score owes a good deal to Felicien David's 'Le Desert,'
but there is a dramatic force about several scenes which foreshadows the
power and variety of 'Carmen.' 'La Jolie Fille de Perth' (1867), is to a
great extent a tribute to the powerful influence of Verdi. It is a
tuneful and effective work, but cannot be called an advance on 'Les
Pecheurs de Perles,' In 'Djamileh' (1872), we find the real Bizet for
the first time. The story tells of the salvation of a world-wearied
youth, who is won back to life by the love and devotion of his slave. It
is a clever study in Oriental colour, but has little dramatic value,
though it was thought very advanced at the time of its production. In
1875, the year of Bizet's death, 'Carmen' was produced. The libretto is
founded upon Merimee's famous novel. Carmen, a sensual and passionate
gipsy girl, is arrested for stabbing one of her comrades in a cigarette
manufactory at Seville. She exercises all her powers of fascination upon
the soldier, Jose by name, who is told off to guard her, and succeeds in
persuading him to connive at her escape. For this offence he is
imprisoned for a month, but Carmen contrives to communicate with him in
gaol, and at the expiration of his sentence he meets her once more in an
inn at the outskirts of the town. The passionate animalism of the gipsy
completely captivates him, and forgetting Micaela, the country damsel to
whom he is betrothed, he yields himself entirely to Carmen's
fascinations. He quarrels with one of his officers about her, and to
escape punishment flies with Carmen to join a band of smugglers in the
mountains. Carmen's capricious affection for Jose soon dies out, and she
transfers her allegiance to the bull-fighter Escamillo, who follows her
to the smugglers' lair, and is nearly killed by the infuriated Jose.
Micaela also finds her way up to the camp, and persuades Jose to go home
with her and tend the last moments of his dying mother. The last act
takes place outside the Plaza de Toros at Seville. Jose has returned to
plead once more with Carmen, but her love has grown cold and she rejects
him disdainfully. After a scene of bitter recrimination he kills her,
while the shouts of the people inside the arena acclaim the triumph of
Escamillo. 'Carmen' was coldly received at first. Its passionate force
was miscalled brutality, and the suspicion of German influence which
Bizet's clever use of guiding themes excited, was in itself enough to
alienate the sympathies of the average Frenchman in the early seventies.
Since its production 'Carmen' has gradually advanced in general
estimation, and is now one of the most popular operas in the modern
repertory. It is unnecessary to do more than allude to its many
beauties, the nervous energy of the more declamatory parts, the
brilliant and expressive orchestration, the extraordinarily clever use
of Spanish rhythms, and the finished musicianship displayed upon every
page of the score. The catalogue of Bizet's works is completed by 'Don
Procopio,' an imitation of Italian opera buffa dating from his student
days in Rome. It was unearthed and produced at Monte Carlo in 1906. It
is a bright and lively little work, but has no pretensions to original
value. Bizet's early death deprived the French school of one of its
brightest ornaments. To him is largely due the development of opera
comique which has taken place within the last twenty years, a
development which has taken it almost to the confines of grand opera.

Jacques Offenbach (1819-1880), though German by birth, may fitly be
mentioned here, since the greater part of his life was spent in Paris,
and his music was more typically French than that of any of his Gallic
rivals. His innumerable operas bouffes scarcely come within the scope of
this work, but his posthumous opera comique, 'Les Contes d'Hoffman
(1881), is decidedly more ambitious in scope, and still holds the stage
by virtue of its piquant melody and clever musicianship. In Germany,
where 'Les Contes d' Hoffmann' is still very popular under the name of
'Hoffmann's Erzaehlungen,' it is usually performed in a revised version,
which differs considerably from the French original as regards plot and
dialogue, though the music is practically the same. Hoffmann, the famous
story-teller, is the hero of the opera, which, after a prologue in a
typically German beer-cellar, follows his adventures through three
scenes, each founded upon one of his famous tales. In the first we see
him fascinated by the mechanical doll Olympia, in the second he is at
the feet of the Venetian courtesan Giulietta, while in the third we
assist at his futile endeavours to save the youthful singer Antonia from
the clutches of the mysterious Dr. Miracle.

The career of Cesar Franck (1822-1890), offers a striking contrast to
that of his famous contemporary Gounod. Fame came betimes to Gounod.
While he was still a young man his reputation was European. He wrote his
masterpiece at forty, and lived on its success for the remaining thirty
years of his life. Since his death his fame has sadly shrunk, and even
'Faust' is beginning to 'date' unmistakably. The name of Cesar Franck,
on the other hand, until his death was hardly known beyond a narrow
circle of pupils, but during the last fifteen years his reputation has
advanced by leaps and bounds. At the present moment there is hardly a
musician in Paris who would not call him the greatest French
composer--he was a Belgian by birth, but what of that?--of the
nineteenth century. His fame was won in the concert-room rather than in
the theatre, but the day may yet come when his 'Hulda' will be a
familiar work to opera-goers. It was produced in 1894 at Monte Carlo,
but, in spite of the deep impression which it created, has not yet been
heard in Paris. The action passes in Norway in the times of the Vikings.
Hulda is carried off by a band of marauders, whose chief she is
compelled to wed. She loves Eyolf, another Viking, and persuades him to
murder her husband. After a time he proves faithless to her, whereupon
she kills him and throws herself into the sea. This gloomy tale is
illustrated by music of extraordinary power and beauty. Although Franck
only avails himself of guiding themes to a limited extent, in mastery of
the polyphonic style his work will compare with Wagner's most elaborate
scores. In fact, the opulence of orchestral resource and the virility of
inspiration displayed in 'Hulda' strikingly recall the beauties of
'Tristan und Isolde.' 'Ghiselle,' a work left unfinished by the composer
and completed by several of his pupils, was produced in 1896 at Monte
Carlo. Although by no means upon the same level as 'Hulda,' 'Ghiselle'
also contains much fine music, and will doubtless be heard of again.

Leo Delibes (1836-1891) made no pretensions to the dignity and solidity
of Cesar Franck's style. He shone principally in ballet-music, but
'Lakme' (1883), his best-known opera, is a work of much charm and
tenderness. It tells the story of a Hindoo damsel who loves an English
officer. Her father, a priest, discovering the state of her affections,
tries to assassinate the Englishman, but Lakme saves his life, and
conveys him to a place of concealment in the jungle. There she find that
his heart is set upon a beautiful English 'miss,' and, in despair,
poisons herself with the flowers of the Datura. Delibes's music never
rises to passion, but it is unfailingly tender and graceful, and is
scored with consummate dexterity. He has a pretty feeling too for local
colour, and the scene in Lakme's garden is full of a dreamy sensuous
charm. 'Le Roi l'a dit' (1873) is a dainty little work upon an old
French subject, as graceful and fragile as a piece of Sevres porcelain.
'Kassya,' which the composer left unfinished, was orchestrated by
Massenet, and produced in 1893. In this work Delibes attempted a tragic
story to which his delicate talent was ill suited, and the opera
achieved little success. Delibes is a typically French musician. Slight
as his works often are, the exquisite skill of the workmanship saves
them from triviality. He made no pretensions to advanced views, and
though he occasionally trifles with guiding themes, the interest of his
works rests almost entirely upon his dainty vein of melody and the
finish of his orchestration.

With Delibes may be classed Ferdinand Poise (1828-1892), a composer who
made a speciality of operas founded upon the comedies of Moliere and his
contemporaries, and Ernest Guiraud (18371892), whose 'Piccolino' (1876)
is one of the daintiest of modern comic operas. His 'Fredegonde,'
produced in Paris in 1895, proved emphatically that his talent did not
lie in the direction of grand opera. Edouard Lalo (1823-1892), a
composer of no little charm and resource, owes his fame chiefly to 'Le
Roi d'Ys,' which was successfully produced at the Opera Comique in 1888,
and was played in London in 1901. It is a gloomy story, founded upon a
Breton legend. Margared and Rozenn, the two daughters of the King of Ys,
both love the warrior Mylio, but Mylio's heart is given to Rozenn. The
slighted Margared in revenge betrays her father's city to Karnac, the
defeated enemy of her country, giving him the keys of the sluices which
protect the town from the sea. Karnac opens the sluices and the tide
rushes in. The town and its people are on the point of being
overwhelmed, when Margared, stricken by remorse, throws herself into the
waters. St. Corentin, the patron saint of Ys, accepts the sacrifice, and
the sea retires. 'Le Roi d'Ys' is an excellent specimen of the kind of
opera which French composers of the second rank used to write before the
sun of Wagner dawned upon their horizon. It is redolent of Meyerbeer and
Gounod, and though some of the scenes are not without vigour, it is
impossible to avoid feeling that in 'Le Roi d'Ys' Lalo was forcing a
graceful and delicate talent into an uncongenial groove. He is at his
best in the lighter parts of the work, such as the pretty scene of
Rozenn's wedding, which is perfectly charming. Emmanuel Chabrier
(1842-1894), after writing a comic opera of thoroughly Gallic _verve_
and grace, 'Le Roi malgre lui,' announced himself as a staunch adherent
of Wagner in the interesting but unequal 'Gwendoline,' which was
performed at Brussels in 1886. Benjamin Godard (1849-1895), one of the
most prolific of modern composers, won no theatrical success until the
production of 'La Vivandiere' (1895), an attractive work constructed
upon conventional lines, in which the banality of the material employed
is often redeemed by clever treatment. Emile Paladilhe won a brilliant
success in 1886 with 'Patrie,' and among other meritorious composers of
what may be called the pre-Wagnerian type are Victorin Joncieres
(1839-1903) and Thodeore Dubois.

Of living French composers Camille Saint Saens is the unquestioned head,
but he is known to fame principally by his successes in the
concert-room. Many of his operas achieved only _succes d'estime_, though
not one of them is without beauty of a high order. Over 'La Princesse
Jaune' (1872) and 'Le Timbre d' Argent' (1877) there is no need to
linger. 'Samson et Dalila,' his first work of importance, was produced
at Weimar in 1877, but, in spite of its success there and in other
German towns, did not find its way on to a Parisian stage until 1890.
The libretto follows the Biblical narrative with tolerable fidelity. In
the first act, Samson rouses the Israelites to arms, kills the
Philistine leader and disperses their army. In the second he visits
Dalila in the Vale of Sorek, tells her the secret of his strength, and
is betrayed into the hands of the Philistines. The third act shows
Samson, blind and in chains, grinding at a mill. The scene afterwards
changes to the temple of Dagon, where a magnificent festival is in
progress. Samson is summoned to make sport for the Philistine lords, and
the act ends with the destruction of the temple, and the massacre of the
Philistines. Saint Saens is the Proteus of modern music, and his scores
generally reveal the traces of many opposing influences. The earlier
scenes of 'Samson et Dalila' are conceived in the spirit of oratorio,
and the choral writing, which is unusually solid and dignified, often
recalls the massive style of Handel. In the second act he exhausts the
resources of modern passion and colour, and in the Philistine revels of
the third act he makes brilliant and judicious use of Oriental rhythms
and intervals. Guiding themes are used in the opera, but not to any
important extent, and the construction of the score owes very little to
Wagner. Yet though the main outlines of the work adhere somewhat closely
to a type which is now no longer popular, there is little fear of
'Samson et Dalila' becoming old-fashioned. The exquisite melody with
which it overflows, combined with the inimitable art of the
orchestration, make it one of the most important and attractive works of
the modern French school. 'Etienne Marcel' (1879) and 'Proserpine'
(1887) must be classed among Saint Saens's failures, but 'Henry VIII.'
is a work of high interest, which, though produced so long ago as 1883,
is still popular in Paris. The action of the piece begins at the time
when Henry is first smitten with the charms of Anne Boleyn, who for his
sake neglects her former admirer, Don Gomez, the Spanish Ambassador.
Negotiations regarding the King's divorce with Catherine of Aragon are
set on foot, and, when the Pope refuses to sanction it, Henry proclaims
England independent of the Roman Church, amidst the acclamations of the
people. In the last act Anne is queen. Catherine, who is at the point of
death, has in her possession a compromising letter from Anne to Don
Gomez. Henry is devoured by jealousy, and comes, accompanied by Don
Gomez, to try to obtain possession of the incriminating document. Anne
comes also for the same purpose. This is the strongest scene in the
opera. Henry, in order to incite Catherine to revenge, speaks to Anne in
his tenderest tones, but the divorced queen rises to the occasion.
Praying for strength to resist the temptation, she throws the letter
into the fire and falls down dead.

Saint Saens has treated this scene with uncommon variety and force, and
indeed the whole opera is a masterly piece of writing. He uses guiding
themes with more freedom than in 'Samson et Dalila,' but the general
outline of 'Henry VIII.' is certainly not Wagnerian in type. The same
may be said of 'Ascanio,' a work produced in 1890, with only partial
success. 'Phryne,' which was given at the Opera Comique in 1893, is on a
much less elaborate scale. It is a musicianly little work, but in form
follows the traditions of the older school of opera comique with almost
exaggerated fidelity. 'Les Barbares' (1901), a story of the Teutonic
invasion of Gaul, did not enhance the composer's reputation. The plot
is of a well-worn kind. Marcomir, the leader of the barbarian invaders,
is subjugated by the charms of the priestess Floria, who, after the
requisite amount of hesitation, falls duly into his arms. Finally
Marcomir is stabbed by Livia, whose husband he had killed in battle.
Saint Saens's music is admirable from the point of view of workmanship,
but it is singularly devoid of anything like inspiration. 'Les Barbares'
was received with all the respect due to a work from the pen of the
leading musician of modern France, but it would be useless to pretend
that it is likely to keep its place in the current repertory.

'Helene' (1904) is a more favourable example of Saint Saens's many-sided
talent. The libretto, which is the work of the composer himself, deals
with the flight of Helen and Paris from Sparta, and the greater part of
the one act of which the opera consists is devoted to an impassioned
duet between the lovers. The apparitions of Venus and Pallas, the one
urging Helen upon her purposed flight, the other dissuading her from it,
give variety to the action, but the work as a whole lacks dramatic
intensity, though it rises to a climax of some power. Saint Saens's
music is interesting and musicianly from first to last. Like Berlioz in
his 'Prise de Troie' he has plainly gone to Gluck for his inspiration,
and in its sobriety and breadth of design no less than in its classic
dignity of melody and orchestration, his music often recalls the style
of the mighty composer of 'Alceste.'

Saint Saens's latest opera, 'L'Ancetre' (1906), has not added materially
to his reputation. It is a gloomy and, to tell the truth, somewhat
conventional story of a Corsican vendetta. The instrumental part of the
work is treated in masterly fashion, but the opera as a whole met with
little favour at its production at Monte Carlo, and it has not been
performed elsewhere.

Saint Saens's theory of opera has been to combine song, declamation, and
symphony in equal proportions, and thus, though he has written works
which cannot fail to charm, he seems often to have fallen foul of both
camps in the world of music. The Wagnerians object to the set form of
his works, and the reactionaries condemn the prominence which he often
gives to the declamatory and symphonic portions of his score. He is by
nature a thorough eclectic, and his works possess a deep interest for
musicians, but it may be doubted whether, in opera at any rate, a more
masterful personality is not necessary to produce work of really
permanent value.

To Ernest Reyer success came late. The beauties of his early works,
'Erostrate' (1852) and 'La Statue' (1861), were well known to musicians;
but not until the production of 'Sigurd' in 1884 did he gain the ear of
the public. Sigurd is the same person as Siegfried, and the plot of
Reyer's opera is drawn from the same source as that of 'Goetterdaemmerung.'
Hilda, the youthful sister of Gunther, the king of the Burgundians,
loves the hero Sigurd, and at the instigation of her nurse gives him a
magic potion, which brings him to her feet. Sigurd, Gunther, and Hagen
then swear fealty to each other and start for Iceland, where
Brunehild lies asleep upon a lofty rock, surrounded by a circle
of fire. There Sigurd, to earn the hand of Hilda, passes through
the flames and wins Brunehild for Gunther. His face is closely hidden by
his visor, and Brunehild in all innocence accepts Gunther as her
saviour, and gives herself to him. The secret is afterwards disclosed by
Hilda in a fit of jealous rage, whereupon Brunehild releases Sigurd from
the enchantment of the potion. He recognises her as the bride ordained
for him by the gods, but before he can taste his new-found happiness he
is treacherously slain by Hagen, while by a mysterious sympathy
Brunehild dies from the same stroke that has killed her lover. Although
not produced until 1884, 'Sigurd' was written long before the first
performance of 'Goetterdaemmerung,' but in any case no suspicion of
plagiarism can attach to Reyer's choice of Wagner's subject. There is
very little except the subject common to the two works. 'Sigurd' is a
work of no little power and beauty, but it is conceived upon a totally
different plan from that followed in Wagner's later works. Reyer uses
guiding themes, often with admirable effect, but they do not form the
foundation of his system. Vigorous and brilliant as his orchestral
writing is, it is generally kept in subservience to the voices, and
though in the more declamatory parts of the opera he writes with the
utmost freedom, he has a lurking affection for four-bar rhythm, and many
of the songs are conveniently detachable from the score. 'Sigurd' is
animated throughout by a loftiness of design worthy of the sincerest
praise. Reyer's melodic inspiration is not always of the highest, but he
rarely sinks below a standard of dignified efficiency. In 'Salammbo,' a
setting of Flaubert's famous romance which was produced at Brussels in
1890, he did not repeat the success of 'Sigurd.' 'Salammbo' is put
together in a workmanlike way, but there is little genuine inspiration
in the score. The local colour is not very effectively managed, and
altogether the work is lacking in those qualities of brilliancy and
picturesqueness which Flaubert's Carthaginian story seems to demand.

Reyer and Saint Saens both show traces of the influence of Wagner, but
though guiding themes are often employed with excellent effect in their
works, the general outlines of their operas remain very much in
accordance with the form handed down by Meyerbeer. Massenet, on the
other hand, has drunk more deeply at the Bayreuth fountain. His early
comic operas, 'La Grand' Tante' (1867) and 'Don Cesar de Bazan' (1872)
are purely French in inspiration, and even 'Le Roi de Lahore' (1877),
his first great success, does not show any very important traces of
German influence. Its success was largely due to the brilliant spectacle
of the Indian Paradise in the third act. The score is rich in sensuous
melody of the type which we associate principally with the name of
Gounod, and the subtle beauties of the orchestration bear witness to the
hand of a master.

In 'Herodiade' (1881) the influence of Wagner becomes more noticeable,
though it hardly amounts to more than an occasional trifling with
guiding themes. The libretto is a version of the Biblical story of St.
John the Baptist, considerably doctored to suit Parisian taste. When
'Herodiade' was performed in London in 1904, under the title of
'Salome,' the names of some of the characters were altered and the scene
of the story was transferred to Ethiopia, in order to satisfy the
conscientious scruples of the Lord Chamberlain. Thus according to the
newest version of Massenet's opera 'Jean' is a mysterious
prophet--presumably a species of Mahdi--who makes his appearance at the
court of Moriame, King of Ethiopia. He denounces the sins of Queen
Hesatoade in no measured terms, but the latter cannot induce her husband
to avenge her wrongs, since Moriame dare not venture for political
reasons to proceed to extreme measures against so popular a character as
Jean. Jean has an ardent disciple in Salome, a young lady whose position
in Ethiopian society is not very clearly defined by the librettist,
though in the end she turns out to be Hesatoade's long-lost daughter.
Jean's regard for Salome is purely Platonic, but Moriame loves her
passionately, and when he finds out that Jean is his rival he promptly
orders him to prison where he is put to death after a passionate scene
with Salome, who kills herself in despair. Massenet has taken full
advantage of the passionate and voluptuous scenes of the libretto, which
lend themselves well to his peculiar style. In certain scenes his
treatment of guiding themes reaches an almost symphonic level, and the
opera is throughout a singularly favourable specimen of his earlier
manner. He has recently revised the score, and added a scene between the
Queen and a Chaldean soothsayer, which is one of the most powerful in
the opera.

'Manon,' which was first performed in 1884, shows perhaps no advance in
the matter of form upon 'Herodiade,' but the subject of the opera is so
admirably suited to Massenet's tender and delicate talent that it
remains one of his most completely successful works. The Abbe Prevost's
famous romance had already been treated operatically by Auber, but his
'Manon Lescaut' was never really a success, and had been laid upon the
shelf many years before Massenet took the story in hand.

The action of Massenet's opera begins in the courtyard of an inn at
Amiens, where the Chevalier des Grieux happens to fall in with Manon
Lescaut, who is being sent to a convent under the charge of her brother,
a bibulous guardsman. Manon does not at all like the prospect of convent
life, and eagerly agrees to Des Grieux's proposal to elope with him to
Paris. The next act shows them in an apartment in Paris. Des Grieux has
tried in vain to obtain his father's consent to his marriage, and the
capricious Manon, finding that the modest style of their _menage_
hardly agrees with her ideas of comfort, listens to the advances made to
her by a nobleman named Bretigny, and ends by conniving at a scheme,
planned by the elder Des Grieux, for carrying off his son from his
questionable surroundings. In the next act Manon is the mistress of
Bretigny, feted and admired by all. During an entertainment at
Cours-la-Reine, she overhears a conversation between Bretigny and the
Count des Grieux, and learns from the latter that his son is a novice at
Saint Sulpice. Seized by a sudden return of her old love, she hastens
away to the seminary, and after a passionate interview persuades Des
Grieux to come back once more to her arms. In the next act Manon
beguiles Des Grieux to a gambling-house, where he quarrels with Guillot,
one of her numerous admirers. The latter revenges himself by denouncing
the place to the police, who effect a successful raid upon it and carry
off Manon to St. Lazare. The last scene takes place upon the road to
Havre. Manon, who is condemned to transportation, is passing by with a
gang of criminals. Lescaut persuades the sergeant in charge to allow her
an interview with Des Grieux. She is already exhausted by ill-treatment
and fatigue, and dies in his arms. Massenet's dainty score reproduces
the spirit of the eighteenth century with rare felicity. A note of
genuine passion, too, is not wanting, and an ingenious use of guiding
themes binds the score together into a harmonious whole. A novelty in
its arrangement is the plan of an orchestral accompaniment to the
dialogue. AEsthetically this is perhaps hardly defensible, but in several
scenes--notably that of Cours-la-Reine, in which Manon's agitated
interview with the Count stands out in forcible relief against the
graceful background formed by a minuet heard in the distance--the result
is completely successful. 'Le Cid' (1885) and 'Le Mage' (1891), two
works produced at the Paris Opera, may be passed over as comparative
failures, but 'Esclarmonde' (1889) marks an important stage in
Massenet's career. The libretto is drawn from an old French romance.
Esclarmonde, the Princess of Byzantium, who is a powerful enchantress,
loves Roland, the French knight, and commands her minion spirits to
guide him to a distant island, whither she transports herself every
night to enjoy his company. He betrays the secret of their love, and
thereby loses Esclarmonde, but by his victory in a tournament at
Byzantium he regains her once more.

Massenet's music is a happy combination of Wagner's elaborate system of
guiding themes with the sensuous beauty of which he himself possesses
the secret. As regards the plan of 'Esclarmonde' his indebtedness to
Wagner was so patent, that Parisian critics christened him 'Mlle.
Wagner,' but nevertheless he succeeded in preserving his own
individuality distinct from German influence. No one could mistake
'Esclarmonde' for the work of a German; in melodic structure and
orchestral colouring it is French to the core.

'Werther' was written in 1886, though not actually produced until 1892,
when it was given for the first time at Vienna. The plot of Goethe's
famous novel is a rather slight foundation for a libretto, but the
authors did their work neatly and successfully. In the first act Werther
sees Charlotte cutting bread and butter for her little brothers and
sisters, and falls in love with her. In the second, Charlotte, now
married to Albert, finding that she cannot forget Werther and his
passion, sends him from her side. He departs in despair, meditating
suicide. In the last act Charlotte is still brooding over the forbidden
love, and will not be comforted by the artless prattle of her sister
Sophie. Werther suddenly returns, and after a passionate and tearful
scene, extorts from Charlotte the confession that she loves him. He then
borrows Albert's pistols, and shoots himself in his lodgings, where
Charlotte finds him, and he breathes his last sigh in her arms. Though
in tone and sentiment more akin to 'Manon,' in form 'Werther' resembles
'Esclarmonde.' It is constructed upon a basis of guiding themes, which
are often employed with consummate skill. The uniform melancholy of the
story makes the music slightly monotonous, and though the score cannot
fail to delight musicians, it has hardly colour or variety enough to be
generally popular. 'Le Portrait de Manon,' a delicate little sketch in
one act, and 'Thais,' a clever setting of Anatole France's beautiful
romance, both produced in 1894, will not be likely to add much to
Massenet's reputation. 'La Navarraise,' produced during the same year in
London, was apparently an attempt to imitate the melodramatic
extravagance of Mascagni. The action takes place under the walls of
Bilbao during the Carlist war. Anita loves Araquil, a Spanish soldier,
but his father will not permit the marriage because of her poverty.
Seeing that a reward is offered for the head of the Carlist general,
Anita goes forth like a second Judith, trusting to her charms to win
admittance to the hostile camp. She wins her reward, but Araquil, who is
brought in from a battle mortally wounded, knowing the price at which it
was won, thrusts her from him, and she sinks a gibbering maniac upon his
corpse. There is little in Massenet's score but firing of cannons and
beating of drums. The musical interest centres in a charming duet in the
opening scene, and a delicious instrumental nocturne. The action of the
piece is breathless and vivid, and the music scarcely pretends to do
more than furnish a suitable accompaniment to it. Of late years Massenet
has confined himself principally to works of slight calibre, which have
been on the whole more successful than many of his earlier and more
ambitious efforts. 'Sapho' (1897), an operatic version of Daudet's
famous novel, and 'Cendrillon' (1899), a charming fantasia on the old
theme of Cinderella, both succeeded in hitting Parisian taste. No less
fortunate was 'Griselidis' (1901), a quasi-mediaeval musical comedy,
founded upon the legend of Patient Grizel, and touching the verge of
pantomime in the characters of a comic Devil and his shrewish spouse. Of
Massenet's later works none has been more successful than 'Le Jongleur
de Notre Dame' (1902), which, besides winning the favour of Paris, has
been performed at Covent Garden and in many German towns with much
success. Here we find Massenet in a very different vein from that of
'Manon,' or indeed any of his earlier works. The voluptuous passion of
his accustomed style is exchanged for the mystic raptures of
monasticism. Cupid has doffed his bow and arrows and donned the
conventual cowl. 'Le Jongleur' is an operatic version of one of the
prettiest stories in Anatole France's 'Etui de Nacre.' Jean the juggler
is persuaded by the Prior of the Abbey of Cluny to give up his godless
life and turn monk. He enters the monastery, but ere long is distressed
to find that while his brethren prove their devotion to the Blessed
Virgin by their skill in the arts of painting, music and the like, he
can give no outward sign of the faith that is in him. At last he
bethinks him of his old craft. He steals into the chapel and performs
before the image of Our Lady the homely antics which in old days
delighted the country people at many a village fair. He is discovered by
the Prior, who is preparing to denounce the sacrilege when the image
comes to life and bends down to bless the poor juggler who has sunk
exhausted on the steps of the altar. The Prior bows in awe before this
manifestation of divine graciousness and the juggler dies in the odour
of sanctity. Massenet's music catches the spirit of the story with
admirable art. As regards melodic invention it is rather thin, but the
workmanship is beyond praise. The opening scene at the village fair is
appropriately bright and gay, but the best music comes in the second act
where the monks are gathered together in the convent hall, each busied
over his particular task. Here occurs the gem of the work, the Legend of
the Sage-bush, which is sung to the juggler-monk by his good friend the
convent cook. Rarely has Massenet written anything more delightful than
this exquisite song, so fresh in its artful simplicity, so fragrant with
the charm of mediaeval monasticism.

Mention must be made, for the sake of completeness, of the performance
at Nice in 1903 of Massenet's thirty--year--old oratorio, 'Marie
Magdeleine,' in the guise of a 'drame lyrique.' French taste, it need
hardly be said, is very different from English with regard to what
should and should not be placed upon the stage, but once granted the
permissibility of making Jesus Christ the protagonist of an opera, there
is comparatively little in 'Marie Magdeleine' to offend religious
susceptibilities. The work is divided into four scenes: a palm-girt well
outside the city of Magdala, the house of Mary and Martha, Golgotha, and
the garden of Joseph of Arimathea, where occurs what a noted French
critic in writing about the first performance described as 'l'apparition
tres reussie de Jesus.'

In 'Cherubin' (1905) Massenet returned to his more familiar manner. The
story pursues the adventures of Beaumarchais's too fascinating page
after his disappearance from the scene of 'Le Mariage de Figaro.' What
these adventures are it is needless to detail, save that they embrace a
good deal of duelling and even more love-making. Massenet's music is as
light as a feather. It ripples along in the daintiest fashion, sparkling
with wit and gaiety, and if it leaves no very definite impression of
originality, its craftsmanship is perfection itself. 'Ariane' (1906) is
a far more serious affair. It is a return to the grander manner of
'Herodiade' and 'Le Cid,' and proves conclusively that the musician's
hand has not lost its cunning. Catulle Mendes's libretto is a clever
embroidery of the world-old tale of Ariadne and Theseus, the figure of
the gentle Ariadne being happily contrasted with that of the fiery and
passionate Phaedra, who succeeds her sister in the affections of the
fickle Theseus. The death of Phaedra, who is crushed by a statue of
Adonis which she had insulted, is followed by a curious and striking
scene in Hades, whither Ariadne descends in order to bring her sister
back to the world of life. The opera, according to tradition, ends with
the flight of Theseus and Phaedra, while the deserted Ariadne finds death
in the arms of the sirens, who tempt her to seek eternal rest in the
depths of the sea. Massenet's music is conspicuous for anything rather
than novelty of invention or treatment, but though he is content to
tread well-worn paths, he does so with all his old grace and distinction
of manner, and many of the scenes in 'Ariane' are treated with an
uncommon degree of spirit and energy.

Massenet's latest work, 'Therese' (1907), is a return to the breathless,
palpitating style of 'La Navarraise.' It is a story of the revolution,
high-strung and emotional. Therese is the wife of the Girondin Thorel,
who has bought the castle of Clerval, in the hope of eventually
restoring it to its former owner, Armand de Clerval. Armand returns in
disguise, on his way to join the Royalists in Vendee. He and Therese
were boy-and-girl lovers in old days, and their old passion revives.
Armand entreats her to fly with him, which after the usual conflict of
emotions she consents to do. But meanwhile Thorel, who has been amiably
harbouring the emigre, is arrested and dragged to the scaffold. This
brings about a change in Therese's feelings. She sends Armand about his
business and throws in her lot with Thorel, defying the mob and
presumably sharing her husband's fate. Massenet's music is to a certain
extent thrust into the background by the exciting incidents of the plot.
The cries of the crowd, the songs of the soldiers and the roll of the
drums leave but little space for musical development. Still 'Therese'
contains many passages of charming melody and grace, though it will
certainly not rank among the composer's masterpieces, Massenet is one of
the most interesting of modern French musicians. On the one hand, he
traces his musical descent from Gounod, whose sensuous charm he has
inherited to the full; on the other he has proved himself more
susceptible to the influence of Wagner than any other French composer
of his generation. The combination is extremely piquant, and it says
much for Massenet's individuality that he has contrived to blend such
differing elements into a fabric of undeniable beauty.

Alfred Bruneau is a composer whose works have excited perhaps more
discussion than those of any living French composer. By critics who
pretend to advanced views he has been greeted as the rightful successor
of Wagner, while the conservative party in music have not hesitated to
stigmatise him as a wearisome impostor. 'Kerim' (1887), his first work,
passed almost unnoticed. 'Le Reve,' an adaptation of Zola's novel, was
produced in 1891 at the Opera Comique, and in the same year was
performed in London. The scene is laid in a French cathedral city. The
period is that of the present day.

Angelique, the adopted child of a couple of old embroiderers, is a
dreamer of dreams. All day she pores over the lives of the saints until
the legends of their miracles and martyrdoms become living realities to
her mind, and she hears their voices speaking to her in the silence of
her chamber. She falls in love with a man who is at work upon the
stained glass of the Cathedral windows. This turns out to be the son of
the Bishop. The course of their love does not run smooth. The Bishop, in
spite of the protestations of his son, refuses his consent to their
marriage. Angelique pines away, and is lying at the point of death when
the Bishop relents, and with a kiss of reconciliation restores her to
life. She is married to her lover, but in the porch of the Cathedral
dies from excess of happiness. The entire work is rigorously
constructed upon Wagner's system of representative themes. Each act runs
its course uninterruptedly without anything approaching a set piece. Two
voices are rarely heard together, and then only in unison. So far
Bruneau faithfully follows the system of Wagner. Where he differs from
his master is in the result of his efforts; he has nothing of Wagner's
feeling for melodic beauty, nothing of his mastery of orchestral
resource, and very little of his musical skill. The melodies in 'Le
Reve'--save for an old French _chanson_, which is the gem of the
work--are for the most part arid and inexpressive. Bruneau handles the
orchestra like an amateur, and his attempts at polyphony are merely
ridiculous. Yet in spite of all this, the vocal portions of the work
follow the inflections of the human voice so faithfully as to convey a
feeling of sincerity. Ugly and monotonous as much of 'Le Reve' is, the
music is alive. In its strange language it speaks with the accent of
truth. Here at any rate are none of the worn-out formulas which have
done duty for so many generations. In defence of Bruneau's work it may
be urged that his dreary and featureless orchestration, so wholly
lacking in colour and relief, may convey to some minds the cool grey
atmosphere of the quiet old Cathedral town, and that much of the
harshness and discordance of his score is, at all events, in keeping
with the iron tyranny of the Bishop. 'Le Reve' at any rate was not a
work to be passed over in silence: it was intended to create discussion,
and discussion it certainly created.

In 'L'Attaque du Moulin' (1893), another adaptation of Zola, Bruneau set
himself a very different task. The contrast between the placid Cathedral
close and the bloody terrors of the Franco-Prussian war was of the most
startling description. 'L'Attaque du Moulin' opens with the festivities
attendant upon the betrothal of Francoise, the miller's daughter, to
Dominique, a young Fleming, who has taken up his quarters in the
village. In the midst of the merry-making comes a drummer, who announces
the declaration of war, and summons all the able-bodied men of the
village to the frontier. In the second act, the dogs of war are loose.
The French have been holding the mill against a detachment of Germans
all day, but as night approaches they fall back upon the main body.
Dominique, who is a famous marksman, has been helping to defend his
future father-in-law's property. Scarcely have the French retired when a
division of Germans appears in the courtyard of the mill. The captain
notices that Dominique's hands are black with powder, and finding that,
though a foreigner, he has been fighting for the French in defiance of
the rules of war, orders him to be shot. By the help of Francoise,
Dominique kills the sentinel who has been set to watch him, and escapes
into the forest; but the German captain, suspecting that the miller and
his daughter have had a hand in his escape, orders the old man to be
shot in Dominique's place. Dominique creeps back in the grey dawn from
the forest, and Francoise, torn by conflicting emotions, knows not
whether she should wish him to stay and face his sentence or escape
once more and leave her father to his fate. The miller determines to
sacrifice himself for his daughter's lover, and by pretending that his
sentence has been revoked induces Dominique to depart. The old man is
shot by the Germans just as the French rush in triumphant with Dominique
at their head.

'L'Attaque du Moulin' was received with more general favour than 'Le
Reve.' In it Bruneau shows an inclination to relax the stern principles
of his former creed. The action is often interrupted by solos and duets
of a type which approaches the conventional, though for the most part
the opera follows the Wagnerian system. The result of this mixture of
styles is unsatisfactory. 'L'Attaque du Moulin' has not the austere
sincerity of 'Le Reve,' and the attempts to bid for popular favour are
not nearly popular enough to catch the general ear. Bruneau has little
melodic inspiration, and when he tries to be tuneful he generally ends
in being merely commonplace. The orchestral part of the opera, too, is
far less satisfactory than in 'Le Reve.' There, as has already been
pointed out, the monotony and lack of colour were to a certain extent in
keeping with the character of the work, but in 'L'Attaque du Moulin,'
where all should be colour and variety, the dull and featureless
orchestration is a serious blot. 'Messidor' (1897) and 'L'Ouragan'
(1901) had very much the same reception as the composer's earlier
operas. The compact little phalanx of his admirers greeted them with
enthusiasm, but the general public remained cold. 'Messidor,' written
to a prose libretto by Zola, is a curious mixture of socialism and
symbolism. The foundation of the plot is a legend of the gold-bearing
river Ariege, which is said to spring from a vast subterranean
cathedral, where the infant Christ sits on his mother's lap playing with
the sand which falls from his hands in streams of gold. Intertwined with
this strange story is a tale of the conflict between a capitalist and
the villagers whom his gold-sifting machinery has ruined. There are some
fine moments in the drama, but the allegorical element which plays so
large a part in it makes neither for perspicacity nor for popularity.
'L'Ouragan' is a gloomy story of love, jealousy, and revenge. The scene
is laid among the fisher-folk of a wild coast--presumably
Brittany--where the passions of the inhabitants seem to rival the
tempests of their storm-beaten shores in power and intensity. It
contains music finely imagined and finely wrought, and it is impossible
not to feel that if Bruneau's sheer power of invention were commensurate
with his earnestness and dramatic feeling he would rank very high among
contemporary composers. In 'L'Enfant Roi' (1905), a 'comedie lyrique'
dealing with _bourgeois_ life in modern Paris, which plainly owed a good
deal to Charpentier's 'Louise,' the composer essayed a lighter style
with no very conspicuous success, but his latest work,'Nais Micoulin'
(1907), a Provencal tale of passion, revenge and devotion seems to
contain more of the elements of lasting success.

Bruneau's later works can hardly be said to have fulfilled the promise
of 'Le Reve,' but they unquestionably show a fuller command of the
resources of his art. He is a singular and striking figure in the world
of modern music, and it is impossible to believe that he has spoken his
last word as yet. His career will be watched with interest by all who
are interested in the development of opera.

Of the younger men the most prominent are Vincent d'Indy, Gustave
Charpentier, and Claude Debussy. Vincent d'Indy's 'Fervaal' was produced
at Brussels in 1897 and was given in Paris shortly afterwards. It is a
story of the Cevennes in heroic times, somewhat in the Wagnerian manner,
and the music is defiantly Wagnerian from first to last Clever as
'Fervaal' unquestionably is, it is valuable less as a work of art than
as an indication of the real bent of the composer's talent. The dramatic
parts of the opera suggest nothing but a brilliant exercise in the
Wagnerian style, but in the lyrica scenes, such as the last act in its
entirety, there are evidences of an individuality of conspicuous power
and originality. 'L'Etranger' (1903) hardly bore out the promise of
'Fervaal,' in spite of much clever musicianship. The plot is an
adaptation of the legend of the Flying Dutchman, and the unmitigated
gloom of the work prevented it from winning the degree of favour to
which its many merits entitled it. Gustave Charpentier's 'Louise,'
produced in 1900, hit the taste of the Parisian public immediately and
decisively. It tells the story of the loves of Louise, a Montmartre
work-girl, and Julien, a poet of Bohemian tendencies. Louise's parents
refuse their consent to the marriage, whereupon Louise quits her home
and her work and follows Julien. Together they plunge into the whirl of
Parisian life. Louise's mother appears, and persuades her daughter to
come home and nurse her sick father. In the last act, the parents,
having, as they think, snatched their child from destruction, do all in
their power to keep her at home. At first she is resigned, but
afterwards revolts, and the curtain falls as she rushes out to rejoin
Julien with her father's curses ringing in her ears. The strongly marked
Parisian flavour of the libretto ensured the success of 'Louise' in
Paris, but the music counts for a good deal too. Charpentier owes much
to Bruneau, but his music is more organic in quality, and his
orchestration is infinitely superior. Nothing could be more brilliant
than his translation into music of the sights and sounds of Parisian
street life. The vocal parts of 'Louise' are often ugly and
expressionless, but they are framed in an orchestral setting of curious
alertness and vivacity. It remains to be seen how Charpentier's
unquestionable talent will adapt itself to work of a wider scope than
'Louise.'

The fame of Claude Debussy is a plant of recent growth, and dates, so
far as the general public is concerned, from the production of his
'Pelleas et Melisande' in 1902, though for some years before he had been
the idol of an intimate circle of adorers. 'Pelleas et Melisande' is
founded upon Maeterlinck's play of that name, the action of which it
follows closely, but not closely enough, it seems, to please the poet,
who publicly dissociated himself from the production of Debussy's opera
and, metaphorically speaking, cursed it root and branch. Golaud, the son
of King Arkel, wandering in the wood finds the damsel Melisande sitting
by a fountain. He falls in love with her and carries her back to the
castle as his wife. At the castle dwells also Pelleas, Golaud's brother,
whose growing love for Melisande is traced through a succession of
interviews. In the end, Golaud kills the lovers after a striking scene
in which, as he stands beneath the window of the room in which Pelleas
and Melisande have secretly met, he is told what is passing within by a
child whom he holds in his arms. The story is of course merely that of
Paolo and Francesca retold, but placed in very different surroundings
and accompanied by music that certainly could never have been written by
an Italian, of Dante's or any other time.

Debussy has aimed at creating a musical equivalent for the Maeterlinck
'atmosphere,' The score of 'Pelleas et Melisande' is a pure piece of
musical impressionism, an experiment in musical pioneering the value of
which it is difficult to judge offhand. He has wilfully abjured melody
of any accepted kind and harmony conforming to any established
tradition. His music moves in a world of its own, a dream-world of
neutral tints, shadowy figures, and spectral passions. The dreamy
unreality of the tale is mirrored in the vague floating discords of the
music, and whatever the critics may say the effect is singularly
striking and persuasive. At present there are no rumours of a successor
to 'Pelleas et Melisande,' but whatever the future of Debussy may be, he
at any rate deserves the credit of striking a note entirely new to the
history of music.

There are many other living French composers who, if not destined to
revolutionise the world of opera, have already done admirable work, and
may yet win a more than local reputation. Charles Marie Widor has
recently in 'Les Pecheurs de Saint Jean' (1905) given a worthy success
to his twenty-year-old 'Maitre Ambros.' Navier Leroux, a pupil of
Massenet, has carried on his master's traditions, somewhat Wagnerised
and generally speaking brought up to date, in 'Astarte' (1900), 'La
Reine Fiammette' (1903), 'William Ratcliff' (1906), and 'Theodora'
(1907). Remarkable promise has been shown by Paul Dukas in 'Ariane et
Barbe-Bleue' (1907); by Camille d'Erlanger in 'Le Fils de l'Etoile'
(1904) and 'Aphrodite' (1906); by Georges Marty in 'Daria' (1905); by
Georges Huee in 'Titania' (1903), and by Gabriel Dupont in 'La Cabrera
(1905), while a characteristic note of tender sentiment was struck by
Reynaldo Hahn in 'La Carmelite' (1902).

Andre Messager's name is chiefly associated in England with work of a
lighter character, but it must not be forgotten that he is the composer
of two of the most charming operas comiques of modern times, 'La
Basoche' (1890) and 'Madame Chrysantheme' (1893).

This is perhaps the most convenient place to refer to the remarkable
success recently achieved by the Flemish composer Jan Blockx, whose
'Herbergprinses,' originally produced at Antwerp in 1896, has been given
in French as 'Princesse d'Auberge' in Brussels and many French towns.
The heroine is a kind of Flemish Carmen, a wicked siren named Rita, who
seduces the poet Merlyn from his bride, and after dragging him to the
depths of infamy and despair, dies in the end by his hand. The music,
though not without a touch of coarseness, overflows with life and
energy, and one scene in particular, that of a Flemish Kermesse, is
masterly in its judicious and convincing use of local colour. Jan
Blockx's later works, 'Thyl Uylenspiegel' (1900), 'De Bruid van der Zee'
(1901) and 'De Kapelle' (1903) do not appear to have met with equal
success. Another Belgian composer, Paul Gilson, has of late won more
than local fame by his 'Princesse Rayon de Soleil,' produced at Brussels
in 1905.

In modern times the stream of opera comique has divided into two
channels. The first, as we have seen, under the guidance of such men as
Bizet, Delibes, and Massenet, has approached so near to the confines of
grand opera, that it is often difficult to draw the line between the two
_genres_ The second, under the influence of Offenbach, Herve, and
Lecocq, has shrunk into opera bouffe, a peculiarly Parisian product,
which, though now for some reason under a cloud, has added sensibly to
the gaiety of nations during the past thirty years. The productions of
this school, though scarcely coming within the scope of the present
work, are by no means to be despised from the merely musical point of
view, and though the recent deaths of Audran, Planquette and other
acknowledged masters of the _genre_ have left serious gaps in the ranks
of comic opera writers, there seems to be no valid reason for despairing
of the future of so highly civilised and entertaining a form of musical
art.




CHAPTER XII

MODERN ITALY

VERDI--BOITO--PONCHIELLI--PUCCINI--MASCAGNI--LEONCAVALLO--GIORDANO


The death of Verdi occurred so recently that it is still possible to
speak of him as representing the music of modern Italy in its noblest
and most characteristic manifestation, but his life's record stretches
back to a very dim antiquity. His first work, 'Oberto, Conte di San
Bonifacio,' was performed in 1839, when 'Les Huguenots' was but three
years old, and 'Der Fliegende Hollaender' still unwritten. It is
thoroughly and completely Italian in type, and, though belonging to a
past age in the matter of form, contains the germs of those qualities
which were afterwards to make Verdi so popular, the rough, almost brutal
energy which contrasted so strongly with the vapid sweetness of
Donizetti, and the vigorous vein of melody which throughout his career
never failed him. Verdi's next work, a comic opera known alternatively
as 'Un Giorno di Regno' and 'Il Finto Stanislao' (1840) was a failure.
'Nabucodonosor' (1842) and 'I Lombardi' (1843) established his
reputation in his own country and won favour abroad; but the opera
which gave him European fame was 'Ernani' (1844). The story is an
adaptation of Victor Hugo's famous play. Elvira, the chosen bride of Don
Silva, a Spanish grandee, loves Ernani, an exiled nobleman, who has had
to take refuge in brigandage. Silva discovers their attachment, but
being connected with Ernani in a plot against Charles V., he defers his
vengeance for the moment. He yields his claim upon Elvira's affection,
but exacts a promise from his rival, that when he demands it, Ernani
shall be prepared to take his own life. Charles's magnanimity frustrates
the conspiracy, and Silva, defeated alike in love and ambition, claims
the fulfilment of Ernani's oath, despite the prayers of Elvira, who is
condemned to see her lover stab himself in her presence. Hugo's
melodrama suited Verdi's blood-and-thunder style exactly. 'Ernani' is
crude and sensational, but its rough vigour never descends to weakness,
though it often comes dangerously near to vulgarity. 'Ernani' is the
opera most typical of Verdi's earliest period. With all its blemishes,
it is easy to see how its masculine vigour and energy must have
captivated the audiences of the day. But there were political as well as
musical reasons for the instantaneous success of Verdi's early operas.
Italy in the forties was a seething mass of sedition. Verdi's strenuous
melodies, often allied to words in which the passionate patriotism of
his countrymen contrived to read a political sentiment, struck like a
trumpet-call upon the ears of men already ripe for revolt against the
hated Austrian rule. Such strains as the famous 'O mia patria, si bella
e perduta' in 'Nabucodonosor' proclaimed Verdi the Tyrtaeus of awakened
Italy.

'Ernani' was followed by a series of works which, for the sake of
Verdi's reputation, it is better to pass over as briefly as possible.
His success provided him with more engagements than he could
conscientiously fulfil, and the quality of his work suffered in
consequence. There are some fine scenes in 'I Due Foscari' (1844), but
it has little of the vigour of 'Ernani.' 'Giovanna d'Arco' (1845),
'Alzira' (1845), and 'Attila' (1846), were almost total failures. In
'Macbeth' (1847), however, Verdi seems to have been inspired by his
subject, and wrote better music than he had yet given to the world. The
libretto is a miserable perversion of Shakespeare, and for that reason
the opera has never succeeded in England, but in countries which can
calmly contemplate a ballet of witches, or listen unmoved to Lady
Macbeth trolling a drinking-song, it has had its day of success.
'Macbeth' is interesting to students of Verdi's development as the first
work in which he shows signs of emerging from his _Sturm und Drang_
period. There is some admirable declamatory music in it, which seems to
foreshadow the style of 'Rigoletto,' and the sleep-walking scene, though
old-fashioned in structure, is really impressive. After 'Macbeth' came
another series of works which are now forgotten. Among them was 'I
Masnadieri,' which was written for Her Majesty's Theatre in 1847.
Although the principal part was sung by Jenny Lind, the work was a
complete failure, and was pronounced by the critic Chorley to be the
worst opera ever produced in England. Passing quickly by 'Il Corsaro'
(1848), 'La Battaglia di Legnano' (1849), 'Luisa Miller' (1849) and
'Stiffelio' (1850), all of which have dropped completely out of the
current repertory, we come to the brilliant period in which Verdi
produced in succession three works which, through all changes of
taste and fashion, have manfully held their place in popular
favour--'Rigoletto,' 'Il Trovatore,' and 'La Traviata.' 'Rigoletto'
(1851) is founded upon Victor Hugo's drama, 'Le Roi s'amuse.' The
_locale_ of the story is changed, and the King of France becomes a Duke
of Mantua, but otherwise the original scheme of the work remains
unaltered. Rigoletto, the Duke's jester, has an only daughter, Gilda,
whom he keeps closely immured in an out-of-the-way part of the city, to
preserve her from the vicious influence of the court. The amorous Duke,
however, has discovered her retreat, and won her heart in the disguise
of a student. The courtiers, too, have found out that Rigoletto is in
the habit of visiting a lady, and jumping to the conclusion that she is
his mistress, determine to carry her off by night in order to pay the
jester out for the bitter insults which he loves to heap upon them.
Their plan succeeds, and Gilda is conveyed to the Palace. There she is
found by her father, and to his horror she confesses that she loves the
Duke. He determines to punish his daughter's seducer, and hires a bravo
named Sparafucile to put him out of the way. This worthy beguiles the
Duke, by means of the charms of his sister Maddalena, to a lonely inn on
the banks of the river, promising to hand over his body to Rigoletto at
midnight. Maddalena pleads tearfully for the life of her handsome lover,
but Sparafucile is a man of honour, and will not break his contract with
the jester. Rigoletto has paid for a body, and a body he must have.
However, he consents, should any stranger visit the inn that night, to
kill him in the Duke's place. Gilda, who is waiting in the street, hears
this and makes up her mind to die instead of her lover. She enters the
house, and is promptly murdered by Sparafucile. Her body, sewn up in a
sack, is handed over at the appointed hour to Rigoletto. The jester, in
triumph, is about to hurl the body into the river, when he hears the
Duke singing in the distance. Overcome by a horrible suspicion, he opens
the sack and is confronted by the body of his daughter.

The music of 'Rigoletto' is on a very different plane from that of
'Ernani.' Verdi had become uneasy in the fetters of the
cavatina-cabaletta tradition--the slow movement followed by the
quick--which, since the day of Rossini, had ruled Italian opera with a
rod of iron. In 'Rigoletto,' although the old convention still survives,
the composer shows a keen aspiration after a less trammelled method of
expressing himself. Rigoletto's great monologue is a piece of
declamation pure and simple, and as such struck a note till then
unheard in Italy. The whole of the last act is a brilliant example of
Verdi's picturesque power, combined with acute power of
characterisation. The Duke's gay and lightsome _canzone_, the
magnificent quartet, in which the different passions of four personages
are contrasted and combined with such consummate art, and the sombre
terrors of the tempest, touch a level of art which Verdi had not till
then attained, nor was to reach again until the days of 'Aida,' twenty
years later.

'Il Trovatore' (1853) is melodrama run mad. The plot is terribly
confused, and much of it borders on the incomprehensible, but the
outline of it is as follows. The mother of Azucena, a gipsy, has been
burnt as a witch by order of the Count di Luna. In revenge Azucena
steals one of his children, whom she brings up as her own son under the
name of Manrico. Manrico loves Leonora, a lady of the Spanish Court, who
is also beloved by his brother, the younger Count di Luna. After various
incidents Manrico falls into the Count's hands, and is condemned to
death. Leonora offers her hand as the price of his release, which the
Count accepts. Manrico refuses liberty on these terms, and Leonora takes
poison to escape the fulfilment of her promise.

The music of 'Il Trovatore' shows a sad falling off from the promise of
'Rigoletto.' Face to face with such a libretto, Verdi probably felt that
refinement and characterisation were equally out of the question, and
fell back on the coarseness of his earlier style. 'Il Trovatore' abounds
with magnificent tunes, but they are slung together with very little
feeling for appropriateness. There is a brutal energy about the work
which has been its salvation, for of the higher qualities, which make a
fitful appearance in 'Rigoletto,' there is hardly a trace.

'La Traviata' (1853) is an operatic version of Dumas's famous play, 'La
Dame aux Camellias.' The sickly tale of the love and death of Marguerite
Gauthier, here known as Violetta, is hardly an ideal subject for a
libretto, and it says much for Verdi's versatility that, after his
excursions into transpontine melodrama, he was able to treat
'drawing-room tragedy' with success. Alfredo Germont loves Violetta, the
courtesan, and establishes himself with her in a villa outside Paris.
There his old father pays Violetta a visit, and, by representing that
the matrimonial prospects of his daughter are injured by Violetta's
connection with Alfredo, induces her to leave him. Alfredo is indignant
at Violetta's supposed inconstancy, and insults her publicly at a ball
in Paris. In the last act Violetta dies of consumption after an
affecting reconciliation with her lover. The music of 'La Traviata' is
in strong contrast to Verdi's previous work. The interest of Dumas's
play is mainly psychological, and demands a delicacy of treatment which
would have been thrown away upon the melodramatic subjects which Verdi
had hitherto affected. Much of his music is really graceful and
refined, but his efforts to avoid vulgarity occasionally land him in
the slough of sentimentality. Nevertheless, the pathos which
characterises some of the scenes has kept 'La Traviata' alive, though
the opera is chiefly employed now as a means of allowing a popular prima
donna to display her high notes and her diamonds.

'Les Vepres Siciliennes,' which was produced in Paris in 1855, during
the Universal Exhibition, only achieved a partial success, and 'Simon
Boccanegra' (1857), even in the revised and partly re-written form which
was performed in 1881, has never been popular out of Italy. 'Un Ballo in
Maschera' (1861), on the other hand, was for many years a great
favourite in this country, and has recently been revived with remarkable
success. The scene of the opera is laid in New England. Riccardo, the
governor of Boston, loves Amelia, the wife of his secretary, Renato.
After a scene in a fortune-teller's hut, in which Riccardo's death is
predicted, the lovers meet in a desolate spot on the seashore. Thither
also comes Renato, who has discovered a plot against his chief and
hastens to warn him of his danger. In order to save Riccardo's life
Renato resorts to the time-honoured device of an exchange of cloaks.
Thus effectually disguised Riccardo makes his escape, leaving Amelia,
also completely unrecognisable in a transparent gauze veil, in charge of
her unsuspecting husband, who has promised to convey her home in safety.
Enter the conspirators, who attack Renato; Amelia rushes between the
combatants, and at the psychological moment her veil drops off. Tableau
and curtain to a mocking chorus of the conspirators, which forms a
sinister background to the anguish and despair of the betrayed husband
and guilty wife. In the next act Renato joins forces with the
conspirators, and in the last he murders Riccardo at the masked ball
from which the opera takes its name. 'Un Ballo in Maschera' is one of
the best operas of Verdi's middle period. Like 'Rigoletto' it abounds in
sharp and striking contrasts of character, the gay and brilliant music
of the page Oscar, in particular, forming an effective foil to the more
tragic portions of the score. The same feeling for contrast is
perceptible in 'La Forza del Destino,' in which the gloom of a most
sanguinary plot is relieved by the humours of a vivandiere and a comic
priest. This work, which was produced at St. Petersburg in 1862, has
never been popular out of Italy, and 'Don Carlos,' which was written for
the Paris Exhibition of 1867, seems also to be practically laid upon the
shelf. It tells of the love of Don Carlos for his stepmother, Elizabeth,
the wife of Philip II. of Spain, and apart from the dulness of the
libretto, has the faults of a work of transition. Verdi's earlier manner
was beginning to lie heavily upon his shoulders, but he was not yet
strong enough to sever his connection with the past. There are scenes in
'Don Carlos' which foreshadow the truth and freedom of 'Aida,' but their
beauty is often marred by strange relapses into conventionality.

'Aida' (1871) was the result of a commission from Ismail Pacha, who
wished to enhance the reputation of his new opera-house at Cairo by the
production of a work upon an Egyptian subject from the pen of the most
popular composer of the day. The idea of the libretto seems to have been
originally due to Mariette Bey, the famous Egyptologist, who had
happened to light upon the story in the course of his researches. It was
first written in French prose by M. Camilla du Locle in collaboration
with Verdi himself, and afterwards translated by Signor Ghislanzoni.

Aida, the daughter of Amonasro, the King of Ethiopia, has been taken
prisoner by the Egyptians, and given as a slave to the princess Amneris.
They both love the warrior Radames, the chosen chief of the Egyptian
army, but he cares nothing for Amneris, and she vows a deadly vengeance
against the slave who has supplanted her. Radames returns in triumph
from the wars, bringing with him a chain of prisoners, among whom is
Amonasro. The latter soon finds out Aida's influence over Radames, and
half terrifies, half persuades her into promising to extract from her
lover the secret of the route which the Egyptian army will take on the
morrow on their way to a new campaign against the Ethiopians. Aida
beguiles Radames with seductive visions of happiness in her own country,
and induces him to tell her the secret. Amonasro, who is on the watch,
overhears it and escapes in triumph, while Radames, in despair at his
own treachery, gives himself up to justice. Amneris offers him pardon
if he will accept her love, but he refuses life without Aida, and is
condemned to be immured in a vault beneath the temple of Phtha. There he
finds Aida, who has discovered a means of getting in, and has made up
her mind to die with her lover. They expire in each other's arms, while
the solemn chant of the priestesses in the temple above mingles with the
sighs of the heart-broken Amneris.

'Aida' was an immense advance upon Verdi's previous work. The Egyptian
subject, so remote from the ordinary operatic groove, seems to have
tempted him to a fresher and more vivid realism, and the possibilities
of local colour opened a new world to so consummate a master of
orchestration. The critics of the day at once accused Verdi of imitating
Wagner, and certain passages undoubtedly suggest the influence of
'Lohengrin,' but as a whole the score is thoroughly and radically
Italian. In 'Aida' Verdi's vein of melody is as rich as ever, but it is
controlled by a keen artistic sense, which had never had full play
before. For the first time in his career he discovered the true balance
between singers and orchestra, and at once took his proper place among
the great musicians of the world. Special attention must be directed to
Verdi's use of local colour in 'Aida.' This is often a dangerous
stumbling-block to musicians, but Verdi triumphed most where all the
world had failed. In the scene of the consecration of Radames, he
employs two genuine Oriental tunes with such consummate art that this
scene is not only one of the few instances in the history of opera in
which Oriental colour has been successfully employed, but, in the
opinion of many, is the most beautiful part of the whole opera. Another
magnificent scene is the judgment of Radames, in the fourth act, where
an extraordinary effect is gained by the contrast of the solemn voices
of the priests within the chamber with the passionate grief of Amneris
upon the threshold. The love scene, in the third act, shows the lyrical
side of Verdi's genius in its most voluptuous aspect. The picture of the
palm-clad island of Philae and the dreaming bosom of the Nile is
divinely mirrored in Verdi's score. The music seems to be steeped in the
odorous charm of the warm southern night.

Sixteen years elapsed before the appearance of Verdi's next work. It was
generally supposed that the aged composer had bidden farewell for ever
to the turmoil and excitement of the theatre, and the interest excited
by the announcement of a new opera from his pen was proportionately
keen. The libretto of 'Otello' (1887), a masterly condensation of
Shakespeare's tragedy, was from the pen of Arrigo Boito, himself a
musician of no ordinary accomplishment. The action of the opera opens in
Cyprus, amidst the fury of a tempest. Othello arrives fresh from a
victory over the Turks, and is greeted enthusiastically by the people,
who light a bonfire in his honour. Then follows the drinking scene.
Cassio, plied by Iago, becomes intoxicated and fights with Montano. The
duel is interrupted by the entrance of Othello, who degrades Cassio
from his captaincy, and dismisses the people to their homes. The act
ends with a duet of flawless loveliness between Othello and Desdemona,
the words of which are ingeniously transplanted from Othello's great
speech before the Senate. In the second act Iago advises Cassio to
induce Desdemona to intercede for him, and, when left alone, pours forth
a terrible confession of his unfaith in the famous 'Credo.' This, one of
the few passages in the libretto not immediately derived from
Shakespeare, is a triumph on Boito's part. The highest praise that can
be given to it is to say, which is the literal truth, that it falls in
no way beneath the poetical and dramatic standard of its context.
Othello now enters, and Iago contrives to sow the first seeds of
jealousy in his breast by calling his attention to Cassio's interview
with Desdemona. Then follows a charming episode, another of Boito's
interpolations, in which a band of Cypriotes bring flowers to Desdemona.
Othello is won for the moment by the guileless charm of her manner, but
his jealousy is revived by her assiduous pleading for Cassio. He thrusts
her from him, and the handkerchief with which she offers to bind his
brow is secured by Iago. Left with his chief, Iago fans the rising flame
of jealousy, and the act ends with Othello's terrific appeal to Heaven
for vengeance upon his wife. In the third act, after an interview of
terrible irony and passion between Othello and Desdemona, in which he
accuses her to her face of unchastity, and laughs at her indignant
denial. Cassio appears with the handkerchief which he has found in his
chamber. Iago ingeniously contrives that Othello shall recognise it, and
at the same time arranges that he shall only hear as much of the
conversation as shall confirm him in his infatuation. Envoys from Venice
arrive, bearing the order for Othello's recall and the appointment of
Cassio in his place. Othello, mad with rage and jealousy, strikes
Desdemona to the earth, and drives every one from the hall. Then his
overtaxed brain reels, and he sinks swooning to the floor. The shouts of
the people outside acclaim him as the lion of Venice, while Iago, his
heel scornfully placed on Othello's unconscious breast, cries with
ghastly malevolence, 'Ecco il Leone.' The last act follows Shakespeare
very closely. Desdemona sings her Willow Song, and, as though conscious
of approaching calamity, bids Emilia a pathetic farewell. Scarcely are
her eyes closed in sleep, when Othello enters by a secret door, bent on
his fell purpose. He wakes her with a kiss, and after a brief scene
smothers her with a pillow. Emilia enters with the news of an attempt to
assassinate Cassio. Finding Desdemona lead, she calls for help. Cassio,
Montano, and others rush in; Iago's treachery is unmasked, and Othello
in despair stabs himself, dying in a last kiss upon his dead wife's
lips.

In 'Otello' Verdi advanced to undreamed-of heights of freedom and
beauty. 'Aida' was a mighty step towards the light, but with 'Otello' he
finally shook off the trammels of convention. His inexhaustible stream
of melody remained as pure and full as ever, while the more declamatory
parts of the opera, down to the slightest piece of recitative, are
informed by a richness of suggestion, and an unerring instinct for
truth, such as it would be vain to seek in his earlier work. Rich and
picturesque as much of the orchestral writing is, the voice remains, as
in his earlier works, the key-stone of the whole structure, and though
motives are occasionally repeated with exquisite effect--as in the case
of the 'Kiss' theme from the duet in the first act, which is heard again
in Othello's death scene--Verdi makes no pretence at imitating Wagner's
elaborate use of guiding themes. There is an artistic reason for this,
apart from the radical difference between the German and Italian views
of opera. In 'Otello' the action is rapid for the most part, and in many
scenes the music only aims at furnishing a suitable accompaniment to the
dialogue. A symphonic treatment of the orchestra, in such scenes as that
between Iago and Othello in the second act, would tend to obscure the
importance of the dialogue upon the stage, every word of which for the
proper comprehension of the drama, must be forcibly impressed upon the
listener's attention. In such a scene as the handkerchief trio, in which
the situation remains practically the same for some time, a symphonic
treatment of the orchestra is thoroughly in place, and here Verdi
displays extraordinary skill in working out his theme, though even here
his method has very little resemblance to that of Wagner.

Six years after 'Otello' came 'Falstaff,' produced in 1893, when Verdi
was in his eightieth year. Boito's libretto is a cleverly abbreviated
version of Shakespeare's 'Merry Wives of Windsor,' with the addition of
two or three passages from 'Henry IV.' There are three acts, each of
which is divided into two scenes. The first scene takes place in the
Garter Inn at Windsor. Falstaff and his trusty followers, Bardolph and
Pistol, discomfit Dr. Caius, who comes to complain of having been
robbed. Falstaff then unfolds his scheme for replenishing his coffers
through the aid of Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page, and bids his faithful
esquires carry the famous duplicate letters to the comely dames. Honour,
however intervenes, and they refuse the office. Falstaff then sends his
page with the letters, pronounces his celebrated discourse upon honour,
and hunts Bardolph and Pistol out of the house. In the second scene, we
are in Ford's garden. The letters have arrived, and the merry wives
eagerly compare notes and deliberate upon a plan for avenging themselves
upon their elderly wooer. Dame Quickly is despatched to bid Falstaff to
an interview. Meanwhile Nannetta Ford, the 'Sweet Anne Page' of
Shakespeare, has contrived to gain a stolen interview with her lover
Fenton, while the treacherous Bardolph and Pistol are telling Ford of
their late master's designs on is wife's honour. Ford's jealousy is
easily aroused, and he makes up his mind to carry the war into the
enemy's country by visiting Falstaff in disguise. The second act takes
us back to the Garter. Dame Quickly arrives with a message from Mrs.
Ford. Falstaff is on fire at once, and agrees to pay her a visit between
the hours of two and three. Ford now arrives, calling himself Master
Brook, and paves his way with a present of wine and money. He tells
Falstaff of his hopeless passion for a haughty dame of Windsor, Mrs.
Alice Ford, begging the irresistible knight to woo the lady, so that,
once her pride is broken, he too may have a chance of winning her
favour. Falstaff gladly agrees, and horrifies the unlucky Ford by
confiding the news to him that he already has an assignation with the
lady fixed for that very afternoon. The second scene is laid in a room
in Ford's house. The merry wives are assembled, and soon Falstaff is
descried approaching. Mrs. Ford entertains him for a few minutes, and
then, according to their arrangement, Dame Quickly runs in to say that
Mrs. Page is at the door. Falstaff hastily hides himself behind a large
screen, but the jest changes to earnest when Mrs. Page herself rushes in
to announce that Ford, mad with jealousy and rage, has raised the whole
household and is really coming to look for his wife's lover. The women
quickly slip Falstaff into a huge basket and cover him with dirty linen,
while Nannetta and Fenton who have been indulging in another stolen
interview slip behind the screen. Ford searches everywhere for Falstaff
in vain, and is beginning to despair of finding him, when the sound of a
kiss behind the screen arrests his attention. He approaches it
cautiously, and thrusts it aside only to find his daughter in Fenton's
arms. Meanwhile Mrs. Ford calls on her servants. Between them they
manage to lift the gigantic basket, and, while she calls her husband to
view the sight, carry it to the window and pitch it out bodily into the
Thames. The first scene of the third act is devoted to hatching a new
plot to humiliate the fat knight, and the second shows us a moonlit
glade in Windsor Forest, whither he has been summoned by the agency of
Dame Quickly. There all the characters assemble disguised as elves and
fairies. They give Falstaff a _mauvais quart d'heure_, and end by
convincing him that his amorous wiles are useless against the virtue of
honest burghers' wives. Meanwhile Nannetta has induced her father, by
means of a trick, to consent to her marriage with Fenton, and the act
ends with a song of rejoicing in the shape of a magnificent fugue in
which every one joins.

Perhaps the most extraordinary thing about 'Falstaff' is that it was
written by a man eighty years old. It is the very incarnation of youth
and high spirits. Verdi told an interviewer that he thoroughly enjoyed
writing it, and one can well believe his words. He has combined a
schoolboy's sense of fun with the grace and science of a Mozart. The
part-writing is often exceedingly elaborate, but the most complicated
concerted pieces flow on as naturally as a ballad. The glorious final
fugue is an epitome of the work. It is really a marvel of contrapuntal
ingenuity, yet it is so full of bewitching melody and healthy animal
spirits that an uncultivated hearer would probably think it nothing but
an ordinary jovial finale. In the last act Verdi strikes a deeper note.
He has caught the charm and mystery of the sleeping forest with
exquisite art. There is an unearthly beauty about this scene, which is
new to students of Verdi. In the fairy music, too, he reveals yet
another side of his genius. Nothing so delicate nor so rich in
imaginative beauty has been written since the days of Weber.

It is impossible as yet to speak with any degree of certainty as to
Verdi's probable influence upon posterity. With all his genius he was
perhaps hardly the man to found a school. He was not, like his great
contemporary Wagner, one of the world's great revolutionists. His genius
lay not in overturning systems and in exploring paths hitherto
untrodden, but in developing existing materials to the highest
conceivable pitch of beauty and completeness. His music has nothing to
do with theories, it is the voice of nature speaking in the idiom of
art.

Of the composers who modelled their style upon Verdi's earlier manner,
the most important were Petrella (1813-1877); Apolloni (1822-1889), the
composer of 'L'Ebreo,' a melodrama of a rough and ready description,
which was produced in 1855 and went the round of all the theatres of
Italy; and Carlos Gomez (1839-1896), a Brazilian composer, whose opera,
'Il Guarany,' was performed in London in 1872. In him Verdi's vigour
often degenerated into mere brutality, but his work is by no means
without power, though he has little claim to distinction of style. Of
the many operas written by Marchetti (1835-1902) only one, 'Ruy Blas,'
founded upon Victor Hugo's play, achieved anything like permanent
success. In form and general outline it owes much to Verdi's influence,
but the vein of tender melody which runs through it strikes a note of
individual inspiration. It was performed in London in 1877.

Arrigo Boito, to whom the University of Cambridge accorded the honour of
an honorary degree in 1893, has written but one opera, 'Mefistofele,'
but his influence upon modern Italian music must be measured in inverse
ratio to his productive power. When 'Mefistofele' was originally
produced in 1868, Verdi's genius was still in the chrysalis stage, and
the novelty and force of Boito's music made 'Mefistofele,' even in its
fall--for the first performance was a complete failure--a rallying point
for the Italian disciples of truth and sincerity in music. In 1875 it
was performed in a revised and abbreviated form, and since then has
taken its place among the masterpieces of modern Italy. Boito's libretto
reproduces the atmosphere of Goethe's drama far more successfully than
any other of the many attempts to fit 'Faust' to the operatic stage. It
is a noble poem, but from the merely scenic point of view it has many
weaknesses. Its principal failing is the lack of one continuous thread
of interest. The opera is merely a succession of episodes, each nicely
calculated to throw fresh light upon the character of Faust, but by no
means mutually connected. The prologue opens in Heaven, where the
compact is made regarding the soul of Faust. The next scene shows the
Kermesse, changing to Faust's study, where Mephistopheles appears and
the contract is signed which binds him to Faust's service. We then pass
to the garden scene, in which Faust is shown as Margaret's lover. Then
come the Witches' Sabbath on the summit of the Brocken, and the prison
scene with the death of Margaret. After this we have two scenes from the
second part of Goethe's 'Faust,' the classical Sabbath, in which the
union of Helen and Faust symbolises the embrace of the Greek and
Germanic ideals, and the redemption of Faust with the discomfiture of
Mephistopheles, which ends the work. Although 'Mefistofele' is
unsatisfactory as a whole, the extraordinary beauty of several single
scenes ought to secure for it such immortality as the stage has to
offer. Boito is most happily inspired by Margaret, and the two scenes in
which she appears are masterpieces of beauty and pathos. In the garden
scene he has caught the ineffable simplicity of her character with
astonishing success. The contrast between her girlish innocence and the
voluptuous sentiment of Gounod's heroine cannot fail to strike the most
careless listener. The climax of this scene, the delightfully tender and
playful quartet, which culminates in a burst of hysterical laughter, is
a stroke of genius. In the prison scene Boito rises to still greater
heights. The poignant pathos of the poor maniac's broken utterances, the
languorous beauty of the duet, and the frenzied terror and agony of the
finale, are beyond praise.

Amilcare Ponchielli (1834-1886) owed much to both Verdi and Boito, and
his best work, 'La Gioconda,' which was produced in 1876, bears
unmistakable traces of the influence of 'Mefistofele' and 'Aida.' The
libretto of 'La Gioconda' is founded upon a gloomy play by Victor Hugo,
'Angelo, Tyran de Padoue.' La Gioconda, a Venetian street singer, buys
the safety of her lover Enzo from the spy Barnaba with her own hand,
only to find that the former uses his new-found liberty to prosecute an
intrigue with another woman. She generously contrives to save the lives
of Enzo and his mistress, which are threatened by the vengeance of the
latter's husband, and commits suicide in order to escape falling into
the hands of Barnaba. Ponchielli's opera overflows with melody of a
rather commonplace description. He has, besides, a certain dramatic
gift, and the concerted music in 'La Gioconda' is powerful and
effective. The ballet music is unusually good, and shows many favourable
examples of Ponchielli's fondness for fanciful melodic designs, a
mannerism which has been freely imitated by his pupils and followers.
Another meritorious composer of the same school was Alfredo Catalani
(1854-93), whose 'Lorelei' (1890) and 'La Wally' (1892) still hold the
stage.

The most important of the younger men is Giacomo Puccini, a composer who
during the last decade has come to the front in a decisive manner. His
first opera, 'Le Villi,' was produced in 1884. The subject is a strange
one to have taken the fancy of a southern composer. It is founded upon
one of those weird traditions which seem essentially the property of
Northern Europe. Villi, or in English, Wilis, are the spirits of
affianced damsels, whose lovers have proved untrue. They rise from the
earth at midnight, and assemble upon the highway attired in all their
bridal finery. From midnight until dawn they wheel their wild dances and
watch for their faithless lovers. If one of the latter happen to pass,
he is beguiled into the magic circle, and in the grasp of the relentless
Wilis is whirled round and round until he sinks expiring upon the
ground. In Puccini's opera, the scene is laid in the Black Forest. The
characters are three in number--- Anna, her _fiance_ Robert, and her
father Wilhelm Wulf. The first act opens with the betrothal of the
lovers. After the usual festivities Robert departs for Mayence, whither
he has to go to claim an inheritance. Six months elapse between the
first and second acts. Robert has fallen into the toils of an abandoned
woman, and is still at Mayence; Anna has died of a broken heart. The
second act opens with two orchestral movements, 'L'Abbandono,' which
describes the funeral of Anna, and 'La Tregenda,' the dance of the
Wilis. Robert now appears, torn by remorse, and pours forth his
unavailing regrets. But the hour of repentance is past. Anna and her
attendant Wilis rush on. The unfortunate man, in a kind of hypnotic
trance, is drawn into their circling dance. They whirl him round and
round in ever wilder and more fantastic gambols, until he drops lifeless
upon the ground, and the avenging spirits disappear with a Hosanna of
triumph. There is little attempt at local colour in 'Le Villi,' but the
music is full of imaginative power. In the purely orchestral parts of
the work the composer seems to have escaped from convention altogether,
and has written music instinct with weird suggestion and unearthly
force.

Puccini's next opera, 'Edgar' (1889), was a failure, but in 'Manon
Lescaut' (1893) he once more achieved success. His treatment of the Abbe
Prevost's romance, as may well be imagined, differs _in toto_ from that
of Massenet. The libretto, in the first place, is laid out upon an
entirely different plan. It consists of a string of detached scenes with
but little mutual connection, which, without some previous knowledge of
the story, would be barely comprehensible. The first act deals with the
meeting of the lovers at Amiens and their flight to Paris. In the second
act we find Manon installed as the mistress of Geronte di Lavoir,
surrounded by crowds of admirers. Des Grieux penetrates to her
apartment, and after a scene of passionate upbraiding persuades her to
fly with him. But before they can depart they are interrupted by the
entrance of Manon's irate protector, who, in revenge for her
faithlessness, summons the police and consigns her to St. Lazare. The
third act shows the quay at Havre, and the embarkation of the _filles de
joie_ for New Orleans; and the last act, which takes place in America,
is one long duet between Manon and Des Grieux, ending with Manon's
death. Puccini looked at the story of Manon through Italian spectacles.
His power of characterisation is limited, and there is little in his
music to differentiate Manon and her lover from the ordinary hero and
heroine of Italian opera. The earlier scenes of the opera demand a
lighter touch than he could then command, but in the tragic scene at
Havre he is completely successful. Here he strikes the true note of
tragedy. The great concerted piece with which the act ends is a masterly
piece of writing, and proves that Puccini can handle a form, which as
employed by lesser men is a synonym for stereotyped conventionality,
with superb passion and sincerity.

But Puccini's earlier successes sank into insignificance by the side of
the triumph of 'La Boheme,' which was produced in 1896. It was
impossible to weave a connected story from Murger's famous novel.
Puccini's librettists attempted nothing of the kind. They took four
scenes each complete in itself and put them before the audience without
any pretence of a connecting thread of interest. In the first act we see
the joyous quartet of Bohemians in their Paris attic--Rodolphe the poet,
Marcel the painter, Colline the philosopher, and Schaunard the musician.
Rodolphe sacrifices the manuscript of his tragedy to keep the fire
going, and Marcel keeps the landlord at bay, until the arrival of
Schaunard with an unexpected windfall of provisions raises the spirits
of the company to the zenith of rapture. Three of the Bohemians go out
to keep Christmas Eve at their favourite cafe, leaving Rodolphe to
finish an article. To him enters Mimi, an embroiderer, who lodges on the
same floor, under pretence of asking for a light. A delicious love-duet
follows, and the lovers go off to join their friends. The next scene is
at the Cafe Momus, where Musette appears with a wealthy banker. She
speedily contrives to get the banker out of the way and rushes into the
arms of her old lover, Marcel. This scene, which is very short, is a
carnival of bustle and gaiety, and is a brilliant example of Puccini's
happy knack of handling concerted music. The next scene is a series of
quarrels and reconciliations between the two pairs of lovers, while in
the last act Mimi, who has deserted Rodolphe, comes back to see him once
more before she dies, and breathes her last on the little bed in the
attic. Puccini's music echoes the spirit of Murger's romance with
marvellous sincerity. It paints the mingled joy and grief of Bohemian
life in hues the most delicate and tender. Like Murger, though dealing
with things often squalid and unlovely, he never forgets that he is an
artist. The sordid facts of life are gilded by the rainbow colours of
romance. Puccini has caught the fanciful grace of Murger's style with
the dexterity of genius. His music is thoroughly Italian in style, but
he never strikes a false note. He dashes off the irresponsible gaiety of
the earlier scenes with a touch which though light is always sure, and
when the action deepens to tenderness, and even to pathos, he can be
serious without falling into sentimentality and impressive without
encroaching upon the boundaries of melodrama. 'La Boheme' is one of the
few operas of recent years which can be described as a masterpiece.

With 'La Tosca,' which was produced in 1899, Puccini won another
success, though for very different reasons from those which made 'La
Boheme' so conspicuous a triumph. The libretto is a clever condensation
of Sardou's famous drama. The scene is laid in Rome in the year 1800. In
the first act we are introduced to Mario Cavaradossi, a painter, who is
at work in a church, and to Flora Tosca, his mistress, a famous singer,
who pays him a visit and teases him with her jealous reproaches.
Cavaradossi befriends Angelotti, a victim of Papal tyranny, who has
escaped from the castle of St Angelo, and despatches him by a secret
path to his villa in the outskirts of Rome. Scarpia, the chief of
police, who is close upon Angelotti's heels, suspects Cavaradossi of
being implicated in Angelotti's escape, and uses La Tosca's jealous
suspicions to help him in securing the prisoner. In the next act
Angelotti is still at large, but Cavaradossi has been arrested. Scarpia,
who has meanwhile conceived a violent passion for La Tosca, extracts
from her the secret of Angelotti's hiding-place by putting her lover to
the torture in an adjoining room, whence his cries penetrate to her
distracted ears. La Tosca buys her lover's safety by promising herself
to Scarpia. The latter gives orders that Cavaradossi's execution shall
only be a sham one, blank cartridge being substituted for bullets. When
they are left alone, La Tosca murders Scarpia with a carving-knife when
he tries to embrace her. In the last act, after a passionate duet
between the lovers, Cavaradossi is executed--Scarpia having given a
secret order to the effect that the execution shall be genuine after
all--and La Tosca in despair throws herself into the Tiber.

In 'La Tosca' we are in a world very different from that of 'La Boheme.'
Here there is very little scope for grace and tenderness. All is deadly
earnest. The melodramatic incidents of the story crowd one upon another,
and in the rush and excitement of the plot the music often has to take a
secondary place. Whenever the composer has a chance he utilises it with
rare skill. There are passages in 'La Tosca' of great lyrical beauty,
but as a rule the exigencies of the stage give little room for musical
development, and a great deal of the score is more like glorified
incidental music than the almost symphonic fabric to which we are
accustomed in modern opera.

The history of 'Madama Butterfly' (1904), Puccini's latest opera, is a
strange one. At its production in Milan it was hissed off the stage and
withdrawn after a single performance. No one seems to know why it failed
to please the Scala audience, with whom Puccini had previously been a
great favourite. Possibly the unfamiliar Japanese surroundings
displeased the conservative Milanese, or the singers may have been
inadequate. At any rate, when it was revived a few months later at
Brescia, in a slightly revised form, it won more favour, and its London
appearance the following year was a brilliant triumph. Since then it has
gone the round of Europe and America, and is now probably the most
popular opera in the modern repertory. The story of 'Madama Butterfly'
is familiar to English hearers, the opera being founded upon the drama
by David Belasco, which was played here with great success some years
ago. Peculiarly apt for musical setting is the tale of the fascinating
little 'mousme' who contracts a so-called Japanese marriage with a
lieutenant in the American navy, and after a brief union is driven by
his perfidy to suicide. That the story is what may be called edifying
can hardly be claimed, but the world has long since ceased to
expect--perhaps even to desire--that opera should inculcate a lofty
moral code.

However, to come to business, the scene opens in the garden of a country
house among the hills above Nagasaki. Lieutenant Pinkerton and his
friend Sharpless, the American consul, are inspecting the retreat which
the former has prepared for his Japanese wife. The voices of Butterfly
and her girl friends are soon heard in the distance as they ascend the
hill. After an amusing scene of greeting and introduction comes the
marriage ceremony and its attendant festivities, which are interrupted
by the arrival of Butterfly's uncle. This venerable person, who is a
priest in a neighbouring temple, has discovered that Butterfly has
renounced her own religion and adopted that of her 'husband.' He
pronounces the most portentous maledictions upon her and is bundled out
by Pinkerton. The act ends with a love-duet of extraordinary beauty,
breathing tenderness and passion in strains which seem to embody all the
charm and mystery of the perfumed eastern night. Three years have passed
when the next act begins. Butterfly is deserted and lives with her
two-year-old baby and her faithful maid Suzuki, praying and waiting for
the husband who never comes. The friendly consul tries to break to her
the news of Pinkerton's marriage with an American girl, but Butterfly
cannot comprehend such perfidy. She sees Pinkerton's ship entering the
harbour and calls Suzuki to help her deck the house with flowers. The
music of this scene is exquisite, as is also that of the scene in which
Sharpless reads Pinkerton's letter to Butterfly; but the whole act is a
treasure-house of delicious melody and tender pathos. It ends curiously,
but not the less effectively, with a short orchestral movement, played
whilst Butterfly, Suzuki, and the child post themselves at the windows
to watch through the night for the coming of Pinkerton. The grey dawn
shows Butterfly still at her post, though the others have fallen asleep,
but no Pinkerton appears. A little later that singularly unheroic person
sneaks in with his wife, whom he commissions to interview Butterfly
while he waits in the garden outside. Mrs. Pinkerton rather
cold-bloodedly offers to take charge of the child, to which Butterfly
agrees, and, after a passionate farewell, kills herself behind a
screen. Puccini's music is unquestionably the strongest thing he has
done yet. The score is richer and more solid than that of any of his
earlier works, and the orchestration shows no falling off in ingenuity
and resource. Melodically 'Madama Butterfly' is perhaps not so fresh or
abundant as 'La Boheme,' but the composer's touch is firmer and surer in
handling dramatic situations. 'Madama Butterfly' is unquestionably one
of the most interesting and important operas of modern times, as it is
one of the most attractive. It has established Puccini more firmly than
ever in the position of the leading operatic composer of the day.

The name of Pietro Mascagni is chiefly connected in the minds of
opera-goers with 'Cavalleria Rusticana,' This work, which was produced
in 1890, lifted its composer at once into popularity. The story is
founded upon one of Verga's Sicilian tales. Turiddu, a village Adonis,
is beloved by the fair Lola. He enlists as a soldier, and on his return
from the wars finds that the fickle damsel has married Alfio, a carter.
He looks round him for fresh conquests, and his choice falls upon
Santuzza. This arouses all Lola's latent coquetry, and she soon
contrives to win him back to her side. The deserted Santuzza appeals in
vain to his love and pity. He repulses her roughly, and in despair she
tells Alfio the story of his wife's inconstancy. Alfio challenges
Turiddu to mortal combat, and kills him as the curtain falls. Squalid as
the story is, it is full of life and movement, and has that simple
directness which is essential to success. The music is melodious, if
not very original, and vigorous even to brutality. Mascagni here shows a
natural instinct for the theatre. His method is often coarse, but his
effects rarely miss their mark. At its production 'Cavalleria' was
absurdly overpraised, but it certainly is a work of promise.
Unfortunately the promise so far has not been fulfilled. 'L'Amico Fritz'
and 'I Rantzau,' two adaptations of novels by Erckmann-Chatrian,
produced respectively in 1891 and 1892, have almost disappeared from the
current repertory. The first is a delicate little story of an old
bachelor's love for a pretty country girl, the second a village 'Romeo
and Juliet,' showing how an internecine feud between two brothers is
ended by the mutual love of their children. Mascagni's melodramatic
style was ill suited to idylls of this kind. He drowned the pretty
little stories in oceans of perfervid orchestration, and banged all the
sentiment out of them with drums and cymbals. Yet, in the midst of the
desert of coarseness and vulgarity came oases of delicate fancy and
imagination. The 'Cherry Duet' in 'L'Amico Fritz,' and the _Cicaleccio_
chorus in 'I Rantzau,' are models of refinement and finish, which are
doubly delightful by reason of their incongruous environment.
Unfortunately such gems as these only make the coarseness of their
setting the more conspicuous, and on the whole the sooner the world
forgets about 'L'Amico Fritz' and 'I Rantzau' the better it will be for
Mascagni's reputation. 'Guglielmo Ratcliff' and 'Silvano,' both produced
in 1895, have not been heard out of Italy, nor is there much
probability that they will ever cross the Alps. 'Zanetto' (1896), on
the other hand, seems to contain the best work which Mascagni has yet
given to the world. It is founded upon Francois Coppee's charming
duologue, 'Le Passant,' a graceful scene between a world-weary courtesan
and a youthful troubadour who passes beneath her balcony. Mascagni's
music, which is scored only for strings and harp, is both delicate and
refined, and instinct with a tender melancholy, for which it would be
vain to look in his earlier works. 'Iris' (1898), an opera on a rather
unpleasant Japanese story, has met with a certain degree of favour, but
'Le Maschere' (1901), an attempt to introduce Harlequin and Columbine to
the lyric stage, failed completely, nor does 'Amica' (1905) seen to have
done much to rehabilitate the composer's waning reputation. Mascagni has
as yet done little to justify the extravagant eulogies with which his
first work was greeted, and his warmest admirers are beginning to fear
that the possibility of his doing something to redeem the early promise
of 'Cavalleria' is getting rather remote.

Leoncavallo, though older than Mascagni, must be regarded as in a
certain sense his follower, since his most popular work, 'Pagliacci,'
was undoubtedly inspired by 'Cavalleria Rusticana.' The story begins
with the arrival of a troupe of travelling comedians, or _Pagliacci_, in
an Italian village. All is not harmony in the little company. Tonio (the
Taddeo, or clown) loves Nedda (Columbine), the wife of Canio
(Pagliaccio), but she already has a lover in the shape of Silvio, a
young villager, and rejects the clumsy advances of the other with scorn.
Tonio overhears the mutual vows of Nedda and her lover, and bent upon
vengeance, hurries off to bring the unsuspecting Canio upon the scene.
He only arrives in time to see the disappearance of Silvio, and cannot
terrify his wife into disclosing her lover's name, though he is only
just prevented by Beppe, the Harlequin of the troupe, from stabbing her
on the spot. The second act is on the evening of the same day, a few
hours later. The curtain of the rustic theatre goes up and the little
play begins. By a curious coincidence the scheme of the plot represents
something like the real situation of the actors. Columbine is
entertaining her lover Harlequin in the absence of her husband
Pagliaccio, while Taddeo keeps a look-out for his return. When he
returns we see that the mimic comedy is to develop into real tragedy.
Canio scarcely makes a pretence of keeping to his role of Pagliaccio.
Mad with jealousy, he rushes on his wife and tries to make her confess
the name of her lover. She refuses, and in the end he stabs her, while
Silvio, who has formed one of the rustic audience, leaps on to the stage
only to receive his death-blow as well. As in 'Cavalleria,' the theme of
the story is squalid and unpleasant, though lucid and undeniably
effective for stage purposes. The music makes an effective accompaniment
to the exciting incidents of the plot, but it has few claims to
intrinsic interest. Leoncavallo is never much of a melodist, and
'Pagliacci' teems with reminiscences. The opera was probably written in
a hurry, in order to pander to the taste for melodrama which
'Cavalleria' had excited. In 'I Medici' (1893), a tale of the Florentine
Renaissance, Leoncavallo aimed far higher. Here, too, however, his music
is for the most part a string of ill-digested reminiscences, though
scored with such extraordinary cleverness and fertility of resource as
almost to disguise the inherent poverty of the score. 'Chatterton'
(1896) was a failure, but 'La Boheme' (1897), though somewhat cast into
the shade by Puccini's work upon the same subject, scored a decided
success. Leoncavallo's music is conceived in a totally different mood
from that of Puccini. He has little of Puccini's grace and tenderness,
but he treated the scenes of Bohemian life with amazing energy and
spirit, if with an occasional suggestion of brutality. 'Zaza' (1900),
founded upon a French play which recently achieved a scandalous
notoriety, has found little favour even in Italy. Leoncavallo's latest
work, 'Der Roland,' was written in response to a commission from the
German Emperor, who believed that he had found in the composer of 'I
Medici' a musician worthy to celebrate the mighty deeds of the
Hohenzollerns. 'Der Roland' was produced in a German version at Berlin
in 1904, and in spite of Court patronage failed completely.

Umberto Giordano, who during the last few years has steadily worked his
way to the front rank of Italian composers, started his career with a
_succes de scandale_ in 'Mala Vita' (1892), a coarse and licentious
imitation of 'Cavalleria Rusticana.' There is far better work in 'Andrea
Chenier' (1896), a stirring tale of the French Revolution set to music
which shows uncommon dramatic power and in certain scenes a fine sense
of lyrical expression. After a good deal of preludial matter the plot
centres in the rivalry of Chenier the poet and Gerard, a revolutionary
leader, for the hand of Madeleine. Gerard condemns Chenier to death, but
is melted by Madeleine's pleading, and rescinds the order for his
execution. The pardon, however, comes too late, and Madeleine and
Chenier ascend the scaffold together, in an ecstasy of lyrical rapture.
'Fedora' (1898), an adaptation of Sardou's famous drama, has less
musical interest than 'Andrea Chenier,' the breathless incidents of the
plot giving but little scope for musical treatment. The first act shows
the death of Vladimir, the police investigation and Fedora's vow to
discover the murderer. In the second Fedora extorts from Loris Ipanoff a
confession of the vengeance that he wreaked upon the perfidious
Vladimir, and, finding Loris innocent and Vladimir guilty, in a sudden
revulsion of feeling throws herself into Loris's arms, bidding him stay
with her rather than leave the house to fall into the hands of spies. In
the third act Fedora, certain of detection, confesses to Loris her
previous machinations against him, which have resulted in the deaths of
his mother and brother, and takes poison before his eyes. Giordano
touched a far higher level in 'Siberia' (1903), a gloomy tale of
Russian crime and punishment. Stephana, a courtesan, among all her
lovers cares only for the young sergeant Vassili. Vassili, who has
learnt to love her, not knowing who she is, when he discovers the truth,
bursts in upon a fete she is giving, quarrels with a lieutenant and
kills him on the spot. He is condemned to exile in Siberia, but is
followed by Stephana, who overtakes him at the frontier, and gets leave
to share his fate. In the mines they find Globy, Stephana's original
seducer, whose infamy she exposes to the assembled convicts. In revenge
Globy betrays to the authorities a project of escape devised by Stephana
and Vassili, and the lovers are shot just as liberty appears to be
within their grasp. The music of 'Siberia' is more artistic than
anything Giordano has previously written. The situations are skilfully
handled, and the note of pity and pathos is touched with no uncertain
hand. The opera is unequal, but the scene of the halt at the frontier is
treated in masterly fashion.

Francesco Cilea won no marked success until the production of his
'Adriana Lecouvreur' in 1902. The plot is an adaptation of Scribe's
famous play, but so trenchantly abbreviated as to be almost
incomprehensible. The opening scene in the _foyer_ of the Comedie
Francaise is bright and lively, the handling of the score arousing
pleasant reminiscences of Verdi's 'Falstaff,' but the more dramatic
passages in the struggle of Adrienne and her rival the Princess de
Bouillon for Maurice de Saxe seem to be outside the scope of the
composer's talent, and the great moments of the piece are somewhat
frigid and unimpressive. There is a note of pathos, however, in
Adrienne's death-scene, and the character of Michonnet is elaborated
with skill and feeling. Cilea's latest opera, 'Gloria' (1907), a
blood-thirsty story of the struggle between the Guelphs and Ghibellines,
does not appear to have won much favour in Italy.

Edoardo Mascheroni's early laurels were won as a conductor, but in 1901
he sprang into fame as the composer of 'Lorenza,' an opera which has met
with much success in various cities of Spain and Spanish America as well
as in Italy. 'Lorenza' is a Calabrian version of the time-honoured story
of Judith and Holofernes, though in this case the Judith, so far from
slaying her brigand Holofernes, falls in love with him, and ends by
disguising herself in his cloak and allowing herself to be shot by the
soldiers who come to capture the bandit chief. Mascheroni's score
overflows with thoroughly Italian melody, and shows considerable
knowledge of dramatic effect, which from a conductor of his experience
was only to be expected.

Of the numerous other Italian composers who bask in the sunshine of
popularity south of the Alps very few are known to fame beyond the
frontiers of Italy. The younger men follow religiously in the steps of
Mascagni or Puccini, while their elders still hang on to the skirts of
'Aida.' Giacomo Orefice won a success of curiosity in 1901 with his
'Chopin,' a strange work dealing in fanciful fashion with the story of
the Polish composer's life, the melodies of the opera being taken
entirely from Chopin's music.

Spinelli's 'A Basso Porto' (1895), which has been performed in English
by the Carl Rosa Opera Company, is redolent of Mascagni's influence, but
the nauseating incidents of the plot make 'Cavalleria,' by comparison,
seem chaste and classical. The libretto deals with the vengeance wreaked
by a villainous Neapolitan street loafer upon a woman who has played him
false--a vengeance which takes the form of ruining her son by drink and
play, and of attempting to seduce her daughter. In the end this
egregious ruffian is murdered in the street by the mother of his two
victims, just in time to prevent his being knifed by the members of a
secret society whom he had betrayed to justice. The music is not without
dramatic vigour, and it has plenty of melody of a rough and ready kind.
There is technical skill, too, in the treatment of the voices and in the
orchestration, but hardly enough to reconcile an English audience to so
offensive a book. Salvatore Auteri-Manzocchi has never repeated the
early success of 'Dolores,' and Spiro Samara, a Greek by birth, but an
Italian by training and sympathies, seems to have lost the secret of the
delicate imagination which nearly made 'Flora Mirabilis' a European
success, though his 'Martire,' a work of crude sensationalism, enjoyed
an ephemeral success in Italy. Franchetti, the composer of 'Asrael,'
'Cristoforo Colombo,' and other works, conceived upon a scale grandiose
rather than grand, appears anxious to emulate the theatrical glories of
Meyerbeer, and to make up for poverty of inspiration by spectacular
magnificence, but none of his operas has yet succeeded in crossing the
Alps.




CHAPTER XIII

MODERN GERMAN AND SLAVONIC OPERA


CORNELIUS--GOETZ--GOLDMARK--HUMPERDINCK--STRAUSS--
SMETANA--GLINKA--PADEREWSKI


The history of music furnishes more than one instance of the paralysing
effect which the influence of a great genius is apt to exercise upon his
contemporaries and immediate successors. The vast popularity of Handel
in England had the effect of stunting the development of our national
music for more than a century. During his lifetime, and for many years
after his death, English-born musicians could do little but imitate his
more salient mannerisms, and reproduce in an attenuated form the lessons
which he had taught. The effect of Wagner's music upon German opera has
been something of the same description. As soon as his works gained
their legitimate place in the affections of his countrymen, his
influence began to assume formidable proportions. The might of his
individuality was irresistible. It was not possible, as in Italy and
France, to combine the system of Wagner with other elements. In Germany
it had to be Wagner or nothing, and thus, except for the writers of
sentimental Singspiele, a form of opera which scarcely comes into the
province of art at all, German musicians have vied with each other in
producing imitations of their great master, which succeeded or failed
according to the measure of their resemblance to their model, but had
very little value as original work. The production of Humperdinck's
'Haensel und Gretel' gave rise to a hope that the merely imitative period
was passing away, but it is plain that the mighty shadow of Wagner still
hangs over German music. Strauss's 'Salome' may be the herald of a new
epoch, but on that subject it is too soon to indulge in prophecy.

Wagner had completed what, for the sake of convenience, we have called
his earlier period, before his influence began to make itself felt in
German opera. 'Lohengrin' was performed for the first time under Liszt's
direction at Weimar in 1850. Eight years later Cornelius's 'Barbier von
Bagdad' was performed at the same theatre under the same conductor. This
was Liszt's last production at Weimar, for the ill-feeling stirred up by
Cornelius's work was so pronounced that the great pianist threw up his
position as Kapellmeister in disgust, and took refuge in the more
congenial society of Rome. Peter Cornelius (1824-1874) was one of the
most prominent of the band of young men who gathered round Liszt at
Weimar, and by means of their music and writings sought to further the
cause of 'New-German' art. 'Der Barbier von Bagdad' was immensely in
advance of its time. It failed completely to attract the public of
Weimar, the most cultivated in Europe, when it was originally produced,
but it is now one of the most popular operas in Germany. The beauties of
the score are doubly astonishing when it is remembered that when it was
written 'Die Meistersinger' had not been composed. The germs of much
that delights us in Wagner's comic opera may be found in 'Der Barbier,'
and it is certain that if Cornelius received his initial impulse from
'Lohengrin,' he himself reacted upon Wagner to a very remarkable extent.
The plot of 'Der Barbier' is long-winded and puerile, and the interest
is entirely centred in the music, Noureddin loves Margiana, the daughter
of the Cadi, and is bidden to an interview by Bostana, her _confidante_.
He takes with him Abul Hassan, a talkative fool of a barber, who watches
in the street while Noureddin visits his sweetheart. Suddenly the cries
of a slave undergoing the bastinado are heard. The barber jumps to the
conclusion that Noureddin is being murdered, summons help and invades
the house. Noureddin takes refuge from the wrath of the Cadi in a chest.
The commotion and tumult end in bringing the Caliph upon the scene, and
the unfortunate youth is discovered half dead in his hiding-place. He is
revived by the barber, and presented with the hand of Margiana. To this
silly story Cornelius wrote music of extraordinary power and beauty.
Much of it is of course light and trivial, but such scenes as that of
the Muezzin call, or the wild confusion of the last finale, are fully
worthy of the master upon whom Cornelius modelled his style. Cornelius
had a pretty gift for humorous orchestration, and his accompaniments
often anticipate the dainty effects of 'Die Meistersinger.' 'Das
Rheingold' being still unwritten in 1858, it would be too much to expect
a systematised use of guiding themes, but they are often employed with
consummate skill, and in the Muezzin scene the music of the call to
prayer forms the basis of a symphonic passage, which is thoroughly in
the style of Wagner's later works. Cornelius left two posthumous works,
'Der Cid' and 'Gunloed,' which have been produced during the last few
years. They are little more than imitations of Wagner's maturer style.
Hermann Goetz (1840-1876) was a composer whose early death cut short a
career of remarkable promise. He produced but one opera during his
lifetime, but that displayed an originality and a resource for which it
would be vain to look in the multifarious compositions of the
Kapellmeisters of the period. 'Der Widerspaenstigen Zaehmung' follows the
incidents of 'The Taming of the Shrew' very closely. The action begins
at night. Lucentio is serenading Bianca, but his ditty is interrupted by
a riot among Baptista's servants, who refuse to submit any longer to
Katharine's ill-treatment. Peace is restored, and Lucentio resumes his
song. A second interruption is in store for him in the shape of
Hortensio, another of Bianca's suitors, also upon serenading bent.
Baptista, angry at being disturbed again by the quarrels of the rival
musicians, dismisses them with the information that Bianca shall be
bestowed upon neither of them until Katharine is wedded. Petruchio now
enters, and fired with Hortensio's description of Katharine's beauty and
spirit, vows to make her his own.

The second act begins with a scene between Katharine and her sister,
which conclusively proves that the reports of the former's shrewishness
have not exceeded the truth. Hortensio and Lucentio, disguised
respectively as a music master and a teacher of languages, are now
ushered in, and receive most uncourteous treatment at Katharine's hands.
The act ends with Petruchio's wooing of Katharine, and the settlement of
their wedding-day. In the third act comes the marriage of Petruchio and
Katharine, and the fourth act shows the taming of the shrew in strict
accordance with Shakespeare's comedy. Goetz's music brims over with
frolicsome humour and gaiety, and the more serious portions are tender
without being sentimental. The influence of Wagner is more plainly seen
in the musicianly development of the melodies than in their employment
as guiding themes, though of this, too, there are not a few instances.
But the parts of the work in which Goetz's indebtedness to Wagner are
most apparent are the choruses, which, both in their tunefulness and in
the elaborate nature of the part-writing, often recall 'Die
Meistersinger,' and in the orchestration, which is extraordinarily
fanciful and imaginative. 'Der Widerspaenstigen Zaehmung' has never been
properly appreciated in this country, in spite of the familiar nature of
the libretto. Goetz left another opera, 'Francesca da Rimini,'
unfinished. This was completed by his friend Ernst Frank, but has never
met with much success.

Cornelius and Goetz would have been the first to admit the influence
which Wagner's works exercised upon their imagination, yet their
admiration for his music never seduced them into anything like mere
imitation. The operas of Carl Goldmark are founded far more directly
upon the methods and system of Wagner. Yet it would be unjust to dismiss
him as a mere plagiarist. In his first work, 'Die Koenigin von Saba'
(1875), there is a great deal which is entirely independent of Wagner's
or any one else's influence. The plot of the work has really nothing
Biblical about it, and if the names of the characters were changed, the
work might be produced to-morrow at Covent Garden without offending the
most puritanical susceptibilities. Sulamith, the daughter of the high
priest, is to wed Assad, a Jewish warrior, upon his return from a
military expedition, but Assad has fallen in with the Queen of Sheba on
her way to Jerusalem, and her charms have proved fatal to his constancy.
Sulamith is prepared to forgive him, but his love for the queen is
irresistible, and even at the altar he leaves Sulamith for her embraces.
Finally Assad is banished to the desert, where he is overwhelmed by a
sandstorm. 'Die Koenigin von Saba' is a strong and effective opera. The
local colour is managed very skilfully, and the orchestration is novel
and brilliant. Yet there is very little of that indefinable quality,
which we call sincerity, about the score. It was happily described at
its production as a clever imitation of good music. The influence of
Wagner is strongest in the love music, which owes much to 'Tristan und
Isolde,' 'Merlin' (1886), Goldmark's second opera, has not been as
successful in Germany as 'Die Koenigin von Saba,' The libretto, which is
founded upon the Arthurian legend of Merlin and Vivien, shows many
points of resemblance to Wagner's later works, and the music follows his
system of guiding themes far more closely than in the earlier work.
'Merlin' may stand as an instance of the unfortunate influence which a
man of Wagner's power and originality exercises upon his contemporaries.
There is little in it which cannot be traced more or less directly to a
prototype in the works of Wagner, and it need scarcely be said that
Goldmark does not improve upon his model In 'Das Heimchen am Herd'
(1896), the libretto of which is founded upon Dickens's famous story
'The Cricket on the Hearth,' Goldmark seems to have tried to emulate the
success of Humperdinck's 'Haensel und Gretel,' There are suggestions in
it, too, of the influence of Smetana who dawned upon the Viennese
horizon in 1890. In this work, which has been performed with great
success in Germany, and was produced in English by the Carl Rosa Company
in 1900, the composer contrived very cleverly to put off the grandiose
manner of his earlier operas. Elaborate as the orchestral part of the
score is, it is never allowed to overpower the voices, and the general
impression of the opera is one of rare simplicity and charm. Goldmark's
later works, 'Die Kriegsgefangene' (1899) and 'Goetz von Berlichingen'
(1902), have been less successful.

Cyrill Kistler (1848-1907) was spoken of some years ago as the man upon
whom Wagner's mantle had fallen, but his recent death has shattered the
hopes founded upon the promise of his early works. 'Kunihild,' a work
dealing with a heroic legend, was produced in 1883. It is a clever
imitation of the Wagnerian manner, except as regards the choruses, which
scarcely rise above the standard of the Liedertafel; but neither at its
production nor at an elaborate revival, which took place at Wuerzburg a
few years ago, did it meet with more than a _succes d'estime_. There
seems to be better work in 'Eulenspiegel,' a comic opera founded upon
Kotzebue's comedy. The music is instinct with genuine humour, and though
but remotely suggesting the methods of Wagner shows complete mastery of
technical resource.

The most important contribution to German opera made during the decade
that followed the death of Wagner was Humperdinck's 'Haensel und Gretel,'
which was produced in December 1893. Before that time the composer was
known to fame, at any rate so far as England is concerned, only by a
couple of cantatas and some arrangements of scenes from Wagner's works
for concert purposes, but at one bound he became the most popular living
operatic composer of Germany. The libretto of 'Haensel und Gretel' is a
very charming arrangement, in three scenes, of a familiar nursery tale.
The action opens in the cottage of Peter the broom-maker. Haensel and
Gretel, the two children, are left to keep house together. They soon
tire of their tasks, and Gretel volunteers to teach her brother how to
dance. In the middle of their romp, Gertrude their mother comes in, and
angrily packs them off into the wood to pick strawberries. Tired and
faint she sinks into a chair, bewailing the lot of the poor man's wife,
with empty cupboards and hungry mouths to be fed. Soon Peter's voice is
heard singing in the distance. He has had a good sale for his besoms,
and comes back laden with good cheer. But his delight is cut short by
the absence of the children, and when he finds that they are out in the
wood alone, he terrifies his wife with the story of the witch of
Schornstein, who is given to eating little children, and they both hurry
off to bring Haensel and Gretel home. Meanwhile, out in the forest the
children amuse themselves with picking strawberries and making flower
garlands, until the approach of night, when they find to their horror
that they have lost their way. They search for it in vain, and at last,
completely tired out, they sink down upon the moss beneath a spreading
tree. The Dustman--the German sleep-fairy--appears and throws dust in
their weary eyes. Together they sing their little evening hymn, and drop
off to sleep locked in each other's arms. Then the heavens open, and
down a shining staircase come the bright forms of angels, who group
themselves round the sleeping children, and watch over their innocent
slumbers until the break of day. Haensel and Gretel are aroused by the
Dew-fairy, who sprinkles his magic branch over them and drives the sleep
from their eyes. They tell each other of the wonderful dream which came
to both of them, and then, looking round for the first time, discover a
beautiful gingerbread house, close to where they were sleeping. This is
where the witch of the forest lives, who bakes little children into
gingerbread in her great oven, and eats them up. She catches Haensel and
Gretel, and nearly succeeds in her wicked schemes, but the children,
with great presence of mind, defeat her malice by pushing her into her
own oven. Then they free the other children who have been turned into
gingerbread through her magic spells, and the father and mother
opportunely appearing, all join in a hymn of thanksgiving for their
deliverance.

Humperdinck's music reproduces, with infinite art, the tender and
childlike charm of the delightful old fairy tale. His score is amazingly
elaborate, and his treatment of the guiding themes which compose it is
kaleidoscopic in its variety, yet the whole thing flows on as naturally
as a ballad. The voice-parts are always suave and melodious, and the
orchestral score, however complicated, never loses touch of consummate
musical beauty. Humperdinck's melody is founded upon the Volkslied, and
he uses at least one nursery tune with charming effect. The framework of
'Haensel und Gretel' is that bequeathed by Wagner, but the spirit which
animates and informs the work is so different from that of the Bayreuth
master, that there can be no suspicion of imitation, much less of
plagiarism. Humperdinck is the first German operatic composer of
distinct individuality since the death of Wagner. He has shown that the
methods of the great composer can be used as a garment to cover an
individuality as distinct as that of any writer in the history of opera.

Humperdinck's share of 'Die sieben Geislein,' a children's ballad opera
which was published some years ago, consists only of a few songs of an
unimportant character, which will not enhance his reputation.
'Koenigskinder,' which was produced in 1897, must be classed as a play
with incidental music rather than as an opera. The composer directed
that the accompanied dialogue, of which there is a good deal, should be
rhythmically chanted, but when the work came to be performed these
directions were practically ignored by the players. 'Koenigskinder' was
followed in 1902 by 'Dornroeschen,' another fairy play accompanied by
incidental music, which won little success, nor has good fortune
attended his latest opera, 'Die Heirath wider Willen' (1905).

Among the younger generation of German composers, mention must be made
of Max Schillings, whose very promising 'Ingwelde' (1894) has recently
been succeeded by a remarkable work entitled 'Moloch' (1907); and of
Wilhelm Kienzl, the composer of 'Der Evangelimann' (1895). In
'Ingwelde' Schillings followed the Wagnerian tradition almost too
faithfully, but 'Moloch' is a work of very distinct individuality. 'Der
Evangelimann,' on the other hand, is thoroughly eclectic in style, and
the influence not only of Wagner, but of Meyerbeer, Gounod and even
Mascagni, may be traced in its pages. Kienzl's later works have met with
little favour. 'Donna Diana' (1895), by a composer named Reznicek, is a
comic opera founded upon a Spanish subject, which has had a most
successful career in Germany during the past few years. It is elaborate
in construction, and indeed the score seems to be too complicated to
harmonise well with the comic incidents of the story. More recently the
composer has won success with a work on the subject of Till
Eulenspiegel. Heinrich Zoellner came to the front in 1899 with 'Die
versunkene Glocke,' an opera founded upon Gerhart Hauptmann's famous
play, which is said to reproduce the symbolic charm of the original with
conspicuous success. Eugene d'Albert, though English by birth, has for
so long identified himself with Germany, that the success of his comic
opera, 'Die Abreise' (1898), may most suitably be recorded here. His
more ambitious works have been less favourably received. Siegfried
Wagner, in spite of his parentage, seems to have founded his style
principally upon that of Humperdinck. His first opera, 'Der Baerenhaeuter'
(1899), was fairly successful, principally owing to a fantastic and
semi-comic libretto. 'Herzog Wildfang' (1901) and 'Der Kobold' (1904)
failed completely, nor does his latest work, 'Bruder Lustig' (1905),
raise very sanguine hopes as to its young composer's future career.
Another follower of Humperdinck is Eduard Poldini, whose clever and
charming 'Der Vagabund und die Prinzessin,' a graceful version of one of
Hans Andersen's stories, was given in London with success in 1906.

Mention must also be made of Felix Weingartner, whose 'Genesius' (1892)
and 'Orestes' (1902) are said to contain much fine music; of August
Bungert, whose trilogy founded upon the Odyssey has been received with
favour in Dresden, though it does not appear to have made much way
elsewhere; and of Hans Pfitzner, whose 'Rose von Liebesgarten' (1901) is
one of the most promising operas of the younger generation.

The most important figure in the world of German opera to-day is
unquestionably that of Richard Strauss. This is not the place to dilate
upon Strauss's achievements as a symphonic writer, which are
sufficiently well known to the world at large. His first opera,
'Guntram' (1894), was hardly more than an exercise in the manner of
Wagner, and made comparatively little impression. 'Feuersnoth' (1901)
was a far more characteristic production. It deals with an old legend of
the love of a sorcerer for a maiden. The sorcerer is rejected, and in
revenge he deprives the town in which the maiden lives of fire and
light. The townspeople press the maiden to relent, and her yielding is
signalised by a sudden blaze of splendour. Strauss's score shows to the
full the amazing command of polyphony and the bewildering richness and
variety of orchestration which have made his name famous. The plot of
'Feuersnoth,' however, was against it, and it does not seem to have won
a permanent success. 'Salome' (1906), on the other hand, has triumphed
in Italy and Paris as well as in Germany, and succeeded in scandalising
New York so seriously that it was withdrawn after a single performance.
'Salome' is a setting, almost unabbreviated, of Oscar Wilde's play of
that name, which itself owed much to a tale by Flaubert. The scene is
laid upon a terrace of Herod's palace, where soldiers are keeping watch
while the king holds revel within. Salome, the daughter of Herodias,
issues from the banquet chamber, troubled by Herod's gaze. The voice of
Jochanaan (John the Baptist), who is imprisoned in a cistern hard by, is
heard. Salome bids Narraboth, a young Assyrian, bring him forth. Dragged
from his living tomb, Jochanaan denounces the wickedness of Herodias,
but Salome has no ears for his curses. Fascinated by the strange beauty
of the prophet, she pours forth her passion in wild accents. Jochanaan
repulses her and retreats once more to his cistern. Herod and Herodias
now come forth from the banquet, and Herod bids Salome dance. She
extorts a promise from him that he will give her whatever she asks, even
to the half of his kingdom, and dances the dance of the seven veils. The
dance over, she demands the head of Jochanaan. Herod pleads with her in
vain, the executioner is sent into the cistern and the head of Jochanaan
is brought in upon a silver charger. Salome kisses the lifeless lips,
but Herod in wrath and horror cries to his soldiers: 'Kill this woman,'
and as the curtain falls she is crushed beneath their shields. Strauss
is the stormy petrel of modern music, and 'Salome' has aroused more
discussion than anything he has written. Many critics quite the reverse
of prudish have found its ethics somewhat difficult of digestion, while
conservative musicians hold up their hands in horror at its harmonic
audacity. The more advanced spirits find a strange exotic beauty in the
weird harmonies and infinitely suggestive orchestration, and contend
with some justice that a work of art must be judged as such, not as an
essay in didactic morality. The 'Salome' question may well be left for
time to settle, more especially as the subject and treatment of the work
combine to put its production upon the London stage beyond the limits of
immediate probability.

In modern times Singspiel has for the most part become merged in comic
opera, which, though originally an importation from France, has become
thoroughly acclimatised in Germany, and in the hands of such men as
Johann Strauss, Franz von Suppe, and Carl Milloecker, has produced work
of no little artistic interest, though scarcely coming within the scope
of this book. To the Singspiel, too, may be traced an exceedingly
unpretentious school of opera, dealing for the most part with homely and
sentimental subjects, of which the best-known representative is Victor
Nessler (1841-1890). Nessler's opera, 'Der Trompeter von Saekkingen,' is
still one of the most popular works in the repertory of German
opera-houses, and his 'Rattenfaenger von Hameln' is scarcely less of a
favourite. The first of these works is founded upon Scheffel's
well-known poem, and tells in artless fashion of the love of Jung
Werner, the trumpeter, for the daughter of the Baron von Schoenau; the
second deals with the story of the Hamelin rat-catcher, which Browning
has immortalised. Nessler has little more than a vein of simple melody
to recommend him, and his works have had no success beyond the frontiers
of Germany; but at home his flow of rather feeble sentimentality has
endeared him to every susceptible heart in the Fatherland.

Closely allied to the German school of opera is that of Bohemia, of
which the most famous representative is Smetana (1824-1884). Outside the
frontiers of his native land, Smetana was practically unknown until the
Vienna Exhibition of 1890, when his opera, 'Die verkaufte Braut,' was
produced for the first time in the Austrian capital. Since then it has
been played in many German opera-houses, and was performed in London in
1895, and again in 1907. The story is simplicity itself. Jenik, a young
peasant, and Marenka, the daughter of the rich farmer Krusina, love each
other dearly; but Kezal, a kind of go-between in the Bohemian
marriage-market, tells Krusina that he can produce a rich husband for
his daughter in the shape of Vasek, the son of Micha. The avaricious old
man jumps at the proposal, but Marenka will have nothing to say to the
arrangement, for Vasek is almost an idiot, and a stammerer as well.
Kezal then proceeds to buy Jenik out for three hundred gulden. The
latter, however, stipulates that in the agreement it shall only be set
down that Marenka is to marry the son of Micha. The contract is signed
and the money is paid, whereupon Jenik announces that he is a long-lost
son of Micha by a youthful marriage, and carries off the bride, to the
discomfiture of his enemies. If Smetana owes anything to anybody it is
to Mozart, whose form and system of orchestration his own occasionally
recalls, but his music is so thoroughly saturated with the melodies and
rhythms of Bohemia, that it is quite unnecessary to look for any source
of inspiration other than the composer's own native land. But although
Smetana's music is Bohemian to the core, he brings about his effects
like a true artist. The national colour is not laid on in smudges, but
tinges the whole fabric of the score. Smetana's other works are less
known outside Bohemia. 'Das Geheimniss' and 'Der Kuss' are comic operas
of a thoroughly national type, while 'Dalibor' and 'Libusa' deal with
stirring episodes of Bohemian history.

More famous than his master is Smetana's pupil Dvorak (1841-1904), yet
the latter seems to have had little real vocation for the stage. His
operas, 'Der Bauer ein Schelm' and 'Der Dickschaedel,' appear to follow
the style of Smetana very closely. They have been favourably received in
Bohemia, but the thoroughly national sentiment of the libretti must
naturally militate against their success elsewhere.

In Russia the development of opera, and indeed of music generally, is of
comparatively recent date. Glinka (1803-1857), the founder of the
school, is still perhaps its most famous representative, although his
operas, in spite of frequent trials, seem never to succeed beyond the
frontiers of Russia. The splendid patriotism of 'Life for the Czar'
(1836), his most famous work, endears him to the hearts of his
countrymen. The scene of the opera is laid in the seventeenth century,
when the Poles held Moscow and the fortunes of Russia were at the lowest
ebb. Michael Fedorovich Romanov has just been elected Czar, and upon him
the hopes of the people are centred. The Poles are determined to seize
the person of the Czar, and some of them, disguised as ambassadors,
summon the peasant Ivan Sussaninna to guide them to his retreat. Ivan
sacrifices his life for his master. He despatches his adopted son to
warn the Czar, and himself leads the Poles astray in the wild morasses
of the country. When they discover that they have been betrayed they put
Ivan to death, but not before he has had the satisfaction of knowing
that the Czar is in safety. The opera ends with the triumphal entry of
the Czar into Moscow.

'Russian and Ludmila' (1858), Glinka's second work, is founded upon a
fantastic Russian legend of magic and necromancy. It has not the
national and patriotic interest of 'Life for the Czar,' but as music it
deserves to rank higher. Berlioz thought very highly of it. Nevertheless
it may be doubted whether, at this time of day, there is any likelihood
of Glinka becoming popular in Western Europe. Glinka had an
extraordinary natural talent, and had he lived in closer touch with the
musical world, he might have become one of the great composers of the
century. Melody he had in abundance, and his feeling for musical form is
strong, though only partially developed. He had little dramatic
instinct, and it is singular that he should be known principally as a
composer for the stage. His treatment of the orchestra is brilliant and
effective, but the national element in his music is the _signe
particulier_ of his style. He rarely used actual Russian folk-tunes, but
his music is coloured throughout by the plaintive melancholy of the
national type. A composer, whose music smells so strongly of the soil,
can scarcely expect to be appreciated abroad.

Dargomishky (1813-1869) and Serov (1818-1871) are unfamiliar names to
Englishmen. The former during his lifetime was content to follow in the
steps of Glinka, but his opera, 'The Marble Guest,' a treatment of the
story of Don Juan, which was produced after his death, broke entirely
fresh ground. This work is completely modern in thought and expression,
and may be regarded as the foundation of modern Russian opera. Serov was
an enthusiastic imitator of Wagner, and even his own countrymen admit
that his works have little musical value.

Rubinstein (1829-1895) wrote many works for the stage, and during the
last years of his life founded something like a new form of art in his
sacred operas, 'Moses' and 'Christus,' the latter of which was produced
after his death at Bremen. Critics differ very much as to Rubinstein's
merits as a composer, but as to the quality of his work for the stage
there can hardly be two opinions. His music is essentially undramatic.
None of his works, at any rate outside Russia, has achieved more than a
passing success. 'The Demon,' a strange story of the love of a demon for
a Russian princess, has some fine music in it, but the story is almost
totally devoid of incident, and the opera as a whole is intolerably
wearisome.

Of the younger school of Russian operatic composers it is almost
impossible to speak with any authority, since their works are rarely
performed in Western Europe. Tchaikovsky's 'Eugene Onegin' is
occasionally given in London, but has won little success. Much of the
music is interesting, but the disconnected character of the libretto and
the lack of incident fully account for the scanty favour with which it
is received. 'Le Flibustier,' an opera by Cesar Cui, was performed in
Paris a few years ago with even less success. Borodin's 'Prince Igor,'
and 'Die Mainacht' by Rimsky-Korsakov, are thought highly of by the
fellow-countrymen of the composers, but neither work has succeeded in
crossing the frontier of Russia.

Poland has not hitherto taken a prominent place in the history of opera,
and the successful production of 'Manru' (1901), an opera by Ignaz
Paderewski, the world-famous pianist, is hardly to be taken as the
foundation of a new school. The story deals with the fortunes of a
gipsy, Manru, who marries Ulana, a peasant girl, but is won back to
gipsy life by the fascinations of Asa, the princess of his tribe. He
rejoins his own people in spite of Ulana's entreaties and a love-potion
which she administers, but is killed by a gipsy rival, while Ulana in
despair throws herself into a lake. Paderewski's music is thoroughly
German in style, but he makes clever use of gipsy tunes and rhythms,
which give a welcome variety to the score.

The genius of Scandinavian musicians seems to have little in common with
the stage. The works of Hartmann and Weyse are not known beyond the
boundaries of Denmark. Of late years, however, works by August Enna, a
young Danish composer, have been performed in various German towns. 'Die
Hexe' and 'Cleopatra' won a good deal of success, but the composer's
more recent operas, 'Aucassin und Nicolette' and 'Das Streichholzmaedel,'
have met with little favour.




CHAPTER XIV

ENGLISH OPERA

BALFE--WALLACE--BENEDICT--GORING THOMAS--MACKENZIE
STANFORD--SULLIVAN--SMYTH


Soon after the death of Purcell, the craze for Italian opera seems to
have banished native art completely from the English stage. At the
beginning of the eighteenth century, the most popular form of
entertainment consisted of operas set to a mixture of English and
Italian words, but after a time the town, to quote Addison, tired of
understanding only half the work, determined for the future to
understand none of it, and these hybrid works gave place, after the
arrival of Handel, to the splendid series of masterpieces extending from
'Rinaldo' to 'Deidamia.' From time to time attempts were made to gain a
footing for English opera in London, and in 1728 'The Beggar's Opera'
achieved a triumph so instantaneous and overwhelming as seriously to
affect the success of Handel's Italian enterprise at the Haymarket
Theatre. It is supposed, that the origin of 'The Beggar's Opera' is due
to a remark of Swift's that 'a Newgate pastoral might be made a pretty
thing.' Gay borrowed the idea, and constructed 'The Beggar's Opera'
round a cut-throat highwayman of the name of Macheath, while Dr. Pepusch
arranged the music from old English and Scotch melodies, together with
some of the most popular tunes of the day. The success of the work was
very remarkable. It was performed sixty-two times during the first
season, and even now is still to be heard occasionally. It was the
foundation of that exceedingly simple form of art, the English ballad
opera, which was so widely popular in London during the closing years of
the eighteenth century, and early in the nineteenth. At first composers
availed themselves largely of traditional or popular tunes in arranging
the music which diversified the dialogue of these works, but as time
went on they became more ambitious, and the operas of Storace and his
contemporaries are for the most entirely original.

Meanwhile an attempt had been made by Arne to adapt the mannerisms of
the Italian stage to English opera. His 'Artaxerxes,' which was produced
in 1762, was constructed strictly upon the lines of Italian opera, being
made up throughout entirely of airs and recitative. It had a most
encouraging reception, but the enterprise seems to have borne little
fruit, for after a few years we hear no more of English opera 'after the
Italian manner,' and London seems to have been content with Italian
opera and ballad operas of the already familiar type. The traditions of
the latter were successfully carried on by Storace, a naturalised
Italian, Dibdin, Shield, Hook, and many others, many of whose songs are
still popular, though the works of which they once formed part have
long been forgotten. The ballad operas of these composers were of
unimaginable _naivete_ and depended entirely upon their simple
tunefulness for such favour as they won. Sir Henry Bishop (1786-1855)
raised the artistic standard of this form of art considerably. There is
real musical interest in some of his concerted pieces, and many of his
choruses, which are familiar to us under the incorrect name of glees,
are capitally written. Had Bishop possessed the necessary energy and
enterprise, he might have founded a school of English opera which would
have compared favourably even with its continental contemporaries.

To John Barnett (1802-1890) belongs the credit of writing the first
English opera, strictly so called, since Arne's 'Artaxerxes.' 'The
Mountain Sylph,' which was produced in 1834, fulfils all the
requirements of the operatic form. It is besides a work of genuine charm
and power, and retained its popularity for many years.

It is unfortunate for the memory of Balfe (1808-1870) that the one opera
by which he is now remembered, the perennial 'Bohemian Girl,' should be
perhaps the least meritorious of his many works. It lives solely by
reason of the insipid tunefulness of one or two airs, regardless of the
fact that the plot is transcendentally foolish, and that the words are a
shining example of the immortal balderdash of the poet Bunn. In the
first act Thaddeus, an exiled Polish rebel, finds refuge among a tribe
of gipsies, who disguise him in order to enable him to escape his
pursuers. While among them he saves the life of Arline, the six-year-old
daughter of Count Arnheim, an Austrian nobleman. Arnheim, in delight at
recovering his child, invites Thaddeus and his companion Devilshoof, the
leader of the gipsies, to a banquet, at which the Emperor's health is
proposed. The two supposed gipsies refuse to drink it, whereupon
Devilshoof is seized and imprisoned, while Thaddeus, at the Count's
earnest entreaty, is allowed to go in freedom. Devilshoof contrives to
make his escape, and in revenge for the treatment he has received steals
the little Arline, whom he carries off to the gipsy camp. Twelve years
have passed when the second act begins. Arline has grown up to
womanhood, but all the other characters remain at precisely the same age
as in the first act. Thaddeus loves Arline, and is himself beloved by
the gipsy queen, who vows the innocent girl's ruin. By her machinations
Arline is accused of theft, and is taken to be tried by her own father.
The inevitable recognition ensues, and upon Thaddeus disclosing his true
position he is rewarded with Airline's hand. During the betrothal feast
the gipsy queen attempts Arline's life, but the shot, in a manner which
even Bunn himself might have found difficult to explain, recoils and
strikes her who aimed it.

Balfe had to the full his share of that vein of maudlin sentiment which
is typical of one side of the Irish character. He appears to have had
little ambition, and was content throughout his career to fit his
saccharine melodies to whatever words the librettists of the day chose
to supply. No one can deny him the possession of fluent and commonplace
melody, but there his claim to musicianship ends.

Wallace (1814-1865) was more of a musician than Balfe, but his
best-known work, 'Maritana,' is but little superior to 'The Bohemian
Girl.' Maritana, a street singer, has attracted the attention of the
King of Spain. Don Jose, one of the courtiers, determines to help the
King in his amour, in order that he may afterwards use his infidelity as
a means of advancing himself in the favour of the Queen. There is a law
against duelling in the streets of Madrid, and a certain spendthrift
nobleman, Don Caesar de Bazan, has rendered himself liable to death for
protecting a poor boy named Lazarillo from arrest. Don Jose promises the
condemned man that he shall be shot instead of hanged, if he will
consent to marry a veiled lady an hour before the execution, intending
thus to give Maritana a position at court as the widow of a nobleman.
Don Caesar consents to the arrangement, but Lazarillo takes the bullets
out of the soldiers' rifles, so that the execution does not end fatally,
and Maritana is not a widow after all. Don Caesar finds his way to a
villa in the outskirts of Madrid, where he not only has the satisfaction
of putting a stop to the King's attentions to Maritana, but performs the
same kind office for the Queen, who is being persecuted by Don Jose. For
the latter performance he receives a free pardon, and is made Governor
of Valentia. 'Lurline,' an opera constructed upon the Rhenish legend of
the Loreley, has perhaps more musical merit than 'Maritana,' but the
libretto is more than usually indefinite.

Wallace rivalled Balfe in the facility and shallowness of his melody.
Yet with all their weaknesses, his operas contain many tunes which have
wound themselves into popular affection, and in the eyes of Bank-Holiday
audiences, 'Maritana' stands second only to 'The Bohemian Girl.'

Sir Julius Benedict (1804-1885), though German by birth, may
conveniently be classed as an Englishman. Trained in the school of
Weber, he was a musician of a very different calibre from Balfe and
Wallace. His earlier works, 'The Gipsy's Warning' and 'The Brides of
Venice,' are now forgotten, but 'The Lily of Killarney,' which was
produced in 1862, is still deservedly popular.

It is founded upon Boucicault's famous drama, 'The Colleen Bawn.'
Hardress Cregan, a young Irish landowner, has married Eily O'Connor, a
beautiful peasant girl of Killarney. The marriage has been kept secret,
and Hardress, finding that an opportunity has arisen of repairing the
fallen fortunes of his house by a rich marriage, contemplates
repudiating Eily. Eily refuses to part with her 'marriage lines,'
whereupon Danny Mann, Hardress's faithful henchman, attempts to drown
her in the lake. She is saved by Myles na Coppaleen, a humble lover of
her own, who shoots Danny Mann. Eily's narrow escape has the result of
bringing Hardress to his senses. He renounces his schemes of ambition,
and makes public his marriage with Eily. Benedict's music touches a
higher level than had been reached by English opera before. He was, of
course, directly inspired by Weber, but there runs through the opera a
vein of plaintive melancholy which is all his own. The form in which
'The Lily of Killarney' is cast is now somewhat superannuated, but for
tenderness of melody and unaffected pathos, it will compare very
favourably with many more pretentious works which have succeeded it. Sir
George Macfarren (1813-1887) was a prolific writer for the stage, but of
all his works 'Robin Hood' is the only one which is still occasionally
performed. It has little of the buoyancy which the theme demands, but
there is a great deal of sound writing in the concerted music, and some
of the ballads are tuneful enough in a rather commonplace way. Edward
James Loder (1813-1865) was a good musician, and under more favourable
conditions might have produced work of permanent interest. His
best-known work is 'The Night Dancers,' an opera founded upon the legend
which has been used by the Italian composer Puccini in his 'Le Villi.'

About the middle of the nineteenth century the destinies of English
opera were controlled by a company presided over by Miss Pyne and Mr.
Harrison, for which Balfe and Macfarren wrote a good many of their
works. In more recent times the place of this institution was taken by
the Carl Rosa company, which was founded in 1875 by a German violinist
named Carl Rosa. Such opportunities as were presented to English
musicians, during the latter part of the last century, of hearing their
works sung upon the stage were principally due to his efforts. One of
the first works actually written in response to a commission by Carl
Rosa was 'Esmeralda,' an opera by Arthur Goring Thomas (1851-1892),
which was produced in 1883. It is founded upon Victor Hugo's 'Notre
Dame,' and the libretto was written by T. Marzials and A. Randegger.

Esmeralda, a gipsy street singer, is loved by the profligate priest
Claude Frollo, who with the assistance of Quasimodo, the deformed
bell-ringer of Notre Dame, tries to carry her off by night. She is
rescued by Phoebus de Chateaupers, the captain of the guard, who
speedily falls in love with her. Frollo escapes, but Quasimodo is
captured, though, at Esmeralda's entreaty, Phoebus sets him once more at
liberty. In gratitude the dwarf vows himself to her service. Frollo is
mad with rage at seeing Phoebus preferred to himself; he assassinates
the captain and accuses Esmeralda of the crime. She is condemned to
death, but is saved by the appearance of Phoebus, who was not killed
after all, and opportunely turns up in time to rescue Esmeralda. Frollo
attempts once more to murder Phoebus, but the blow is received instead
by Quasimodo, who sacrifices himself for Esmeralda's happiness. When the
opera was produced in French at Covent Garden in 1890, the composer
introduced several alterations into the score. An elaborate air for
Esmeralda in the prison was the most important of the additions, and
the close of the opera was also materially changed. It was generally
thought, however, that the original version was the more successful.
Thomas's training and sympathies were thoroughly French, and except for
the words 'Esmeralda' has very little claim to be called an English
opera. The score is extremely graceful and charming, and it is only at
the more dramatic moments that the composer fails to do justice to his
theme.

In 'Nadeshda,' an opera written upon a Russian subject, which was
produced in 1885, there was much charming music, but the libretto was
uninteresting, and the success of the work never equalled that of its
predecessor. The most attractive part of the opera was the delightfully
quaint and original ballet music, to which local colour was given by
clever orchestration and ingenious use of Russian rhythms.

To the initiative of the Carl Rosa company was due the production of Mr.
Frederick Corder's 'Nordisa,' a work of undoubted talent though
suffering from a fatal lack of homogeneity, and of two operas by Sir
Alexander Mackenzie. The first of these, 'Colomba,' was produced in
1883. It achieved a success, but the gloomy character of the libretto
prevented it from becoming really popular. It is founded upon Prosper
Merimee's famous Corsican tale. The father of Orso and Colomba della
Rebbia has been treacherously murdered by two of the family of
Barracini. Colomba is burning for vengeance, but her brother is an
officer in the French army, and has been absent from Corsica for many
years. When he returns she finds that his love for Lydia, the daughter
of the Count de Nevers, has driven thoughts of revenge from his mind.
She succeeds, however, in rousing him to action, and one day he kills
both the murderers, though wounded himself by a cowardly ambush. He has
to take to the mountains for refuge, and there he remains, tended by
Lydia and Colomba, until news of his pardon comes. It is too late,
however, to save the life of Colomba, who has been mortally wounded in
endeavouring to divert the soldiers from Orso's hiding-place.
Mackenzie's music is exceedingly clever and effective. He uses guiding
themes with judgment and skill, and his employment of some old Corsican
melodies is also very happy. 'Colomba' is a work which eminently merits
revival, and it will be probably heard of again. 'The Troubadour,' which
was produced a few years later, failed completely. The story is
thoroughly dull, and completely failed to inspire the musician. Sir
Alexander Mackenzie has recently completed the score of an opera on the
subject of Dickens's 'Cricket on the Hearth,' the production of which is
awaited with much interest.

During the closing years of the nineteenth century the fortunes of
English opera, never very brilliant, reached a lower point than at any
time in our musical history. The Carl Rosa opera company fell upon evil
days, and was compelled to restrict its energies almost entirely to the
performance of stock operas, while at Covent Garden the opportunities
afforded to native composers were few and far between. In these
disheartening circumstances it is not surprising that English musicians
were not encouraged to devote their powers to a form of art in which so
little prospect of success could be entertained. What they might have
achieved under happier conditions the operatic career of Sir Charles
Stanford suggests in the most convincing manner. Stanford is a composer
whose natural endowment conspicuously fits him for operatic work, and he
has grasped such opportunities as have been vouchsafed to him with
almost unvarying success. Had he been blessed with a more congenial
environment he would have taken rank with the foremost operatic
composers of his time.

His first opera, 'The Veiled Prophet,' was originally performed at
Hanover in 1881, but was not actually heard in London until it was
produced at Covent Garden in 1894. The libretto, an admirable
condensation of Moore's well-known poem from the pen of Mr. W. Barclay
Squire, gave the composer ample opportunities for picturesque and
dramatic effect. Stanford's music is tuneful and vigorous throughout,
and such weaknesses as are occasionally perceptible are due rather to
inexperience of the stage than to any failure in inspiration.

'The Canterbury Pilgrims,' written to a libretto by Gilbert a Beckett,
which was produced in 1884, was happily named by some one at the time
an English 'Meistersinger,' and indeed it is not difficult to imagine
what model Stanford had in his mind when writing his brilliant and
genial opera, Geoffrey, the host of the Tabard Inn, has a pretty
daughter named Cicely, who is loved by the jovial apprentice, Hubert.
Geoffrey finds out their attachment, and determines to sent Cicely upon
a visit to an aunt in Kent, in company with a body of pilgrims who are
just starting for Canterbury. Sir Christopher Synge, a knight of Kent,
has cast sheep's eyes upon the pretty girl, and hearing of her intended
trip bids his factotum, Hal o' the Chepe, assemble a company of
ragamuffins, and carry her off on her way to Canterbury. Hubert
contrives to get enlisted among them, so as to be able to watch over his
sweetheart, and Dame Margery, Sir Christopher's wife, also in disguise,
joins the pilgrims, in the hope of keeping an eye upon her errant
spouse. In the second act the pilgrims arrive at Sidenbourne. Dame
Margery helps the lovers to escape, and taking Cicely's place receives
the vows and sighs of her husband. In the third act the lovers have been
overtaken and caught by the irate Geoffrey, and Hubert is dragged to
trial before Sir Christopher. After an amusing trial scene, the knight
discovers that Cicely is one of the culprits, and at once pardons them
both. Geoffrey is persuaded to forgive the young couple, and all ends
happily, Stanford's music is a happy compromise between old and new. In
his use of guiding themes, and in his contrapuntal treatment of the
orchestra he follows Wagner, but his employment of new devices is
tempered by due regard for established tradition. He is happiest in
dealing with humorous situations, and in the lighter parts of the opera
his music has a bustling gaiety which fits the situation very happily.
In the more passionate scenes he is less at home, and the love duet in
particular is by no means entirely satisfactory. Stanford's next work,
'Savonarola,' was performed in London for the first time by a German
company under Dr. Hans Richter in 1884. Interesting as much of the music
is, the performance was not successful, partly owing to the almost
unmitigated gloom of the libretto. Far the best part of the work, both
musically and dramatically, is the prologue, which tells of the love of
Savonarola for Clarice, of her marriage, and of his renouncement of the
world. The merit of this scene is so great that it might be worth the
composer's while to produce it as a one-act opera, in which form it
would be safe to predict for it a genuine success.

Stanford's next work for the stage was 'Shamus O'Brien,' a romantic
opera dealing with a typically Irish subject, which was produced in 1896
with great success. The form of the work is that of a genuine comic
opera, the dialogue being interspersed throughout with music, but
although less ambitious in form than his earlier works, 'Shamus O'Brien'
has a deeper artistic importance. With all its cleverness and ingenuity,
'The Canterbury Pilgrims' is German in method and expression, and it is
merely by the accident of language that it can be classed as British
opera at all. In 'Shamus O'Brien' the composer drew his inspiration from
the melodies and rhythms of his native Ireland, and the result is that
his work ranks as an original and independent effort, instead of being
merely a brilliant exercise.

In 1901 Sir Charles Stanford's 'Much Ado about Nothing' was produced at
Covent Garden. The libretto by Julian Sturgis is a clever adaptation of
Shakespeare's comedy, in which the action is judiciously compressed into
four scenes without any incidents of importance being omitted. First we
have the ball at Leonato's house, with some love-making for Claudio and
Hero, and a wit-combat between Beatrice and Benedick. Here, too, Don
John hatches his plot against Hero's honour, and Don Pedro unfolds his
scheme for tricking Beatrice and Benedick into mutual love. The second
act takes place in Leonato's garden. Claudio serenades his mistress, who
comes down from her balcony and joins him in a duet. Then follows the
cozening of Benedick, and the act ends effectively by Don John showing
to Claudio the supposed Hero admitting Borachio to her chamber. The
third scene is in the church, following Shakespeare very closely, and
the last takes place in an open square in Messina with Hero's tomb on
one side, where, after a scene with Dogberry, Borachio confesses his
crime, and Hero is restored to her lover. Stanford's music is a masterly
combination of delicate fancy and brilliant humour, and when serious
matters are in hand he is not found wanting. A distinctive feature of
the work is the absence of Wagnerian influence. Stanford uses guiding
themes, it is true, and often in a most suggestive manner, but they do
not form the basis of his score. If foreign influence there be in 'Much
Ado about Nothing,' it is that of Verdi in his 'Falstaff' manner. Like
Verdi Stanford strikes a true balance between voices and instruments.
His orchestra prattles merrily along, underlining each situation in turn
with happy emphasis, but it never attempts to dethrone the human voice
from its pride of place. Like the blithe Beatrice, 'Much Ado about
Nothing' was born under a star that danced. It overflows with delicious
melody, and its orchestration is the _ne plus ultra_ of finished
musicianship. Since its production in London it has been performed with
great success in the provinces by the Moody-Manners opera company, and
has lately been produced in Germany.

Dr. Frederic Cowen is another of our English musicians who, in more
favourable circumstances, would doubtless have proved himself an
operatic composer of distinction. 'Pauline,' a work founded upon 'The
Lady of Lyons,' which was played by the Carl Rosa company in 1876, seems
to have won little success. 'Thorgrim,' produced by the same company in
1889, was more fortunate. The plot is founded upon an Icelandic saga,
and has but little dramatic interest. There is much charm in Dr. Cowen's
music, and some of the lighter scenes in the opera are gracefully
treated, but his talent is essentially delicate rather than powerful,
and the fierce passions of the Vikings scarcely come within its scope.

'Signa' (1893), an opera founded upon Ouida's novel of that name, showed
traces of Italian influence. It was produced at Milan with considerable
success, and was afterwards given in London. In 'Harold' (1895), Dr.
Cowen attempted too ambitious a task. The tale of the conquest of
England was ill suited to his delicate muse, and the opera achieved
little more than a _succes d'estime_.

Sir Arthur Sullivan (1842-1900) was the most successful English composer
of opera during the later years of the nineteenth century. His name is
of course principally associated with the long series of light operas
written in conjunction with Mr. W.S. Gilbert; but it must not be
forgotten that he also essayed grand opera with no little success.

The experiment made by the Carl Rosa company in 1899 of playing his
early oratorio, 'The Martyr of Antioch,' as an opera had, not
unnaturally, very little success, but 'Ivanhoe' (1891) showed that
Sullivan could adapt his style to the exigencies of grand opera with
singular versatility. 'Ivanhoe' was handicapped by a patchy and unequal
libretto, but it contained a great deal of good music, and we have
probably not heard the last of it yet. For the present generation,
however, Sullivan's fame rests almost entirely upon his comic operas,
which indeed have already attained something like the position of
classics and may prove, it is sincerely to be hoped, the foundation of
that national school of opera which has been so often debated and so
ardently desired, but is still, alas! so far from practical realisation.

Sullivan's first essay in comic opera dates from the year 1867, which
saw the production of his 'Contrabandista' and 'Cox and Box,' both
written to libretti by Sir Frank Burnand, and both showing not merely
admirable musicianship and an original vein of melody, but an
irresistible sense of humour and a rare faculty for expressing it in
music. 'Thespis' (1871) first brought him into partnership with Mr.
Gilbert, a partnership which was further cemented by 'Trial by Jury'
(1875). It was 'Trial by Jury' that opened the eyes of connoisseurs to
the possibilities lying within the grasp of these two young men, whose
combined talents had produced a work so entirely without precedent in
the history of English or indeed of any music. The promise of 'Trial by
Jury' was amply borne out by 'The Sorcerer' (1877), which remains in the
opinion of many the best of the whole series of Gilbert and Sullivan
operas--but indeed there is hardly one of them that has not at one time
or another been preferred above its fellows by expert opinion. 'The
Sorcerer' naturally gave Sullivan more scope than 'Trial by Jury.' Here
for the first time he showed what he could do in what may be called his
old English vein, in reproduction of the graceful dance measures of old
time, and in imitations of Elizabethan madrigals so fresh and tuneful
that they seem less the resuscitation of a style long dead than the
creation of an entirely new art-form. In a different vein was the
burlesque incantation, a masterpiece of musical humour, in which the
very essence of Mr. Gilbert's strange topsy-turvydom seems transmuted
into sound.

In 'H.M.S. Pinafore' (1878) Sullivan scored his first great popular
success. 'The Sorcerer' had appealed to the few; 'Pinafore' carried the
masses by storm. In humour and in musicianship alike it is less subtle
than its predecessor, but it triumphed by sheer dash and high spirits.
There is a smack of the sea in music and libretto alike. 'Pinafore' was
irresistible, and Sullivan became the most popular composer of the day.
'The Pirates of Penzance' (1880) followed the lines of 'Pinafore,' with
humour perhaps less abundant but with an added touch of refinement.
There are passages in 'The Pirates' tenderer in tone, one might almost
say more pathetic, than anything Sullivan had previously written,
passages which gave more than a hint of the triumphs he was later to win
in that mingling of tears and laughter of which he had the secret In
'Patience' (1881) musician and librettist mutually agreed to leave the
realm of farcical extravagance, and to turn to satire of a peculiarly
keen-edged and delicate kind--that satire which caresses while it cuts,
and somehow contrives to win sympathy for its object even when it is
most mordant. There are people nowadays who have been known to declare
that the "aesthetic" movement had no existence outside the imagination of
Mr. Gilbert and 'Mr. Punch.' In the eighties, however, everybody
believed in it, and believed too that 'Patience' killed it. What is
quite certain is that, whoever killed it, 'Patience' embalmed it in
odours and spices of the most fragrant and costly description, so that
it has remained a thing of beauty even to our own day. In 'Iolanthe'
(1882) Mr. Gilbert reached the dizziest height of topsy-turvydom to
which he ever climbed, and set Sullivan to solve what was perhaps the
most difficult problem of his whole career. To bring the atmosphere of
fairyland into the House of Lords was a task which the most accomplished
master of musical satire might well have refused, but Sullivan came
victoriously through the ordeal. His 'Iolanthe' music, with its blending
of things aerial with things terrene, and its contrast between the solid
qualities of our hereditary legislators and the irresponsible ecstasy of
fairyland is one of the most surprising feats of musical imagination
that even his career can furnish. In 'Princess Ida' (1884), which is, so
to speak, a burlesque of a burlesque, his task was easier. 'Princess
Ida' contains some of his most brilliant excursions into the realm of
parody--parodies of grand opera, parodies of the traditional Handelian
manner, parodies of sentimental love-making--but it also contains some
of the purest and most beautiful music he ever wrote. Some of Sullivan's
melodies, indeed, would be more fitting on the lips of Tennyson's
romantic princess than on those of Mr. Gilbert's burlesque
"suffragette". 'Princess Ida' was not appreciated at its true value and
still awaits its revenge, but in 'The Mikado' (1885) the two
collaborators scored the greatest success of their career. The freshness
and novelty of its surroundings--Japan had not then, so to speak, become
the property of the man in the street--counted for something in the
triumph of 'The Mikado,' but it is unquestionably one of the very best
of the series. Mr. Gilbert never wrote wittier or more brilliant
dialogue, and Sullivan never dazzled his admirers by more astonishing
feats of musicianship. 'Ruddigore' (1887) was less successful than any
of its predecessors. If the satire of 'Princess Ida' was just a shade
above the heads of the Savoy audience, the satire of 'Ruddigore' was
perhaps a shade below them. 'Ruddigore' is a burlesque of transpontine
melodrama, and a very good burlesque too; but the Savoy audience knew
next to nothing about transpontine melodrama, and so the satire was
missed and the piece fell flat. It was a pity, because Sullivan's music
was in his happiest manner. There may yet, however, be a future for
'Ruddigore,' 'The Yeomen of the Guard' (1888) opened fresh ground. For
the moment Mr. Gilbert turned his back upon topsy-turvydom and Sullivan
approached the frontiers of grand opera.

'The Yeomen of the Guard' has a serious plot, and at times lingers on
the threshold of tragedy. Sullivan caught the altered spirit of his
collaborator with perfect sympathy, and struck a note of romantic
feeling unique in his career. With 'The Gondoliers' (1889) the scene
brightened again, and merriment reigned supreme once more. Perhaps at
times there was a suspicion of weariness in Mr. Gilbert's wit, and some
of Sullivan's melodies had not all the old distinction of manner, but
the piece was an incarnation of liveliness and gaiety, and its success
rivalled the historic glories of 'The Mikado.' With 'The Gondoliers'
came the first solution of continuity in the Gilbert and Sullivan
partnership. Differences arose; Mr. Gilbert retired from the councils of
the Savoy Theatre, and Sullivan had to look out for a new collaborator.
He found one in Mr. Sydney Grundy, and their 'Haddon Hall' was produced
in 1892. In spite of charming music, reflecting very gracefully the old
English atmosphere of the story, its success was only moderate, and the
world of music was much relieved to hear that the differences between
Mr. Gilbert and the Savoy authorities had been adjusted, and that the
two famous collaborators were to join forces once more. Unfortunately
'Utopia' (1893) echoed but faintly the magical harmonies of the past.
The old enchantment was gone; the spell was shattered. Both
collaborators seemed to have lost the clue that had so often led to
triumph. Again they drifted apart, and Sullivan turned once more to his
old friend, Sir Frank Burnand. Together they produced 'The Chieftain'
(1894), a revised and enlarged version of their early indiscretion, 'The
Contrabandista.' Success still held aloof, and for the last time
Sullivan and Mr. Gilbert joined forces. In 'The Grand Duke' (1896)
there were fitful gleams of the old splendour, notably in an amazing
sham--Greek chorus, which no one but Sullivan could have written, but
the piece could not for a moment be compared to even the weakest of the
earlier operas. The fate of 'The Beauty Stone' (1898), written to a
libretto by Messrs Pinero and Comyns Carr, was even more deplorable.
Fortunately Sullivan's collaboration with Captain Basil Hood brought him
an Indian summer of inspiration and success. 'The Rose of Persia'
(1900), if not upon the level of his early masterpieces, contained
better music than he had written since the days of 'The Gondoliers,' and
at least one number--the marvellous Dervish quartet--that for sheer
invention and musicianship could hardly be matched even in 'The Mikado'
itself. There was a great deal of charming music, too, in 'The Emerald
Isle' (1901), which Sullivan left unfinished at his death, and Mr.
Edward German completed.

During his lifetime, Sullivan was called the English Auber by people who
wanted to flatter him, and the English Offenbach by people who wanted to
snub him. Neither was a very happy nickname. He might more justly have
been called the English Lortzing, since he undoubtedly learnt more than
a little from the composer of 'Czar und Zimmermann,' whose comic operas
he heard during his student days at Leipzig. But Sullivan owed very
little to anyone. His genius was thoroughly his own and thoroughly
English, and in that lies his real value to posterity. For if we are
ever to have a national English opera, we shall get it by writing
English music, not by producing elaborate exercises in the manner of
Wagner, Verdi, Massenet, Strauss, or anybody else. Most great artistic
enterprises spring from humble sources, and our young lions need not be
ashamed of producing a mere comic opera or two before attacking a
full-fledged music-drama. Did not Wagner himself recommend a budding
bard to start his musical career with a Singspiel? It is safest as a
rule to begin building operations from the foundation, and a better
foundation for a school of English opera than Sullivan's series of comic
operas could hardly be desired.

In his younger days Sullivan had many disciples. Alfred Cellier, the
composer of the world-famous 'Dorothy,' was the best of them. Edward
Solomon was hardly more than a clever imitator. The mantle of Sullivan
seems now to have fallen on Mr. Edward German, who besides completing
Sullivan's unfinished 'Emerald Isle,' won brilliant success with his
enchanting 'Merrie England.' His 'Princess of Kensington' was saddled
with a dull libretto, but the music was hardly inferior to that of its
predecessor, and much the same may be said of his latest work 'Tom
Jones.'

The recent performances of English composers in the field of grand opera
have not been very encouraging. Few indeed are the opportunities offered
to our native musicians of winning distinction on the lyric stage, and
of late we have been regaled with the curious spectacle of English
composers setting French or German libretti in the hope of finding in
foreign theatres the hearing that is denied them in their own. Miss
Ethel Smyth is the most prominent and successful of the composers whose
reputation has been made abroad. Her 'Fantasio' has not been given in
England, but 'Der Wald,' an opera in one act, after having been produced
in Germany was given at Covent Garden in 1902 with conspicuous success.
The libretto, which is the work of the composer herself, is concise and
dramatic. Heinrich the forester loves Roeschen, the woodman's daughter,
but on the eve of their marriage he has the misfortune to attract the
notice of Iolanthe, the mistress of his liege lord the Landgrave Rudolf.
He rejects her advances, and in revenge she has him stabbed by her
followers. This is the bare outline of the story, but the value of the
work lies in the highly poetical and imaginative framework in which it
is set. Behind the puny passions of man looms the vast presence of the
eternal forest, the mighty background against which the children of
earth fret their brief hour and pass into oblivion. The note which
echoes through the drama is struck in the opening scene--a tangled brake
deep in the heart of the great stillness, peopled by nymphs and fauns
whose voices float vaguely through the twilight. Every scene in the
drama is tinged with the same mysterious influence, until at the close
the spirit-voices chant their primeval hymn over the bodies of the
lovers in the gathering night. Miss Smyth's music has the same mastering
unity. The voice of the forest is the keynote of her score. Perhaps it
can hardly be said that she has altogether succeeded in translating
into music the remarkable conception which is the foundation of her
libretto. Had she done so, she might at once have taken her place by the
side of Wagner, the only composer of modern times who has handled a
philosophical idea of this kind in music with any notable success. But
her music has an individual strain of romance, which stamps her as a
composer of definite personality, while in the more dramatic scenes she
shows a fine grip of the principles of stage effect. Her latest work
'Strandrecht,' in English 'The Wreckers' (1906), was produced at
Leipzig, and shortly afterwards was given at Prague. It has not yet
found its way to London. The scene is laid in Cornwall in the eighteenth
century. The inhabitants of that wild coast, though fervent Methodists,
live by 'wrecking,' in which they are encouraged by their minister.
Thurza, the minister's faithless wife, alone protests against their
cruelty and hypocrisy, and persuades her lover, a young fisherman, to
light fires in order to warn mariners from the dangerous coast. The
treachery, as it seems to the rest of the villagers, of Thurza and her
lover is discovered, and after a rough-and-ready trial they are left in
a cavern close to the sea to be overwhelmed by the rising tide. Miss
Smyth's music is spoken of as strongly dramatic, and marked by a keen
sense of characterisation.

The operas of Mr. Isidore de Lara, a composer who, in spite of his name,
is said to be of English extraction, may conveniently be mentioned
here. It is generally understood that the production of these works at
Covent Garden was due to causes other than their musical value, but in
any case they do not call for detailed criticism. Mr. de Lara's earlier
works, 'The Light of Asia,' 'Amy Robsart,' and 'Moina' failed
completely. There is better work in 'Messaline' (1899). The musical
ideas are poor in quality, but the score is put together in a
workmanlike manner, and the orchestration is often clever. The libretto,
which recounts the intrigues of the Empress Messalina with two brothers,
Hares and Helion, a singer and a gladiator, is in the highest degree
repellent, and it would need far better music than Mr. de Lara's to
reconcile a London audience to so outrageous a subject. Mr. de Lara's
latest production, 'Sanga' (1906), does not seem to have sustained the
promise of 'Messaline.' Another composer whom necessity has driven to
ally his music to a foreign libretto is Mr. Herbert Bunning, whose opera
'La Princesse Osra' was produced at Covent Garden in 1902. Mr. Alick
Maclean, whose 'Quentin Durward' and 'Petruccio' had already shown
remarkable promise, has lately won considerable success in Germany with
'Die Liebesgeige.'

Scanty is the catalogue of noteworthy operas with English words produced
in recent years. The most remarkable of them are Mr. Colin MacAlpin's
'The Cross and the Crescent,' which won the prize offered by Mr. Charles
Manners in 1903 for an English opera, and Mr. Nicholas Gatty's
'Greysteel,' a very able and musicianly setting of an episode from one
of the Norse sagas, which was produced at Sheffield in 1906.

It is difficult to be sanguine as to the prospects of English opera.
Circumstances are certainly against the production of original work in
this country, though it is legitimate to hope that the recent revival of
interest in Sullivan's works may lead our composers to devote their
energies to the higher forms of comic opera. Anything is better than the
mere imitation of foreign models which has for so long been
characteristic of English opera. By turning to the melodies of his
native land, Weber founded German opera, and if we are ever to have a
school of opera in England we must begin by building upon a similar
foundation.




INDEX OF OPERAS


A Basso Porto (_Spinelli_), 300
Abreise, Die (_D'Albert_), 313
Abu Hassan (_Weber_), 89
Adriana Lecouvreur (_Cilea_), 298
Africaine, L' (_Meyerbeer_), 136
Agrippina (_Handel_), 15
Aida (_Verdi_), 271
Alceste (_Gluck_), 25
Alceste (_Lulli_), 8
Alcina (_Handel_), 56
Alfonso und Estrella (_Schubert_), 104
Almira (_Handel_), 13
Alzira (_Verdi_), 264
Amadis (_Lulli_), 8
Amant Jaloux, L' (_Gretry_), 45
Amica (_Mascagni_), 294
Amico Fritz, L' (_Mascagni_), 293
Amy Robsart (_De Lara_), 348
Ancetre, L' (_Saint Saens_), 238
Andrea Chenier (_Giordano_), 297
Anna Bolena (_Donizetti_), 116
Aphrodite (_Erlanger_), 259
Ariane (_Massenet_), 249
Ariane et Barbe-Bleue (_Dukas_), 259
Arianna (_Monteverde_), 4
Armide (_Gluck_), 32
Artaserse (_Gluck_), 20
Artaxerxes (_Arne_), 324
Ascanio (_Saint Saens_), 236
Asrael (_Franchetti_), 301
Astarte (_Leroux_), 259
Attaque du Moulin, L' (_Bruneau_), 253
Attila (_Verdi_), 264
Aucassin und Nicolette (_Enna_), 322

Ballo in Maschera, Un (_Verdi_), 269
Barbares, Les (_Saint Saens_), 236
Barbier von Bagdad, Der (_Cornelius_), 303
Barbiere di Siviglia, Il (_Paisiello_), 49
Barbiere di Siviglia, Il (_Rossini_), 107
Bardes, Les (_Lesueur_), 78
Baerenhaeuter, Der (_S. Wagner_), 313
Basoche, La (_Messager_), 259
Bastien und Bastienne (_Mozart_), 52
Battaglia di Legnano, La (_Verdi_), 265
Bauer ein Schelm, Der (_Dvorak_), 318
Beatrice et Benedict (_Berlioz_), 143
Beauty Stone, The (_Sullivan_), 344
Beggar's Opera, The (_Pepusch_), 323
Benvenuto Cellini (_Berlioz_), 143
Betly (_Donizetti_), 116
Boheme, La (_Leoncavallo_), 296
Boheme, La (_Puccini_), 286
Bohemian Girl, The (_Balfe_), 325
Bonduca (_Purcell_), 11
Brides of Venice, The (_Benedict_), 328
Bruder Lustig (_S. Wagner_), 313
Bruid van der Zee, De (_Blockx_), 260

Cabrera, La (_Dupont_), 259
Caduta de' Giganti (_Gluck_), 21
Canterbury Pilgrims, The (_Stanford_), 333
Carmelite, La (_Hahn_), 259
Carmen (_Bizet_), 227
Castor et Pollux (_Rameau_), 24
Cavalleria Rusticana (_Mascagni_), 292
Cendrillon (_Massenet_), 246
Cendrillon (_Nicolo_), 85
Chalet, Le (_Adam_), 149
Chatterton (_Leoncavallo_), 296
Cherubin (_Massenet_), 248
Chi sofre speri (_Mazzocchi_ and _Marazzoli_), 40
Chieftain, The (_Sullivan_), 343
Chopin (_Orefice_), 300
Christus (_Rubinstein_), 321
Cid, Der (_Cornelius_), 305
Cid, Le (_Massenet_), 244
Cinq-Mars (_Gounod_), 223
Circe (_Banister_), 10
Clemenza di Tito, La (_Mozart_), 68
Cleopatra (_Enna_), 322
Colomba (_Mackenzie_), 331
Colombe, La (_Gounod_), 220
Contes d' Hoffmann, Les (_Offenbach_), 229
Contrabandista, The (_Sullivan_), 339
Corsaro, Il (_Verdi_), 265
Cosi fan tutte (_Mozart_), 67
Cox and Box (_Sullivan_), 339
Cricket on the Hearth, The (_Goldmark_), 308
Cricket on the Hearth, The (_Mackenzie_), 332
Crispino e la Comare (_Ricci_), 124
Cristoforo Colombo (_Franchetti_), 301
Cross and the Crescent, The (_MacAlpin_), 348
Czar und Zimmermann (_Lortzing_), 102

Dafne (_Peri_), 2
Dafne (_Schuetz_), 12
Dalibor (_Smetana_), 318
Dame Blanche, La (_Boieldieu_), 85
Damnation de Faust, La (_Berlioz_), 145
Danaides, Les (_Salieri_), 75
Daria (_Marty_), 259
Deidamia (_Handel_), 16
Demon, The (_Rubinstein_), 321
Deserteur, Le (_Monsigny_), 45
Deux Avares, Les (_Gretry_), 45
Deux Journees, Les (_Cherubini_), 77
Devin du Village, Le (_Rousseau_), 44
Dickschaedel, Der (_Dvorak_) 318
Dido and AEneas (_Purcell_), 10
Dinorah (_Meyerbeer_), 141
Djamileh (_Bizet_), 227
Doktor und Apotheker (_Dittersdorf_), 84
Dolores (_Auteri-Manzocchi_), 300
Don Carlos (_Verdi_), 270
Don Cesar de Bazan (_Massenet_), 240
Don Giovanni (_Mozart_), 64
Don Pasquale (_Donizetti_), 118
Donna Diana (_Reznicek_), 313
Dori, La (_Cesti_), 14
Dornroeschen (_Humperdinck_), 312
Dorothy (_Cellier_), 345
Drei Pintos, Die (_Weber_), 97
Duc d'Albe, Le (_Donizetti_), 116
Due Foscari, I (_Verdi_), 264

Ebreo, L' (_Apolloni_), 280
Echo et Narcisse (_Gluck_), 38
Edgar (_Puccini_), 285
Eleonora (_Paer_), 50
Elisir d'Amore, L' (_Donizetti_), 119
Emerald Isle, The (_Sullivan_), 344
Enfant Roi, L' (_Bruneau_), 255
Enrico di Borgogna (_Donizetti_), 113
Entfuehrung aus dem Serail, Die (_Mozart_), 56
Ernani (_Verdi_), 263
Erostrate (_Reyer_), 238
Erschaffene, gefallene und aufgerichtete Mensch, Der (_Theile_), 12
Esclarmonde (_Massenet_), 244
Esmeralda (_A.G. Thomas_), 330
Etienne Marcel (_Saint Saens_), 235
Etoile du Nord, L' (_Meyerbeer_), 139
Etranger, L' (_Indy_), 256
Eugene Onegin (_Tchaikovsky_), 321
Eulenspiegel (_Kistler_), 309
Euridice (_Peri_), 2
Euryanthe (_Weber_), 93
Evangelimann, Der (_Kienzl_), 313

Falstaff (_Verdi_), 277
Fantasio (_Smyth_), 346
Faust (_Berlioz_), 145
Faust (_Gounod_), 216
Faust (_Spohr_), 98
Favorite, La (_Donizetti_), 115
Fedora (_Giordano_), 297
Feen, Die (_Wagner_), 153
Fernand Cortez (_Spontini_), 80
Fervaal (_Indy_), 256
Feuersnoth (_R. Strauss_), 314
Fidelio (_Beethoven_), 80
Fierrabras (_Schubert_), 104
Fille du Regiment, La (_Donizetti_), 117
Fils de l' Etoile, Le (_Erlanger_), 259
Finta Giardiniera, La (_Mozart_), 53
Finta Semplice, La (_Mozart_), 52
Finto Stanislao, Il (_Verdi_), 262
Flauto Magico, Il (_Mozart_). _See_ Zauberfloete, Die
Flibustier, Le (_Cui_), 321
Fliegende Hollaender, Der (_Wagner_), 158
Flora Mirabilis (_Samara_), 300
Flying Dutchman, The (_Wagner_), 158
Folie, Une (_Mehul_), 77
Forza del Destino, La (_Verdi_), 270
Fra Diavolo (_Auber_), 147
Francesca da Rimini (_Goetz_), 307
Fredegonde (_Guiraud_), 233
Freischuetz, Der (_Weber_), 90

Gazza Ladra, La (_Rossini_), 108
Geheimniss, Das (_Smetana_), 318
Genesius (_Weingartner_), 314
Genoveva (_Schumann_), 105
Ghiselle (_Franck_), 231
Gioconda, La (_Ponchielli_), 283
Giorno di Regno, Un (_Verdi_), 262
Giovanna d'Arco (_Verdi_), 264
Gipsy's Warning, The (_Benedict_), 328
Giulietta e Romeo (_Vaccai_), 124
Giuramento, Il (_Mercadante_), 124
Gloria (_Cilea_), 299
Gondoliers, The (_Sullivan_), 343
Goetterdaemmerung (_Wagner_), 193
Goetz von Berlichingen (_Goldmark_), 309
Grand Duke, The (_Sullivan_), 344
Grand' Tante, La (_Massenet_), 240
Greysteel (_Gatty_), 348
Griselidis (_Massenet_), 246
Guarany, Il (_Gomez_), 280
Guglielmo Ratcliff (_Mascagni_), 293
Guillaume Tell (_Rossini_), 110
Gunloed (_Cornelius_), 305
Guntram (_Strauss_), 314
Gwendoline (_Chabrier_), 234

H.M.S. Pinafore (_Sullivan_), 340
Haddon Hall (_Sullivan_), 343
Hamlet (_Thomas_), 226
Hans Heiling (_Marschner_), 99
Haensel und Gretel (_Humperdinck_), 309
Harold (_Cowen_), 338
Haeusliche Krieg, Der (_Schubert_), 104
Heimchen am Herd, Das (_Goldmark_), 308
Heimkehr aus der Fremde (_Mendelssohn_), 104
Heirath wider Willen, Die (_Humperdinck_), 312
Helene (_Saint Saens_), 237
Henry VIII. (_Saint Saens_), 235
Herbergprinses (_Blockx_), 260
Herodiade (_Massenet_), 241
Herzog Wildfang (_S. Wagner_), 313
Hexe, Die (_Enna_), 322
Hochzeit des Camacho, Die (_Mendelssohn_), 104
Hoffmann's Erzaehlungen (_Offenbach_), 230
Huguenots, Les (_Meyerbeer_), 131
Hulda (_Franck_), 231

Idomeneo (_Mozart_), 54
Impresario, L' (_Mozart_). _See_ Schauspieldirektor, Der
Ingwelde (_Schillings_), 312
Iolanthe (_Sullivan_), 341
Iphigenie en Aulide (_Gluck_), 29
Iphigenie en Tauride (_Gluck_), 35
Irato, L' (_Mehul_), 77
Iris (_Mascagni_), 294
Isis (_Lulli_), 12
Italiana in Algeri, L' (_Rossini_), 107
Ivanhoe (_Sullivan_), 338

Jean de Paris (_Boieldieu_), 85
Jessonda (_Spohr_), 99
Joconde (_Nicolo_), 85
Jolie Fille de Perth, La (_Bizet_), 227
Jongleur de Notre Dame, Le (_Massenet_), 247
Joseph (_Mehul_), 75
Juive, La (_Halevy_), 146

Kapelle, De (_Blockx_), 260
Kassya (_Delibes_), 232
Kerim (_Bruneau_), 251
King Arthur (_Purcell_), 11
Kobold, Der (_S. Wagner_), 313
Koenigin von Saba, Die (_Goldmark_), 307
Koenigskinder (_Humperdinck_), 312
Kriegsgefangene, Die (_Goldmark_), 309
Kunihild (_Kistler_), 309
Kuss, Der (_Smetana_), 318

Lakme (_Delibes_), 231
Lalla Rookh (_David_), 149
Libusa (_Smetana_), 318
Liebesgeige, Die (_Maclean_), 348
Liebesverbot, Das (_Wagner_), 154
Life for the Czar (_Glinka_), 319
Light of Asia, The (_De Lara_), 348
Lily of Killarney, The (_Benedict_), 328
Linda di Chamonix (_Donizetti_), 116
Lodoiska (_Cherubini_), 77
Lohengrin (_Wagner_), 170
Lombardi, I (_Verdi_), 262
Lorelei (_Catalani_), 283
Lorelei (_Mendelssohn_), 104
Lorenza (_Mascheroni_), 299
Louise (_Charpentier_), 256
Lucia di Lammermoor (_Donizetti_), 113
Lucio Silla (_Mozart_), 53
Lucrezia Borgia (_Donizetti_), 114
Luisa Miller (_Verdi_), 265
Lurline (_Wallace_), 328
Lustigen Weiber von Windsor, Die (_Nicolai_), 104

Macbeth (_Verdi_), 264
Madama Butterfly (_Puccini_), 289
Madame Chrysantheme (_Messager_), 259
Mage, Le (_Massenet_), 244
Magic Flute, The (_Mozart_). _See_ Zauberfloete, Die
Mainacht, Die (_Rimsky-Korsakov_), 321
Maitre Ambros (_Widor_), 259
Maitre de Chapelle, Le (_Paer_), 50
Mala Vita (_Giordano_), 297
Manon (_Massenet_), 242
Manon Lescaut (_Puccini_), 285
Manru (_Paderewski_), 321
Marble Guest, The (_Dargomishky_), 320
Marie Magdeleine (_Massenet_), 248
Maritana (_Wallace_), 327
Marriage of Figaro, The (_Mozart_). _See_ Nozze di Figaro, Le
Martha (_Flotow_), 103
Martire, La (_Samara_), 300
Martyr of Antioch, The (_Sullivan_), 338
Masaniello (_Auber_), 148
Maschere, Le (_Mascagni_), 294
Masnadieri, I (_Verdi_), 264
Matrimonio Segreto, Il (_Cimarosa_), 48
Medecin malgre lui, Le (_Gounod_), 215
Medee (_Cherubini_), 78
Medici, I (_Leoncavallo_), 296
Mefistofele (_Boito_), 281
Meistersinger von Nuernberg, Die (_Wagner_), 202
Merlin (_Goldmark_), 308
Merrie England (_German_), 345
Merry Wives of Windsor, The (_Nicolai_), 104
Messaline (_De Lara_), 348
Messidor (_Bruneau_), 254
Mignon (_Thomas_), 225
Mikado, The (_Sullivan_), 342
Milton (_Spontini_), 79
Mireille (_Gounod_), 220
Mitridate (_Mozart_), 53
Mock Doctor, The (_Gounod_), 215
Moina (_De Lara_), 348
Moloch (_Schillings_), 312
Mose in Egitto (_Rossini_), 109
Moses (_Rubinstein_), 321
Mountain Sylph, The (_Barnett_), 325
Much Ado about Nothing (_Stanford_), 336
Muette de Portici, La (_Auber_), 148

Nabucodonosor (_Verdi_), 262
Nachtlager von Granada, Das (_Kreutzer_), 101
Nadeshda (_A.G. Thomas_), 331
Nais Micoulin (_Bruneau_), 255
Navarraise, La (_Massenet_), 245
Nibelung's Ring, The (_Wagner_), 178
Night Dancers, The (_Loder_), 329
Ninette a la Cour (_Duni_), 44
Nonne Sanglante, La (_Gounod_), 215
Nordisa (_Corder_), 331
Norma (_Bellini_), 120
Nozze di Figaro, Le (_Mozart_), 60

Oberon (_Weber_), 95
Oberto (_Verdi_), 262
Oca del Cairo, L' (_Mozart_), 59
Olympie (_Spontini_), 80
Orestes (_Weingartner_), 314
Orazi e Curiazi, Gli (_Cimarosa_), 48
Orfeo (_Monteverde_), 4
Orfeo ed Euridice (_Gluck_), 21
Otello (_Verdi_), 273
Ouragan, L' (_Bruneau_), 254

Pagliacci (_Leoncavallo_), 294
Papa Martin (_Cagnoni_), 125
Pardon de Ploermel, Le (_Meyerbeer_), 141
Paride ed Elena (_Gluck_), 28
Parsifal (_Wagner_), 207
Patience (_Sullivan_), 340
Patrie (_Paladilhe_), 234
Pauline (_Cowen_), 337
Pecheurs de Perles, Les (_Bizet_), 227
Pecheurs de Saint Jean, Les (_Widor_), 259
Peines et les Plaisirs de l'Amour, Les (_Cambert_), 7
Pelleas et Melisande (_Debussy_), 257
Peter Schmoll (_Weber_), 89
Peter the Shipwright (_Lortzing_), 102
Petruccio (_Maclean_), 348
Philemon et Baucis (_Gounod_), 219
Phryne (_Saint Saens_), 236
Piccolino (_Guiraud_), 233
Piramo e Tisbe (_Gluck_), 21
Pirates of Penzance, The (_Sullivan_), 340
Poacher, The (_Lortzing_), 102
Polyeucte (_Gounod_) 224
Pomone (_Cambert_), 7
Porter of Havre, The (_Cagnoni_), 125
Portrait de Manon, Le (_Massenet_), 245
Postillon de Longjumeau, Le (_Adam_), 149
Pre aux Clercs, Le (_Herold_), 128
Prince Igor (_Borodin_), 321
Princess Ida (_Sullivan_), 341
Princess of Kensington, The (_German_), 345
Princesse d'Auberge (_Blockx_), 260
Princesse Jaune, La (_Saint Saens_), 234
Princesse Osra, La (_Bunning_), 348
Princesse Rayon de Soleil (_Gilson_), 260
Prise de Troie, La (_Berlioz_), 144
Prophete, Le (_Meyerbeer_), 134
Proserpine (_Saint Saens_), 235
Psyche (_Locke_), 10
Puritani, I (_Bellini_), 122

Quentin Durward (_Maclean_), 348

Radamisto (_Handel_), 56
Rantzau, I (_Mascagni_), 293
Rattenfaenger von Hameln, Der (_Nessler_), 317
Re Pastore, Il (_Mozart_), 53
Reine de Saba, La (_Gounod_), 220
Reine Fiammette, La (_Leroux_), 259
Reve, Le (_Bruneau_), 251
Reve d'Amour, Le (_Auber_), 147
Rheingold, Das (_Wagner_), 179
Richard Coeur de Lion (_Gretry_), 45
Rienzi (_Wagner_), 155
Rigoletto (_Verdi_), 265
Rinaldo (_Handel_), 15
Ring des Nibelungen, Der (_Wagner_), 178
Robert le Diable (_Meyerbeer_), 129
Robin Hood (_Macfarren_), 329
Rodrigo (_Handel_), 15
Roi de Lahore, Le (_Massenet_), 240
Roi d'Ys, Le (_Lalo_), 233
Roi l'a dit, Le (_Delibes_), 232
Roi malgre lui, Le (_Chabrier_), 234
Roland, Der (_Leoncavallo_), 296
Romeo et Juliette (_Gounod_), 221
Rose of Persia, The (_Sullivan_), 344
Rose von Liebesgarten, Die (_Pfitzner_), 314
Ruddigore (_Sullivan_), 342
Russlan and Ludmila (_Glinka_), 319
Ruy Blas (_Marchetti_), 281

Saffo (_Pacini_), 124
Salammbo (_Reyer_), 240
Salome (_Massenet_), 241
Salome (_Strauss_), 315
Samson et Dalila (_Saint Saens_), 234
Sanga (_De Lara_), 348
Sapho (_Gounod_), 215
Sapho (_Massenet_), 246
Savonarola (_Stanford_), 335
Schauspieldirektor, Der (_Mozart_), 59
Schweizerfamilie, Die (_Weigl_), 84
Scuffiara Raggiratrice, La (_Paisiello_), 50
Seelewig (_Staden_), 12
Semiramide (_Rossini_), 109
Seraglio, Il (_Mozart_). _See_ Entfuehrung aus dem Serail, Die
Serse (_Cavalli_), 7
Serva Padrona, La (_Pergolesi_), 43
Shamus O'Brien (_Stanford_), 335
Siberia (_Giordano_), 297
Sieben Geislein, Die (_Humperdinck_), 312
Siegfried (_Wagner_), 188
Signa (_Cowen_), 338
Sigurd (_Reyer_), 238
Silvano (_Mascagni_), 293
Simon Boccanegra (_Verdi_), 269
Sonnambula, La (_Bellini_), 120
Sorcerer, The (_Sullivan_), 339
Sposo Deluso, Lo (_Mozart_), 59
Statue, La (_Reyer_), 238
Stiffelio (_Verdi_), 265
Strandrecht (_Smyth_), 347
Stratonice (_Mehul_), 76
Streichholzmaedel, Die (_Enna_), 322
Sylvana (_Weber_), 89

Tableau Parlant, Le (_Gretry_), 45
Taming of the Shrew, The (_Goetz_), 305
Tancredi (_Rossini_), 107
Tannhaeuser (_Wagner_), 163
Templer und Juedin (_Marschner_), 100
Thais (_Massenet_), 245
Theodora (_Leroux_), 259
Therese (_Massenet_), 250
Thesee (_Lulli_), 11
Thespis (_Sullivan_), 339
Thorgrim (_Cowen_), 337
Thyl Uylenspiegel (_Blockx_), 260
Timbre d'Argent, Le (_Saint Saens_), 234
Timon of Athens (_Purcell_), 11
Titania (_Huee_), 259
Tom Jones (_German_), 345
Tom Jones (_Philidor_), 46
Tosca, La (_Puccini_), 288
Traviata, La (_Verdi_), 268
Tresor Suppose, Le (_Mehul_), 77
Trial by Jury (_Sullivan_), 339
Tribut de Zamora, Le (_Gounod_), 224
Tristan und Isolde (_Wagner_), 199
Trompeter von Saekkingen, Der (_Nessler_), 316
Troubadour, The (_Mackenzie_), 332
Trovatore, Il (_Verdi_), 267
Troyens, Les (_Berlioz_), 144
Tutti in Maschera (_Pedrotti_), 125

Uthal (_Mehul_), 76
Utopia (_Sullivan_), 343

Vagabund und die Prinzessin, Der (_Poldini_), 314
Vampyr, Der (_Marschner_), 100
Veiled Prophet, The (_Stanford_), 333
Vepres Siciliennes, Les (_Verdi_), 269
Verkaufte Braut, Die (_Smetana_), 317
Versunkene Glocke, Die (_Zoellner_), 313
Vestale, La (_Spontini_), 79
Villi, Le (_Puccini_), 283
Vivandiere, La (_Godard_), 234

Wald, Der (_Smyth_), 346
Walkuere, Die (_Wagner_), 183
Wally, La (_Catalani_), 283
Water-Carrier, The (_Cherubini_), 77
Werther (_Massenet_), 244
Widerspaenstigen Zaehmung, Der (_Goetz_), 305
Wildschuetz, Der (_Lortzing_), 102
William Ratcliff (_Leroux_), 259
William Tell (_Rossini_), 110
Wreckers, The (_Smyth_), 347

Yeomen of the Guard, The (_Sullivan_), 342

Zampa (_Herold_), 127
Zanetto (_Mascagni_), 294
Zauberfloete, Die (_Mozart_), 69
Zaza (_Leoncavallo_), 296
Zemire und Azor (_Spohr_), 99
Zwillingsbrueder, Die (_Schubert_), 104




INDEX OF COMPOSERS


Adam, 149
Apolloni, 280
Arne, 324
Auber, 147
Audran, 261
Auteri-Manzocchi, 300

Balfe, 325
Banister, 10
Barnett, 325
Beethoven, 81
Bellini, 119
Benedict, 328
Berlioz, 143
Bishop, 325
Bizet, 227
Blockx, 260
Boieldieu, 85
Boito, 281
Borodin, 321
Bruneau, 251
Bungert, 314
Bunning, 348
Buononcini, 16

Cagnoni, 125
Cambert, 7
Campra, 19
Carissimi, 6
Catalani, 283
Cavaliere, 2
Cavalli, 5
Cellier, 345
Cesti, 6
Chabrier, 233
Charpentier, 256
Cherubini, 77
Child, 9
Cilea, 298
Cimarosa, 48
Clapisson, 150
Corder, 331
Cornelius, 300
Cowen, 337
Cui, 321

D'Albert, 313
Dargomishky, 320
David, 149
Debussy, 257
De Lara, 347
Delibes, 231
Destouches, 19
Dibdin, 324
Dietsch, 159
Dittersdorf, 84
Donizetti, 112
Dubois, 234
Dukas, 259
Duni, 44
Dupont, 259
Dvorak, 318

Enna, 322
Erlanger, 259

Flotow, 103
Franchetti, 301
Franck, Cesar, 230
Frank, Ernst, 307

Gagliano, 4
Galilei, 2
Gatty, 348
German, 345
Gibbons, C., 9
Gilson, 260
Giordano, 296
Glinka, 319
Gluck, 20
Godard, 234
Goetz, 305
Goldmark, 307
Gomez, 280
Gossec, 27
Gounod, 214
Gretry, 45
Grisar, 150
Guiraud, 232

Hahn, 259
Halevy, 146
Handel, 13
Hartmann, 322
Hasse, 17
Herold, 126
Herve, 260
Hiller, J.A., 50
Hoffmann, 100
Hook, 324
Huee, 259
Humperdinck, 309
Humphreys, 9

Indy, V. D', 256
Isouard, 84

Jomelli, 43
Joncieres, 234

Keiser, 13
Kienzl, 312
Kistler, 309
Kreutzer, 101

Lalo, 233
Lecocq, 260
Leoncavallo, 294
Leroux, 259
Lesueur, 78
Lindpaintner, 100
Locke, 10
Loder, 329
Logroscino, 42
Lortzing, 102
Lulli, 8

MacAlpin, 348
Macfarren, 329
Mackenzie, 331
Maclean, 348
Maillart, 150
Marais, 19
Marazzoli, 40
Marchetti, 281
Marschner, 99
Marty, 259
Mascagni, 292
Mascheroni, 299
Massenet, 240
Mazzocchi, 40
Mehul, 75
Mendelssohn, 104
Mercadante, 124
Messager, 259
Meyerbeer, 128
Milloecker, 316
Monsigny, 45
Monteverde, 4
Mozart, 52

Nessler, 316
Nicolai, 104
Nicolo, 84
Niedermeyer, 150

Offenbach, 229
Orefice, 299

Pacini, 124
Paderewski, 321
Paer, 49
Paisiello, 49
Paladilhe, 234
Pedrotti, 125
Pepusch, 324
Pergolesi, 43
Peri, 2
Petrella, 280
Pfitzner, 314
Philidor, 46
Piccinni, 47
Planquette, 261
Poise, 232
Poldini, 314
Ponchielli, 283
Porpora, 17
Provenzale, 6
Puccini, 283
Purcell, 9

Rameau, 20
Reichardt, 51
Reyer, 238
Reznicek, 313
Ricci, F., 124
Ricci, L., 124
Rimsky-Korsakov, 321
Rossini, 106
Rousseau, 44
Rubinstein, 320

Sacchini, 75
Saint Saens, 234
Salieri, 75
Samara, 300
Scarlatti, 14
Schillings, 312
Schubert, 104
Schumann, 105
Schuetz, 12
Serov, 320
Shield, 324
Smetana, 317
Smyth, 346
Solomon, 345
Spinelli, 300
Spohr, 98
Spontini, 79
Staden, 12
Stanford, 333
Storace, 324
Strauss, J., 316
Strauss, R., 314
Sullivan, 338
Suppe, 316
Suessmayer, 84

Tchaikovsky, 321
Theile, 12
Thomas, Ambroise, 224
Thomas, A.G., 330

Vaccai, 124
Verdi, 262
Vogler, 84

Wagner, R., 151
Wagner, S., 313
Wallace, 327
Weber, 89
Weigl, 84
Weingartner, 314
Weyse, 322
Widor, 259
Winter, 84

Zoellner, 313


PRINTED AT THE EDINBURGH PRESS, 9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Opera, by R.A. Streatfeild

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OPERA ***

***** This file should be named 16248.txt or 16248.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/2/4/16248/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
