The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Summons, by A.E.W. Mason

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Summons

Author: A.E.W. Mason

Release Date: July 28, 2005 [EBook #16381]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUMMONS ***




Produced by Ted Garvin and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE
SUMMONS

BY
A.E.W. MASON

AUTHOR OF "THE FOUR FEATHERS," "THE TURNSTILE," ETC.


NEW YORK

GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1920.
BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA



            TO THOSE
     WHO SERVED WITH ME ABROAD
      THROUGH THE FOUR YEARS




CONTENTS


CHAPTER


     I THE OLYMPIC GAMES                                  11

    II AN ANTHEM INTERVENES                               18

   III MARIO ESCOBAR                                      28

    IV THE SECRET OF HARRY LUTTRELL                       35

     V HILLYARD'S MESSENGER                               47

    VI THE HONORARY MEMBER                                55

   VII IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN                              65

  VIII HILLYARD HEARS NEWS OF AN OLD FRIEND               70

    IX ENTER THE HEROINE IN ANYTHING BUT WHITE SATIN      80

     X THE SUMMONS                                        91

    XI STELLA RUNS TO EARTH                              100

   XII IN BARCELONA                                      111

  XIII OLD ACQUAINTANCE                                  121

   XIV "TOUCHING THE MATTER OF THOSE SHIPS"              135

    XV IN A SLEEPING-CAR                                 144

   XVI TRICKS OF THE TRADE                               155

  XVII ON A CAPE OF SPAIN                                163

 XVIII THE USES OF SCIENCE                               173

   XIX UNDER GREY SKIES AGAIN                            183

    XX LADY SPLAY'S PREOCCUPATIONS                       193

   XXI THE MAGNOLIA FLOWERS                              208

  XXII JENNY PRASK                                       219

 XXIII PLANS FOR THE EVENING                             227

  XXIV JENNY PRASK IS INTERESTED                         235

   XXV IN A LIBRARY                                      238

  XXVI A FATAL KINDNESS                                  248

 XXVII THE RANK AND FILE                                 257

XXVIII THE LONG SLEEP                                    263

  XXIX JENNY PUTS UP HER FIGHT                           273

   XXX A REVOLUTION IN SIR CHICHESTER                    287

  XXXI JENNY AND MILLIE SPLAY                            298

 XXXII "BUT STILL A RUBY KINDLES IN THE VINE"            306




THE SUMMONS




CHAPTER I

THE OLYMPIC GAMES


"Luttrell! Luttrell!"

Sir Charles Hardiman stood in the corridor of his steam yacht and bawled
the name through a closed door. But no answer was returned from the
other side of the door. He turned the handle and went in. The night was
falling, but the cabin windows looked towards the north and the room was
full of light and of a low and pleasant music. For the tide tinkled and
chattered against the ship's planks and, in the gardens of the town
across the harbour, bands were playing. The town was Stockholm in the
year nineteen hundred and twelve, and on this afternoon, the Olympic
games, that unfortunate effort to promote goodwill amongst the nations,
which did little but increase rancours and disclose hatreds, had ended,
never, it is to be hoped, to be resumed.

"Luttrell," cried Hardiman again, but this time with perplexity in his
voice. For Luttrell was there in the cabin in front of him, but sunk in
so deep a contemplation of memories and prospects that the cabin might
just as well have been empty. Sir Charles Hardiman touched him on the
shoulder.

"Wake up, old man!"

"That's what I am doing--waking up," said Luttrell, turning without any
start. He was seated in front of the writing-desk, a young man, as the
world went before the war, a few months short of twenty-eight.

"The launch is waiting and everybody's on deck," continued Hardiman.
"We shall lose our table at Hasselbacken if we don't get off."

Then he caught sight of a telegram lying upon the writing-table.

"Oh!" and the impatience died out of his voice. "Is anything the
matter?"

Luttrell pushed the telegram towards his host.

"Read it! I have got to make up my mind--and now--before we start."

Hardiman read the telegram. It was addressed to Captain Harry Luttrell,
Yacht _The Dragonfly_, Stockholm, and it was sent from Cairo by the
Adjutant-General of the Egyptian Army.

     "_I can make room for you, but you must apply immediately to
     be transferred._"

Hardiman sat down in a chair by the side of the table against the wall,
with his eyes on Luttrell's face. He was a big, softish, overfed man of
forty-five, and the moment he began to relax from the upright position,
his body went with a run; he collapsed rather than sat. The little veins
were beginning to show like tiny scarlet threads across his nose and on
the fullness of his cheeks; his face was the colour of wine; and the
pupils of his pale eyes were ringed with so pronounced an _arcus
senilis_ that they commanded the attention like a disfigurement. But the
eyes were shrewd and kindly enough as they dwelt upon the troubled face
of his guest.

"You have not answered this?" he asked.

"No. But I must send an answer to-night."

"You are in doubt?"

"Yes. I was quite sure when I cabled to Cairo on the second day of the
games. I was quite sure, whilst I waited for the reply. Now that the
reply has come--I don't know."

"Let me hear," said the older man. "The launch must wait, the table at
the Hasselbacken restaurant must be assigned, if need be, to other
customers." Hardiman had not swamped all his kindliness in good living.
Luttrell was face to face with one of the few grave decisions which
each man has in the course of his life to make; and Hardiman understood
his need better than he understood it himself. His need was to formulate
aloud the case for and against, to another person, not so much that he
might receive advice as, that he might see for himself with truer eyes.

"The one side is clear enough," said Luttrell with a trace of
bitterness. "There was a Major I once heard of at Dover. He trained his
company in night-marches by daylight. The men held a rope to guide them
and were ordered to shut their eyes. The Major, you see, hated stirring
out at night. He liked his bridge and his bottle of port. Well, give me
another year and that's the kind of soldier I shall become--the worst
kind--the slovenly soldier. I mean slovenly in mind, in intention. Even
now I come, already bored, to the barrack square and watch the time to
see if I can't catch an earlier train from Gravesend to London."

"And when you do?" asked Hardiman.

Luttrell nodded.

"When I do," he agreed, "I get no thrill out of my escape, I assure you.
I hate myself a little more--that's all."

"Yes," said Hardiman. He was too wise a man to ask questions. He just
sat and waited, inviting Luttrell to spread out his troubles by his very
quietude.

"Then there are these games," Luttrell cried in a swift exasperation,
"--these damned games! From the first day when the Finns marched out
with their national flag and the Russians threatened to withdraw if they
did it again----" he broke off suddenly. "Of course you know soldiers
have believed that trouble's coming. I used to doubt, but by God I am
sure of it now. Just a froth of fine words at the opening and
afterwards--honest rivalry and let the best man win? Not a bit of it!
Team-running--a vile business--the nations parked together in different
sections of the Stadium like enemies--and ill-will running here and
there like an infection! Oh, there's trouble coming, and if I don't go I
shan't be fit for it. There, that's the truth."

"The whole truth and nothing but the truth?" Hardiman asked with a
smile. He leaned across the table and drew towards him a case of
telegraph forms. But whilst he was drawing them towards him, Luttrell
spoke again.

"Nothing but the truth--_yes_," he said. He was speaking shyly,
uncomfortably, and he stopped abruptly.

"The whole truth--no." Hardiman added slowly, and gently. He wanted the
complete story from preface to conclusion, but he was not to get it. He
received no answer of any kind for a considerable number of moments and
Luttrell only broke the silence in the end, to declare definitely,

"That, at all events, is all I have to say."

Sir Charles nodded and drew the case of forms close to him. There was
something more then. There always is something more, which isn't told,
he reflected, and the worst of it is, the something more which isn't
told is always the real reason. Men go to the confessional with a
reservation; the secret chamber where they keep their sacred vessels,
their real truths and inspirations, as also their most scarlet
sins--that shall be opened to no one after early youth is past unless it
be--rarely--to one woman. There was another reason at work in Harry
Luttrell, but Sir Charles Hardiman was never to know it. With a shrug of
his shoulders he took a pencil from his pocket, filled up one of the
forms and handed it to Luttrell.

"That's what I should reply."

He had written:

     "_I am travelling to London to-morrow to apply for
     transfer._--LUTTRELL."

Luttrell read the telegram with surprise. It was not the answer which he
had expected from the victim of the flesh-pots in front of him.

"You advise that?" he exclaimed.

"Yes. My dear Luttrell, as you know, you are a guest very welcome to me.
But you don't belong. We--Maud Carstairs, Tony Marsh and the rest of
us--even Mario Escobar--we are the Come-to-nothings. We are the people
of the stage door, we grow fat in restaurants. From three to seven, you
may find us in the card-rooms of our clubs--we are jolly fine
fellows--and no good. You don't belong, and should get out while you
can."

Luttrell moved uncomfortably in his chair.

"That's all very well. But there's another side to the question," he
said, and from the deck above a woman's voice called clearly down the
stairway.

"Aren't you two coming?"

Both men looked towards the door.

"That side," said Hardiman.

"Yes."

Hardiman nodded his head.

"Stella Croyle doesn't belong either," he said. "But she kicked over the
traces. She flung out of the rank and file. Oh, I know Croyle was a
selfish, dull beast and her footprints in her flight from him were
littered with excuses. I am not considering the injustice of the world.
I am looking at the cruel facts, right in the face of them, as you have
got to do, my young friend. Here Stella Croyle is--with us--and she
can't get away. You can."

Luttrell was not satisfied. His grey eyes and thin, clean features were
troubled like those of a man in physical pain.

"You don't know the strange, queer tie between Stella Croyle and me," he
said. "And I can't tell you it."

Hardiman grew anxious. Luttrell had the look of a man overtrained, and
it was worry which had overtrained him. His face was a trifle too
delicate, perhaps, to go with those remorseless sharp decisions which
must be made by the men who win careers.

"I know that you can't go through the world without hurting people,"
cried Hardiman. "Neither you nor any one else, except the limpets. And
you won't escape hurting Stella Croyle, by abandoning your chances. Your
love-affair will end--all of that kind do. And yours will end in a
bitter, irretrievable quarrel after you have ruined yourself, and
because you have ruined yourself. You are already on the rack--make no
doubt about it. Oh, I have seen you twitch and jump with irritation--how
many times on this yacht!--for trumpery, little, unimportant things she
has said and done, which you would never have noticed six months ago;
or only noticed to smile at with a pleased indulgence."

Luttrell's face coloured. "Why, that's true enough," he said. He was
remembering the afternoon a week ago, when the yacht steamed between the
green islands with their bathing stations and chalets, over a tranquil,
sunlit sea of the deepest blue. Rounding a wooded corner towards sunset
she came suddenly upon the bridges and the palace and the gardens of
Stockholm. The women of the party were in the saloon. A rush was made
towards it. They were summoned to this first wonderful view of the city
of beauty. Would they come? No! Stella Croyle was in the middle of a
game of Russian patience. She could play that game any day, every day,
all day. This exquisite vision was vouchsafed to her but the once, and
she had neglected it with the others. She had not troubled, even to move
so far as the saloon door. For she had not finished her game.

Luttrell recalled his feeling of scorn; the scorn had grown into
indignation; in the end he had made a grievance of her indifference to
this first view of the city of Stockholm; a foolish, exasperating
grievance, which would rankle, which would not be buried, which sprang
to fresh life at each fresh sight of her. Yes, of a certainty, sooner or
later Stella Croyle and he would quarrel, so bitterly that all the
king's horses and all the king's men could never bring them again
together; and over some utterly unimportant matter like the first view
of Stockholm.

"Youth has many privileges over age," continued Hardiman, "but none
greater than the vision, the half-interpreted recurring vision of wider
spaces and greater things, towards which you sail on the wind of a great
emotion. Sooner or later, a man loses that vision and then only knows
his loss. Stay here, and you'll lose it before your time."

Luttrell looked curiously at his companion, wondering what manner of man
he had been in his twenties. Hardiman answered the look with a laugh.
"Oh, I, too, had my ambitions once."

Luttrell folded the cablegram which Hardiman had written out and placed
it in the breast pocket of his dinner-jacket.

"I will talk to Stella to-night at dinner. Then, if I decide to send it,
I can send it from the hotel over there at the landing-steps before we
return to the yacht."

Sir Charles Hardiman rose cumbrously with a shrug of his shoulders. He
had done his best, but since Luttrell would talk the question over with
Stella Croyle, shoulder to shoulder with her amongst the lights and
music, the perfume of her hair in his nostrils and the pleading of her
eyes within his sight--he, Charles Hardiman, might as well have held his
tongue.

So very likely it would have been. But when great matters are ripe for
decisions one way or the other, the little accident as often as not
decides. There was a hurrying of light feet in the corridor outside, a
swift, peremptory knocking upon the door. The same woman's voice called
in rather a shrill note through the panels! "Harry! Why don't you come?
We are waiting for you."

And in the sound of the voice there was not merely impatience, but a
note of ownership--very clear and definite; and hearing it Luttrell
hardened. He stood up straight. He had the aspect of a man in revolt.




CHAPTER II

AN ANTHEM INTERVENES


Upon the entrance of Hardiman's party a wrinkle was smoothed away from
the forehead of a _maitre d'hotel_.

"So! You have come!" he cried. "I began to despair."

"You have kept my table?" Sir Charles insisted.

"Yes, but with what an effort of diplomacy!"; and the _maitre d'hotel_
led his guests to the very edge of the great balcony. Here the table was
set endwise to the balustrade, commanding the crowded visitors, yet
taking the coolness of the night. Hardiman was contented with his choice
of its position. But when he saw his guests reading the cards which
assigned them their places, he was not so contented with the order of
their seating.

"If I had known an hour before!" he said to himself, and the astounding
idea crept into his mind that perhaps it was, after all, a waste to
spend so much time on the disposition of a dinner-table and the ordering
of food.

However, the harm was done now. There was Luttrell already seated at the
end against the balustrade. He had the noise of a Babel of tongues and
the glitter of a thousand lights upon his left hand; upon his right, the
stars burning bright in a cool gloom of deepest purple, and far below
the riding-lamps of the yachts tossing on the water like yellow flowers
in a garden; whilst next to him, midway between the fragrant darkness
and the hard glitter, revealing, as she always did, a kinship with each
of them, sat Stella Croyle.

"I should have separated them," Hardiman reflected uneasily as he raised
and drank his cocktail. "But how the deuce could I without making
everybody stare? This party wasn't got up to separate people. All the
same----"

The hushed wonder of a summer night. The gaiety of a bright thronged
restaurant! In either setting Stella Croyle was a formidable
antagonist. But combine the settings and she took to herself, at once by
nature, the seduction of both!

"Poor devil, he won't have a dog's chance!" the baronet concluded; and
he watched approvingly what appeared to him to be Luttrell's endeavour
to avoid joining battle on this unfavourable field. He could only trust
feebly in that and in the strength of the "something else," the secret
reason he was never to know.

It was about half-way through dinner when Stella Croyle, who had
directed many a furtive, anxious glance to the averted face of her
companion, attacked directly.

"What is the matter with you to-night?" she asked, interrupting him in
the midst of a rattle of futilities. "Why should you recite to me from
the guide-book about the University of Upsala?"

"It appears to be most interesting, and quaint," replied Luttrell
hastily.

"Then we might hire a motor-car and run out there to luncheon.
To-morrow! Just you and I."

"No." Harry Luttrell exclaimed suddenly and Stella Croyle drew back. Her
face clouded. She had won the first round, but victory brought her no
ease. She knew now from the explosion of his "No" and the swift alarm
upon his face that something threatened her.

"You must tell me what has happened," she cried. "You must! Oh, you turn
away from me!"

From the dark steep garden at their feet rose a clamour of cheers--to
Luttrell an intervention of Providence.

"Listen," he said.

Here and there a man or a woman rose at the dinner tables and looked
down. Upwards along a glimmering riband of path, a group of students
bore one of their number shoulder-high. Luttrell leaned over the
balustrade. The group below halted; speeches were made; cheers broke out
anew.

"It is the Swedish javelin-thrower. He won the championship of the world
this afternoon."

"Did he?" asked Stella Croyle in a soft voice at his side. "Does he
throw javelins as well as you? You wound me every time."

Luttrell raised his head. It was not fear of defeat which had kept his
looks averted from Stella's dark and starry eyes. No thought of lists
set and a contest to be fought out had even entered his head. But he did
fear to see those eyes glisten with tears--for she so seldom shed them!
And even more than the evidence of her pain he feared the dreadful
submission with which women in the end receive the stroke of fortune. He
had to meet her gaze now, however.

"I put off telling you," he began lamely.

"So that this evening of mine with you might not be spoilt," she
returned. "But, my dear, my evening was already spoilt before the launch
left the yacht gangway. I am not so blind."

Stella Croyle was at this date twenty-six years old; and it was
difficult to picture her any older. Partly because of her vivid
colouring and because she was abrim with life; partly because in her
straightness of limb and the clear treble of her voice, she was boyish.
"What a pretty boy she would make!" was the first thought until you
noticed the slim delicacy of her hands and feet, the burnish of gold on
the dark wealth of her hair, the fine chiselling of brow and nose and
chin. Then it was seen that she was all woman. She was tall and yet
never looked tall. It seemed that you could pick her up with a finger,
but try and she warned you of the weakness of your arm. She was a
baffling person. She ran and walked with the joyous insolence of
eighteen, yet at any moment some veil might be rolled up in her eyes and
face to show you for one tragic instant a Lady of Sorrows.

She leaned towards Luttrell, and as Hardiman had foreseen the perfume of
her hair stormed his senses.

"Tell me!" she breathed, and Luttrell, with his arguments and reasons
cut and dried and conned over pat for delivery, began nevertheless to
babble. There were the Olympic Games. She herself must have seen how
they were fatal to their own purpose. Troubles were coming--battles
behind the troubles. All soldiers knew! They knew this too--the phrase
of a young Lieutenant-Colonel lecturing at the Staff College.

"Battles are not won either by sheer force or pure right, but by the one
or the other of those two Powers which has Discipline as its Chief of
Staff."

He was implying neither very tactfully nor clearly that he was on the
way to dwindling into an undisciplined soldier. But it did not matter in
the least. For Stella Croyle was not listening. All this was totally
unimportant. Men always went about and about when they had difficult
things to say to women. Her eyes never left his face and she would know
surely enough when those words were rising to his lips which it was
necessary that she should mark and understand. Meanwhile her
perplexities and fears grew.

"Of course it can't be _that_," she assured herself again and again, but
with a dreadful catch at her heart. "Oh no, it can't be _that_."

"That," was the separation which some day or another--after a long and
wondrous period--both were agreed, must come. But, consoling herself
with the thought that she would be prepared, she had always set the day
on so distant an horizon that it had no terrors for her. Now it suddenly
dismayed her, a terror close at hand. Here on this crowded balcony
joyous with lights and gay voices and invaded by all the subtle
invitations of a summer night above the water! Oh no, it was not
possible!

Luttrell put his hand to his breast pocket and Stella watched and
listened now with all her soul. More than once during dinner she had
seen him touch that pocket in an abstraction. He drew from it two
papers, one the cablegram which he had received from Cairo, the other
Hardiman's reply. He handed her the first of the two.

"This reached me this morning."

Stella Croyle studied the paper with her heart in her mouth. But the
letters would not be still.

"Oh, what does it mean?" she cried.

"It offers me service abroad."

Stella's face flushed and turned white. She bent her head over the
cablegram.

"At Cairo," she said, with a little gasp of relief. After all Cairo was
not so far. A week, and one was at Cairo.

"Further south, in the Sudan--Heaven knows where!"

"Too far then?" she suggested. "Too far."

"For you? Yes! Too far," Luttrell replied.

Stella lifted a tragic face towards him; and though he winced he met her
eyes.

"But you are not going! You can't go!"

Luttrell handed to her the second paper.

"You never wrote this," she said very quickly.

"Yet it is what I would have written."

Stella Croyle shot one swift glance at Sir Charles Hardiman. She had
recognised his handwriting. Hardiman was in Luttrell's cabin while the
rest of the party waited on the deck and the launch throbbed at the
gangway. If a woman's glance had power, he would have been stricken that
instant. But she wasted no more than a glance upon the worldly-wiseman
at the head of their table. She turned again to the first telegram.

"This is an answer, this cablegram from Cairo?"

"Yes."

"To a cable of yours?"

"Sent three days ago."

The answers she received were clear, unhesitating. It was a voice from a
rock speaking! So utterly mistaken was she; and so completely Luttrell
bent every nerve to the service of shortening the hour of misery. The
appalling moment was then actually upon her. She had foreseen it--so she
thought. But it caught her nevertheless unprepared as death catches a
sinner on his bed.

She stared at the telegrams--not reading them. His arguments and
prefaces--the Olympic Games, Discipline and the rest of it--what she had
caught of them, she blew away as so much froth. She dived to the
personal reason.

"You are tired of me."

"No," Luttrell answered hotly. "That's not true--not even a half-truth.
If I were tired of you, it would all be so easy, so brutally easy."

"But you are!" Her voice rose shrill in its violence. "You know you are
but you are too much of a coward to say so--oh, like all men!" and as
Luttrell turned to her a face startled by her outcry and uttered a
remonstrant "Hush!", she continued bitterly, "What do I care if they all
hear? I am impossible! You know that, don't you? I am quite impossible!
I have gone my own way. I am one of the people you hate--one of the
Undisciplined."

Stella Croyle hardly knew in her passion what she was saying, and
Luttrell could only wait in silence for the storm to pass. It passed
with a quickness which caught him at loss; so quickly she swept from
mood to mood.

He heard her voice at his ear, remorseful and most appealing. "Oh, Wub,
what have I done that you should treat me so?"

Sir Charles Hardiman, watchful of the duel, guessed from the movement of
her lips what she was saying.

"These nicknames are the very devil," he exclaimed, apparently about
nothing, to his startled neighbour. "The first thing a woman does when
she's fond of a man is to give him some ridiculous name, which doesn't
belong to him. She worries her wits trying this one and that one, as a
tailor tries on you a suit of clothes, and when she has got your fit,
she uses it--publicly. So others use it too and so it no longer contents
her. Then she invents a variation, a nickname within a nickname, and
that she keeps to herself, for her own private use. That's the nickname
I am referring to, my dear, when I say it's the very devil."

The lady to whom he spoke smiled vaguely and surmised that he might be
very right. For herself, she said, she had invented no nicknames; which
was to assert that she had never been in love. For the practice seems
invariable, and probably Dido in times long since gone by had one for
AEneas, and Virgil knew all about it. But since she was a woman, it would
be a name at once so absurd and so intimate that it would never have
gone with the dignified rhythm of the hexameter. "Wobbles" had been the
first name which Stella Croyle had invented for Harry Luttrell, though
by what devious process she had lighted upon it, psychology could not
have discovered. "Wub" was the nickname within the nickname, the
cherished sign that the two of them lived apart in a little close-hedged
garden of their own. Luttrell's eyes were upon her as she spoke it. And
she spoke it with a curious little wistful pursing of soft lips so that
it came to him winged with the memory of all her kisses.

"Oh, Wub, must you leave me?" she pleaded in a breaking whisper. "What
will be left to me if you do?"

Luttrell dropped his forehead in his hands. All the character which he
had in those untried days bade him harden himself against the appeal.
But his resolution was melting like metal in a furnace. He tried to
realise the truth which Hardiman had uttered three or four hours before.
There would be sooner or later a quarrel, a humiliating, hateful quarrel
over some miserable trifle which neither Stella nor he would ever
afterwards forgive. But her voice was breaking with a sob in a whisper
at his ear and how could he look forward so far?

"Stella!"

He turned impulsively towards her.

"The game's up," reflected Sir Charles Hardiman at the end of the table.
"Calypso wins--no, by God!"

For before Luttrell could speak another word, the music crashed and all
that assemblage was on its feet. The orchestra was playing the Swedish
National Anthem; and upon that, one after the other, followed the hymns
of the peoples who had taken part in the Games. In turn the
representatives of each people stood and resumed their seat, the music
underlining their individuality and parking them in sections, even as
rivalry had parked them in the Stadium. The majestic anthem of Russia,
the paean of the Marseillaise, the livelier march of Italy, the song of
Germany, the Star-Spangled Banner; and long before the band struck into
the solemn rhythm of "God save the King," Stella Croyle at all events
knew that Calypso had lost. For she saw a flame illumine Luttrell's face
and transfigure him. He had slipped out of her reach. The doubts and
perplexities which had so troubled him during the last months were now
resolved. As he listened to the Hymns, he saw as in a vision the nations
advancing abreast over a vast plain like battalions in line with their
intervals for manoeuvring spaced out between them. In front of each
nation rolled a grey vapour, which gradually took shape before
Luttrell's eyes; and there was made visible to him a shadowy legion of
men marching in the van, the men who had left ease and women and all the
grace of life behind them and had gone out to die in the harness of
service--one in this, one in that corner of the untravelled world, and
now all reunited in a strong fellowship. The vision remained with him
after the last strains of music had died away, and faded slowly. He
waked to the lights and clamour of the restaurant and turned to Stella
Croyle.

"Stella," he began, and----

"I know," she interrupted in a small voice. She was sitting with her
head downcast and her hands clenched upon her lap so tightly that the
skin was white about the points where the tips of her fingers pressed.
"Perhaps I shan't suffer so very much."

She was careful not to lift her head, and when a few moments later their
host gave the signal to move, she rose quickly and turned her back on
Luttrell.

The party motored back through the Dyurgarden, past the glimmering tents
where the Boy-Scouts were encamped to the great hotel by the
landing-stage. There a wait of a few minutes took place whilst Hardiman
settled for the cars, and during that wait Luttrell disappeared. He
rejoined his friends at the harbour steps and when the launch put off
towards the _Dragonfly_, he found himself side by side with Stella
Croyle. In the darkness she relaxed her guard. Luttrell saw the great
tears glisten on her dark eyelashes and fall down her cheeks.

"I am sorry, Stella," he whispered, dropping his hand on hers, and she
clutched it and let it go.

"Perhaps I shan't suffer so very much," she repeated and the next moment
the gangway light shone down upon their faces. Stella dropped her head
and furtively dried her cheeks.

"I want to go up last," she said, "and just behind you, so that no one
shall see what a little fool I am making of myself."

But by some subtle understanding already it was felt amongst that group
of people, quick to perceive troubles of the emotions, that something
was amiss between the pair. They were left alone upon the deck. Stella
by chance looking southwards to the starlit gloom, Luttrell to the
north, where still the daylight played in blue and palest green and the
delicate changing fires of the opal.

"What will you do, Stella?" Luttrell asked gently.

"I think I will go and live in the country," she replied.

"It will be lonely, child."

"There will be ghosts, my dear, to keep me company," she answered with a
wan smile. "People like me always have to be a good deal alone, anyway.
I shall be, of course, lonelier, now that I have no one to play with,"
and the smile vanished from her lips. She flung up her face towards the
skies, letting her grief have its way upon that empty deck.

"So we shall never be together--just you and I--alone again," she said,
forcing herself to realise that unintelligible thing. Her thoughts ran
back over the year--the year of their alliance--and she saw all of its
events flickering vividly before her, as they say drowning people do.
"Oh, Wub, what a cruel mistake you made when you went out of your way to
be kind," she cried, with the tears streaming down her face; and
Luttrell winced.

"Yes, that's true," he admitted remorsefully. "I never dreamed what
would come of it."

"You should have left me alone."

Amongst the flickering pictures of the year the first was the clearest.
A great railway station in the West of England, a train drawn up at the
departure platform, herself with a veil drawn close over her face, half
running, half walking in a pitiful anguish towards the train; and then a
man at her elbow. Harry Luttrell.

"I have reserved a compartment. I suspected that things were not going
to turn out well. I thought the long journey to London alone would be
terrible. If things had turned out right, you would not have seen me."

She had let him place her in a carriage, look after her wants as if she
had been a child, hold her in his arms, tend her with the magnificent
sympathy of his silence. That had been the real beginning. Stella had
known him as the merest of friends before. She had met him here and
there at a supper party, at a dancing club, at some Bohemian country
house; and then suddenly he had guessed what others had not, and
foolishly had gone out of his way to be kind.

"She would have died if I hadn't travelled with her," Luttrell argued
silently. "She would have thrown herself out of the carriage, or when
she reached home she would have----" and his argument stopped, and he
glanced at her uneasily.

Undisciplined, was the epithet she had used of herself. You never knew
what crazy thing she might do. There was daintiness but no order in her
life; the only law she knew was given to her by a fastidious taste.

"Of course, Wub, I have always known that you never cared for me as I do
for you. So it was bound to end some time." She caught his hand to her
heart for a second, and then, dropping it, ran from his side.




CHAPTER III

MARIO ESCOBAR


Late in the autumn of the following year a new play, written by Martin
Hillyard and named "The Dark Tower," was produced at the Rubicon Theatre
in Panton Street, London. It was Hillyard's second play. His first,
produced in April of the same year, had just managed to limp into July;
and that small world which concerns itself with the individualities of
playwrights was speculating with its usual divergencies upon Hillyard's
future development.

"The Dark Tower" was a play of modern days, built upon the ancient
passions. The first act was played to a hushed house, and while the
applause which greeted the fall of the curtain was still rattling about
the walls of the theatre, Sir Charles Hardiman hoisted himself heavily
out of his stall and made his way to a box on the first tier, which he
entered without knocking.

There was but one person in the box, a young man hidden behind a side
curtain. Hardiman let himself collapse into a chair by the side of the
young man.

"Seems all right," he said. "You have a story to tell. It's clear in
every word, too, that you know where you are going. That makes people
comfortable and inclined to go along with you."

Hillyard turned with a smile.

"We haven't come to the water jump yet," he said.

Hardiman remained in the box during the second act. He watched the stage
for a while, took note of the laughter which welcomed this or that line,
and of the silence which suddenly enclosed this or that scene from the
rest of the play; and finally, with a certain surprise, and a certain
amusement he fixed his attention upon the play's author. The act ended
in laughter and Hillyard leaned back, and himself laughed, without pose
or affectation, as heartily as any one in the theatre.

"You beat me altogether, my young friend," said Hardiman. "You ought to
be walking up and down the pavement outside in the classical state of
agitation. But you appear to be enjoying the play, as if you never had
seen it before."

"And I haven't," Hillyard returned. "This isn't quite the play which
we have been learning and rehearsing during the last month. Here's
the audience at work, adding a point there, discovering an
interpretation--yes, actually an interpretation--there, bringing into
importance one scene, slipping over the next which we thought more
important--altering it, in fact. Of course," and he returned to his
earlier metaphor, "I know the big fences over which we may come a
cropper. I can see them ahead before we come up to them and know the
danger. We are over two of them, by the way. But on the whole I am more
interested than nervous. It's the first time I have ever been to a first
night, you see."

"Well, upon my word," cried Hardiman, "you are the coolest hand at it I
ever saw." But he could have taken back his words the next moment.

In spite of Hillyard's aloof and disinterested air, the night had
brought its excitement and in a strength of which he himself was
unaware. It lifted now the veils behind which a man will hide his secret
thoughts! He turned swiftly to Hardiman with a boyish light upon his
face.

"Oh, I am not in doubt of what to-night means to me! Not for a moment.
If it's failure, it means that I begin again to-morrow on something
else; and again after that, and again after that, until success does
come. Playwriting is my profession, and failures are a necessary part of
it--just as much a part as the successes. But even if the great success
were to come now, it wouldn't mean quite so much to me perhaps as it
might to other people." He paused, and a smile broke upon his face. "I
live expecting a messenger. There! That's my secret delivered over to
you under the excitement of a first night."

And as he spoke the colour mounted into his face. He turned away in
confusion. His play was nearer at his heart than he had thought; the
enthusiasm which seemed to be greeting it had stirred him unwisely.

"Tell me," he said hurriedly, "who all these people in the stalls are."

He peeped down between the edge of the curtain and the side wall of the
box whilst Hardiman stood up behind him.

"Yes, I will be your man from Cook's," said Hardiman genially.

His heart warmed to the young man both on account of his outburst and of
the shame which had followed upon the heels of it. Few beliefs had
survived in Hardiman after forty years of wandering up and down the
flowery places of the earth; but one--he had lectured Harry Luttrell
upon it on a night at Stockholm--continually gained strength in him.
Youth must beget visions and man must preserve them if great work were
to be done; and so easily the visions lost their splendour and their
inspiration. Of all the ways of tarnishing the vision, perhaps talk was
the most murderous. Hillyard possessed them. Hillyard was ashamed that
he had spoken of them. Therefore he had some chance of retaining them.

"Yes, I will show you the celebrities." He pointed out the leading
critics and the blue stockings of the day. His eyes roamed over the
stalls. "Do you see the man with the broad face and the short whiskers
in the fourth row? The man who looks just a little too like a country
gentleman to be one? That is Sir Chichester Splay. He made a fortune in
a murky town of Lancashire, and, thirsting for colour, came up to London
determined to back a musical comedy. That is the way the craving for
colour takes them in the North. His wish was gratified. He backed 'The
Patchouli Girl,' and in that shining garden he got stung. He is now what
they call an amateur. No first night is complete without him. He is the
half-guinea Mecaenas of our days."

Hillyard looked down at Sir Chichester Splay and smiled at his
companion's description.

"You will meet him to-night at supper, and if your play is a
success--not otherwise--you will stay with him in Sussex."

"No!" cried Hillyard; but Sir Charles was relentless in his insistence.

"You will. His wife will see to that. Who the pretty girl beside him is
I do not know. But the more or less young man on the other side of her,
talking to her with an air of intimacy a little excessive in a public
place, is Mario Escobar. He is a Spaniard, and has the skin-deep
politeness of his race. He is engaged in some sort of business,
frequents some sort of society into which he is invited by the women,
and he is not very popular amongst men. He belongs, however, to some
sort of club. That is all I know about him. One would think he had
guessed we were speaking of him," Hardiman added.

For at that moment Mario Escobar raised his dark, sleek head, and his
big, soft eyes--the eyes of a beautiful woman--looked upwards to the
box. It seemed to Hillyard for a moment that they actually exchanged a
glance, though he himself was out of sight behind the curtain, so direct
was Escobar's gaze. It was, however, merely the emptiness of the box
which had drawn the Spaniard's attention. He was neatly groomed, of a
slight figure, tall, and with his eyes, his thin olive face, his small
black moustache and clean-cut jaw he made without doubt an effective and
arresting figure.

"Now turn your head," said Hardiman, "the other way, and notice the big,
fair man in the back row of the stalls. He is a rival manager, and he is
explaining in a voice loud enough to be heard by the first rows of the
pit, the precise age of your leading lady. Now look down! There is a
young girl flitting about the stalls. She is an actress, not very
successful. But to-night she is as busy as a bee. She is crabbing your
play. Yesterday her opinion on the subject was of no value, and it will
be again of no value to-morrow. But as one of the limited audience on a
first night, she can do just a tiny bit of harm. But don't hold it
against her, Hillyard! She has no feeling against you. This is her
little moment of importance."

Sir Charles rattled on through the interval--all good nature with just a
slice of lemon--and it had happened that he had pointed out one who was
to be the instrument of great trouble for Hillyard and a few others,
with whom this story is concerned.

Hillyard interrupted Hardiman.

"Who is the girl at the end of the sixth row, who seems to have stepped
down from a china group on a mantelpiece?"

"That one?" said Hardiman, and all the raillery faded from his face.
"That is Mrs. Croyle. You will meet her to-night at my supper party." He
hesitated as to what further he should say. "You might do worse than be
a friend to her. She is not, I am afraid, very happy."

Hillyard was surprised at the sudden gentleness of his companion's
voice, and looked quickly towards him. Hardiman answered the look as he
got heavily up from his chair.

"I sometimes fear that I have some responsibility for her unhappiness.
But there are things one cannot help."

The light in the auditorium went down while Hardiman was leaving the
box, and the curtain rose on the third act of "The Dark Tower." Of that
play, however, you may read in the files of the various newspapers, if
you will. This story is concerned with Martin Hillyard, not his work. It
is sufficient to echo the words of Sir Chichester Splay when Hillyard
was introduced to him an hour and a half later in the private
supper-room at the Semiramis Hotel.

"A good play, Mr. Hillyard. Not a great play, of course, but quite a
good play," said Sir Chichester with just the necessary patronage to
tickle Hillyard to an appreciation of Hardiman's phrases--a ten and
six-penny Mecaenas.

"I am grateful that it has earned your good opinion," he replied.

"Oh, not at all!" cried Sir Chichester, and catching a lady who passed
by the arm. "Stella, Mr. Hillyard should know you. This is Mrs. Croyle.
I hope you will meet him some day at Rackham Park."

Sir Chichester trotted away to greet the manager of the _Daily Harpoon_,
who was at that moment shaking hands with Hardiman.

"I congratulate you," said Stella Croyle, as she gave him her hand.

"Thank you. So you know Sir Chichester well?"

"His wife has been a friend of mine for a long time." Her eyes twinkled.
"I wonder you have not been seen at his house."

"Oh, I am only just hatched out," said Hillyard. They both laughed. "I
hardly know a soul here except my leading lady and our host."

They were summoned to the supper table. Hillyard found himself with the
leading lady on one side of him and Stella Croyle opposite, and Mario
Escobar a couple of seats away. Supper was half through when Escobar
leaned suddenly forward.

"Mr. Hillyard, I have seen you before, somewhere and not in England."

"That is possible."

"In Spain?"

"Yes," answered Hillyard.

A certain curiosity in Escobar's voice, a certain reticence in
Hillyard's, arrested the attention of those about.

"Let me see!" continued Escobar. "It was in the Opera House at Barcelona
on the first performance of Manon Lescaut."

"No," replied Hillyard.

"Then--I know--it was under the palm-trees in front of the sea at
Alicante one night."

Hillyard nodded.

"That may well have been. I was up and down the south coast of Spain for
three years. Eighteen months of it were spent at Alicante."

He turned to his neighbour, but Escobar persisted.

"It was for your health?"

Hillyard did not answer directly.

"My lungs have always been my trouble," he said.

Hardiman bent towards Stella Croyle.

"I think our new friend has had a curious life, Stella. He should
interest you."

Stella Croyle replied with a shrewd look towards the Spaniard.

"At present he is interesting Escobar. One would say Escobar was
suspicious lest Mr. Hillyard should know too much of him."

Sir Charles laughed.

"The Mario Escobars are always suspicious. Let us see!" he said in a low
voice, and leaning across the table, he shot a question sharply at the
Spaniard.

"And what were you doing under the palm trees, in front of the sea at
Alicante, Senor Escobar?"

Mario Escobar sat back. The challenge had startled him. He reflected,
and as the recollection came he turned slowly very white.

"I?" he asked.

"Yes," said Hardiman, leaning forward. But it was not at Hardiman that
Escobar was looking. His eyes were fixed warily on Hillyard. He answered
the question warily too, fragment by fragment, ready to stop, ready to
take the words back, if a sign of recollection kindled in Hillyard's
face.

"It is what we should call here the esplanade--the sea and harbour on
one side, the houses on the other. The band plays under the palms in
front of the Casino on summer nights. I----" and he took the last words
at a rush--"I was sitting in a lounge chair in front of the club, when I
saw Mr. Hillyard pass. An Englishman is noticeable in Alicante. There
are so few of them."

"Yes," Hillyard agreed. No recollection was stirred in him by Escobar's
description. Escobar turned away, but he could not quite conceal the
relief he felt.

"Yes, my friend," said Hardiman to himself, "you have taken your
water-jump too. And you're uncommonly glad that you haven't come a
cropper."

After that noticeable moment of tension, the talk swept on into
sprightlier channels.




CHAPTER IV

THE SECRET OF HARRY LUTTRELL


"Shall I take you home?"

"Oh, will you?" cried Stella Croyle, with a little burst of pleasure.
After all, Hillyard was the great man of the evening, and that he should
consider her out of all that company was pleasant. "I will get my
cloak."

Throughout the supper-party Hillyard had been at a loss to discover in
Stella Croyle the woman whom Hardiman had led him to expect. Her spirits
were high, but unforced. She chattered away with more gaiety than wit,
like the rest of Hardiman's guests, but the gaiety was apt to the
occasion. She had the gift of a clear and musical laugh, and her small
delicate face would wrinkle and pout into grimaces which gave to her a
rather attractive air of _gaminerie_--Hillyard could find no word but
the French one to express her on that evening. He drove her to a small
house in the Bayswater Road, overlooking Kensington Gardens.

"Will you come in for a moment?" she asked.

Hillyard followed her up a paved pathway, through a tiny garden enclosed
in a high wall, to her door. She led him into a room bright with flowers
and pictures. Curtains of purple brocade were drawn across the window, a
fire burned on the hearth, and thick soft cushions on broad couches gave
the room a look of comfort.

"You live here alone?" Hillyard asked.

"Yes."

She turned suddenly towards him as he gazed about the room.

"I married a long while ago." She stood in front of him like a slim
child. It seemed impossible. "Yes, before I knew anything--to get away
from home. Our marriage did not go smoothly. After three years I ran
away--oh, not with any one I cared for; he happened to be there, that
was all. After a month he deserted me in Italy. I have fortunately some
money of my own and a few friends who did not turn me down--Lady Splay,
for instance. There!"

She moved to a table and poured out for Hillyard a whisky-and-soda.

"My question was thoughtless," he said. "I did not mean that you should
answer it as you did."

"I preferred you to know."

"I am honoured," Hillyard replied.

Stella Croyle sat down upon a low stool in front of the fire. Hillyard
sank into one of the deep-cushioned chairs. The day of tension was over,
and there was no doubt about the success of "The Dark Tower." Stella
Croyle sat very quietly, with the firelight playing upon her face and
her delicate dress. Her vivacity had dropped from her like the pretty
cloak she had thrown aside. Both became her well, but they were for use
out-of-doors, and Hillyard was grateful that she had discarded them.

"You are tired, no doubt," he said, reluctantly. "I ought to go."

"No," she answered. "It is pleasant before the fire here."

"Thank you. I should like to stay for a little while. I did not know
until I came into this room with how much anxiety I had been looking
forward to this night."

He leaned forward with his hands clenched, and saw pass in the bright
coals glimpses of the long tale of days when endeavour was fruitless and
hopes were disappointed. "Success! Lord, how I wanted it!" he whispered.

Stella Croyle looked at him with a smile.

"It was sure to come to you, since you wanted it enough," she said.

"Yes, but in time?" exclaimed Hillyard.

"In time for what?"

Hillyard broke into a laugh.

"I don't know," he answered. He was silent for a little while, and the
comfort of the room, the quiet of the night, the pleasant sympathy of
Stella Croyle, all wrought upon him. "I don't know," he repeated slowly.
"I am waiting. But out of my queer life something more has got to
come--something more and something different. I have always been sure of
it, but I used to be afraid that the opportunity would come while I was
still chained to the handles of the barrow."

Hillyard's life, though within a short time its vicissitudes had been
many and most divergent, had probably not been as strange as he imagined
it to be. He looked back upon it with too intense an interest to be its
impartial judge. Certainly its distinctive feature had escaped him
altogether. At the age of twenty-nine he was a man absolutely without
tradition.

His father, a partner in a small firm of shipping agents which had not
the tradition of a solid, old-fashioned business, had moved in Martin's
boyhood from a little semi-detached villa with its flight of front steps
in one suburb, to a house in a garden of trees in another. The boy had
been sent to a brand new day-school of excessive size, which gathered
its pupils into its class-rooms at nine o'clock in the morning and
dispersed them to their homes at four. No boy was proud that he went to
school at St. Eldred's, or was deterred from any meanness by the thought
that it was a breach of the school's traditions. The school meant so
many lessons in so many class-rooms, and no more.

Hillyard was the only child. Between himself and his parents there was
little sympathy and understanding. He saw them at meals, and fled from
the table to his own room, where he read voraciously.

"You never heard of such a jumble of books," he said to Stella Croyle.
"Matthew Arnold, Helps, Paradise Lost, Ten Thousand a Year, The Revolt
of Islam, Tennyson. I knew the whole of In Memoriam by heart--absolutely
every line of it, and pages of Browning. The little brown books! I would
walk miles to pick one of them up. My people would find the books lying
about the house, and couldn't make head or tail of why I wanted to read
them. There were two red-letter days: one when I first bought the two
volumes of Herrick, the second when I tumbled upon De Quincey. That's
the author to bowl a boy over. The Stage-Coach, the Autobiography, the
Confessions--I could never get tired of them. I remember buying an ounce
of laudanum at a chemist's on London Bridge and taking it home, with
the intention of following in the steps of my hero and qualifying to
drink it out of a decanter."

Stella Croyle had swung round from the fireplace, and was listening now
with parted lips.

"And did you?" she exclaimed, in a kind of eager suspense.

Hillyard shook his head.

"The taste was too unpleasant. I drank about half an ounce and threw the
rest away. I was saved from that folly."

Stella Croyle turned again to the fire.

"Yes," she said rather listlessly.

Yet Hillyard might almost have become a consumer of drugs, such queer
and wayward fancies took him in charge. It became a fine thing to him to
stay up all night just for the sake of staying up, and many a night he
passed at his open window, even in winter time, doing nothing, not even
dreaming, simply waiting for the day to break. It seemed to him soft and
wrong that a man should take his clothes off and lie comfortably between
sheets. And then came another twist. When all the house was quiet, he
would slip out of a ground-floor window and roam for hours about the
lonely roads, a solitary boy revelling even then in the extraordinary
conduct of his life. There was in the neighbourhood a footpath through a
thick grove of trees which ran up a long, high hill, and, midway in the
ascent, crossed a railway cutting by a rustic bridge.

"That was my favourite walk, though I always entered by the swing-gate
in fear, and trembled at every movement of the branches, and continually
expected an attack. I would hang over that railway bridge, especially on
moonlit nights, and compose poems and thoughts--you know--great, short
thoughts." Hillyard laughed. "I was going to be a poet, you
understand--a clear, full voice such as had seldom been heard; my poems
were all about the moon sailing in the Empyrean and Death. Death was my
strong suit. I sent some of my poems to the local Press, signed 'Lethe,'
but I could never hear that they were published."

Stella Croyle laughed, and Hillyard went on. "From the top of the hill I
would strike off to the west, and see the morning break over London. In
summer that was wonderful! The Houses of Parliament. St Paul's like a
silver bubble rising out of the mist, then, as the mist cleared over the
river, a London clean and all silver in the morning light! I was going
to conquer all that, you know--I--

     "'Silent upon a peak of Peckham Rye.'"

"I wonder you didn't kill yourself," cried Stella.

"I very nearly did," answered Hillyard.

"Didn't your parents interfere?"

"No. They never knew of my wanderings. They did know, of course, that I
used not to go to bed. But they left me alone. I was a bitter
disappointment in every way. They wanted a reasonable son, who would go
into the agency business, and they had instead--me. I should think that
I was pretty odious, too, and we were all of passionate tempers.
Besides, with all this reading, I didn't do particularly well at school.
How could I when day after day I would march off from the house, leaving
a smooth bed behind me in my room? We were thorny people. Quarrels were
frequent. My mother had a phrase which set my teeth on edge--'Don't you
talk, Martin, until you are earning your living'--the sort of remark
that stings and stays in a boy's memory as something unfair. There was a
great row in the end, one night at ten o'clock, when I was sixteen, and
I left the house and tramped into London."

"What in the world did you do?" cried Stella.

"I shipped as a boy on a fruit-tramp for Valencia in Spain. And I
believe that saved my life. For my lungs were beginning to be
troublesome."

The fruit-tramp had not been out more than two days when the fo'c'sle
hands selected the lad, since he had some education, to be their
spokesman on a deputation to the captain. Martin Hillyard went aft with
the men and put their case for better food and less violence. He was not
therefore popular with the old man, and at Valencia he thought it
prudent to desert.

Stella Croyle had turned towards him again. There was a vividness in his
manner, an enjoyment, too, which laid hold upon her. It was curious to
her to realise that this man talking to her here in the Bayswater Road,
had been so lately a ragged youth scouting for his living on the quays
of Southern Spain.

"You were at that place--Alicante!" she cried.

"Part of the time."

"And there Mario Escobar saw you. I wonder why he was frightened lest
you too should have seen him," she added slowly.

"Was he?"

"Yes. He was sitting on the same side of the table as you, so you
wouldn't have noticed. But he was opposite to me; and he was afraid."

Hillyard was puzzled.

"I can't think of a reason. I was a shipping clerk of no importance. I
can't remember that I ever came across his name in all the eighteen
months I spent in Alicante."

When Martin Hillyard was nineteen, Death intervened in the family feud.
His parents died within a few weeks of each other.

"I was left with a thousand pounds."

"What did you do with them?"

"I went to Oxford."

"You? After those years of independence?"

"It had been my one passionate dream for years."

"The Scholar Gipsy," "Thyrsis," the Preface to the "Essays in
Criticism," one or two glimpses of the actual city, its grey spires and
towers, caught from the windows of a train, had long ago set the craving
in his heart. Oxford had grown dim in unattainable mists, no longer a
desire so much as a poignant regret, yet now he actually walked its
sacred streets.

"And you enjoyed it?" asked Stella.

"I had the most wondrous time," Hillyard replied fervently. "There was
one bad evening, when I realised that I couldn't write poetry. After
that I cut my hair and joined the Wine Club. I stroked the Torpid and
rowed three in my College Eight. I had friends for the first time. One
above all"

He stopped over-abruptly. Stella Croyle had the impression of a careless
sentinel suddenly waked, suddenly standing to attention at the door of a
treasure-house of memories. She was challenged. Very well. It was her
humour to take the challenge up just to prove to herself that she could
slip past a man's guard if the spirit moved her. She turned on Hillyard
a pair of most friendly sympathetic eyes.

"Tell me of your friend."

"Oh, there's not much to tell. He rowed in the same boat with me. He had
just what I had not--traditions. From his small old brown manor-house in
a western county to his very choice of a career, he was wrapped about in
tradition. He went into the army. He had to go."

"What is his name?"

Stella Croyle interrupted him. She was not looking at him any more. She
was staring into the fire, and her body was very still. But there was
excitement in her voice.

"Harry Luttrell," replied Hillyard, and Stella Croyle did not move. "I
don't know what has become of him. You see, I had ninety pounds left out
of the thousand when I left Oxford. So I just dived."

"But you have come up again now. You will resume your friends at the
point where you dived."

"Not yet. I am going away in a week's time."

"For long?"

"Eight months."

"And far?"

"Very."

"I am sorry," said Stella.

It had been the intention of Hillyard to use his first months of real
freedom in a great wandering amongst wide spaces. The journey had been
long since planned, even details of camp outfit and equipment and the
calibre of rifles considered.

"I have been at my preparations for years," he said. "I lived in a
cubbyhole in Westminster, writing and writing and writing, but when I
thought of this journey to be, certain to be, the walls would dissolve,
and I would walk in magical places under the sun."

     "Now the New Year reviving old desires,
      The thoughtful soul to solitude retires"

Stella Croyle quoted the verses gaily, and Hillyard, lost in the
anticipation of his journey, never noticed that the gaiety rang false.

"And where are you going?" she asked.

"To the Sudan."

It seemed that Stella expected just that answer and no other. She gazed
into the fire without moving, seeking to piece together a picture in the
coals of that unknown country which held all for which she yearned.

"I shall travel slowly up the White Nile to Renk," Hillyard continued,
blissfully. He was delighted at the interest which Mrs. Croyle was
taking in his itinerary. She was clearly a superior person. "From Renk,
I shall cross to the Blue Nile at Rosaires, and travel eastward again to
the River Dinder----"

"You are most fortunate," Stella interrupted wistfully.

"Yes, am I not?" cried Hillyard. It looked as if nothing would break
through his obtuseness.

"I should love to be going in your place."

"You?"

Hillyard smiled. She was for a mantelshelf in a boudoir, not for a camp.

"Yes--I," and her voice suddenly broke.

Hillyard sprang up from his chair, but Stella held up her hand to check
him, and turned her face still further away. Hillyard resumed his seat
uncomfortably.

"You may meet your friend Harry Luttrell in the Sudan," she explained.
"He is stationed somewhere in that country--where exactly I would give a
great deal to know."

They sat without speaking for a little while, Stella once more turning
to the fire. Hillyard watching her wistful face and the droop of her
shoulders understood at last the truth of Hardiman's description. The
mask was lain aside. Here indeed was a Lady of Sorrows.

Stella Croyle was silent until she was quite sure that she had once more
the mastery of her voice. It was important to her that her next words
should not be forgotten. But even so she did not dare to speak above a
whisper.

"I want you to do me a favour. If you should meet Harry, I should like
him to have news of me. I should like him also--oh, not so often--but
just every now and then to write me a little line."

There were tears glistening on her dark eyelashes. Hillyard fell into a
sort of panic as he reflected upon his own vaunting talk. Compared with
this woman's poignant distress, all the vicissitudes of his life seemed
now quite trivial and small. Here were tears falling and Hillyard was
unused to tears. Nor had he ever heard so poignant a longing in any
human voice as that on which Stella's prayer to him was breathed. He was
ashamed. He was also a little envious of Harry Luttrell. He was also a
little angry with Harry Luttrell.

"You won't forget?"

Stella clasped her hands together imploringly.

"No," Hillyard replied. "Be very sure of that, Mrs. Croyle! If I meet
Luttrell he shall have your message."

"Thank you."

Stella Croyle dried the tears from her cheeks and stood up.

"I have been foolish. You won't find me like that again," she cried, and
she helped Hillyard on with his coat. She went to the door to see him
out, but stopped as she grasped the handle.

All Hillyard's talk about himself had passed in at one ear and out at
the other. But every word which he had spoken about Harry Luttrell was
written on her heart. And one phrase had kindled a tiny spark of hope.
She had put it aside by itself, wanting more knowledge about it, and
meaning to have that knowledge before Hillyard departed. She put her
question now, with the door still closed and her back to it.

"You said that Harry _had_ to join the army. What did you mean by that?"

Hillyard hesitated.

"Did he not tell you himself?"

"No."

Hillyard stood between loyalty to his friend and the recollection of
Stella Croyle's tears. If Luttrell had not told her--why then----

"Then I don't well see how I can," he said uncomfortably.

"But I want to know," said Stella, bending her brows at him in
astonishment that he should refuse her so small a thing. Then her manner
changed. "Oh, I do want to know," she cried, and Hillyard's obstinacy
broke down.

Men have the strangest fancies which compel them to do out of all
reason, even the things which they hate to do, and to put aside what
they hold most dear. Fancies unintelligible to practical people like
women--thus Stella Croyle's thoughts ran--but to be taken note of very
carefully. High-flown motives from a world of white angels, where no
doubt they are very suitable. But men will use them as working motives
here below, with the result that they wreck women's hearts and cause
themselves a great deal of useless misery.

Stella's hopes and her self-esteem had for long played with the thought
that it might possibly be one of those impracticable notions which had
whipped Harry Luttrell up to the rupture of their alliance; that after
all, it was not that he was tired of a chain. Yes, she wanted to know.

"Luttrell only told me once, only spoke about it once," said Hillyard
shifting from one foot to the other. "The week after the eights. We
rowed down to Kennington Island in a racing pair, had supper there----"

"Yes, yes," Stella Croyle interrupted. Oh, how dense men could be to be
sure! What in the world did it matter, how or when the secret was told?

"I beg your pardon," said Hillyard. "But really it does matter a little.
You see, it was on our way back, when it was quite dark, so dark that
really you could see little but the line of sky above the trees, and the
flash of the water at the end of the stroke. I doubt if Luttrell would
have ever told me at all, if it hadn't been for just that one fact, that
we were alone together in the darkness and out on the river."

"Yes, I was wrong," said Stella penitently. "I was impatient. I am
sorry."

More and more, just because of this detail, she was ready to believe
that Harry Luttrell had left her for some reason quite outside
themselves, for some other reason than weariness and the swift end of
passion.

"Luttrell's father, his grandfather and many others of his name had
served in the Clayford Regiment. It was his home regiment and the
tradition of the family binding from father to son, was that there
should always be Luttrells amongst its officers."

"And for that reason Harry----" Stella interrupted impetuously.

"No, there is more compulsion than that in Harry's case," Hillyard took
her up. "Much more! The Clayfords _ran_ in the South African War, and
ran badly. They returned to England a disgraced regiment. Now do you see
the compulsion?"

Stella Croyle turned the problem over in her mind.

"Yes, I think I do," she said, but still was rather doubtful. Then she
looked at the problem through Harry Luttrell's eyes.

"Yes, I understand. The regiment must recover its good name in the next
war. It was an obligation of honour on Harry to take his commission in
it, to bear his part in the recovery."

"Yes. I told you, didn't I? Harry Luttrell was cradled in tradition."

Hillyard saw Mrs. Croyle's face brighten. Now she had the key to Harry
Luttrell. He had joined the Clayfords. And what was his fear at
Stockholm? The slovenly soldier! Yes, he had given her the real reason
after all during that dinner on the balcony at Hasselbacken. He feared
to become the slovenly soldier if he idled longer in England. It was not
because he was tired of her, that the separation had come. Thus she
reasoned, and she reasoned just in one little respect wrong. She had the
real secret without a doubt, that "something else," which Sir Charles
Hardiman divined but could not interpret. But she did not understand
that Harry Luttrell saw in her, one of the factors, nay the chief of the
factors which were converting him into that thing of contempt, the
slovenly soldier.

"Thank you," she said to Hillyard with a smile. She stood aside now from
the door. "It was kind of you to bring me home and talk with me for a
little while."

But it seems that her recovery of spirits did not last out the night.
Doubts assailed her--Harry Luttrell was beneath other skies with other
preoccupations and no message from him had ever come to her. Even if
his love was unchanged at Stockholm, it might not be so now. Hillyard
rang her up on the telephone the next morning and warm in his sympathy
asked her to lunch with him. But it was a pitiful little voice which
replied to him. Stella Croyle answered from her bed. She was not well.
She would stay in bed for a day and then go to a little cottage which
she owned in the country. She would see Hillyard again next year when he
returned from the East.

"Yes, that's her way," said Sir Charles Hardiman. He met Hillyard the
day before he sailed for Port Said and questioned him about Stella
Croyle discreetly. "She runs to earth when she's unhappy. We shall not
see her for a couple of months. No one will."




CHAPTER V

HILLYARD'S MESSENGER


Hillyard turned his back upon the pools of the Khor Galagu at the end of
April and wandered slowly down the River Dinder. From time to time his
shikari would lead his camels and camp-servants out on to an open
clearing on the high river bank and announce a name still marked upon
the maps. Once there had been a village here, before the Kalifa sent his
soldiers and herded the tribes into the towns for his better security.
Now there was no sign anywhere of habitation. The red boles of the
mimosa trees, purple-brown cracked earth, yellow stubble of burnt grass,
the skimming of myriads of birds above the tree-tops and shy wild
animals gliding noiselessly in the dark of the forest--there was nothing
more now. It seemed that no human foot had ever trodden that region.

Hillyard's holiday was coming to an end, for in a month the rainy season
would begin and this great park become a marsh. He went fluctuating
between an excited eagerness for a renewal of rivalry and the
interchange of ideas and the companionship of women; and a reluctance to
leave a country which had so restored him to physical well-being. Never
had he been so strong. He had recaptured, after his five years of London
confinement, the swift spring of the muscles, the immediate response of
the body to the demand made upon it, and the glorious cessation of
fatigue when after arduous hours of heat and exertion he stretched
himself upon his camp-chair in the shadow of his tent. On the whole he
travelled northwards reluctantly; until he came to a little open space
ten days away from the first village he would touch.

He camped there just before noon, and at three o'clock on the following
morning, in the company of his shikari, his skinner and his donkey-boy
he was riding along a narrow path high above the river. It was very
dark, so that even with the vast blaze of stars overhead, Hillyard could
hardly see the flutter of his shikari's white robe a few paces ahead of
him. They passed a clump of bushes and immediately afterwards heard a
great shuffling and lapping of water below them. The shikari stopped
abruptly and seized the bridle of Hillyard's donkey. The night was so
still that the noise at the water's edge below seemed to fill the world.
Hillyard slipped off the back of his donkey and took his rifle from his
boy.

"_Gamus!_" whispered the shikari.

Hillyard almost swore aloud. There was a creek, three hours' march away,
where the reed buck came down to drink in the morning. For that creek
Hillyard was now making with a little Mannlicher sporting rifle--and he
had tumbled suddenly upon buffalo! He was on the very edge of the
buffalo country, he would see no more between here and the houses of
Senga.

It was his last chance and he had nothing but a popgun! He was still
reproaching himself when a small but startling change took place. The
snuffling and lapping suddenly ceased; and with the cessation of all
sound, the night became sinister.

The shikari whispered again.

"Now they in their turn know that we are here." He enveloped the
donkey's head in a shawl that he was carrying. "Do not move," he
continued. "They are listening."

Shikari, skinner, donkey-boy, donkey and Hillyard stood together,
motionless, silent. Hillyard had come out to hunt. Down below the herd
in its dumb parliament was debating whether he should be the hunted.
There was little chance for any one of them if the debate went against
them. Hillyard might bring down one--perhaps two, if by some miraculous
chance he shot a bullet through both forelegs. But it would make no
difference to the herd. Hillyard pictured them below by the water's
edge, their heads lifted, their tails stiffened, waiting in the
darkness. Once the lone, earth-shaking roar of a lion spread from far
away, booming over the dark country. But the herd below never stirred.
It no more feared the lion than it feared the four men on the river bank
above. An hour passed before at last the river water plashed under the
trampling hoofs.

Hillyard threw his rifle forward, but the shikari touched him on the
arm.

"They are going," he whispered, and again the four men waited, until the
shikari raised his hand.

"It will be good for us to move! They are very near." He looked towards
the east, but there was no sign yet of the dawn.

"We will go very cautiously into the forest. We shall not know where
they are, but they will know everything we are doing."

In single file they moved from the bank amongst the mimosas, the donkey
with his head covered, still led by the boy. Under the cavern of the
branches it was black as pitch--so black that Hillyard did not see the
hand which the shikari quietly laid upon his shoulder.

"Listen."

On his left a branch snapped, ahead of them a bush that had been bent
aside swished back on its release.

"They are moving with us. They are all round us," the shikari whispered.
"They know everything we do. Let us wait here. When the morning breaks
they will charge or they will go."

So once again the little party came to a halt. Hillyard stood listening
and wondering if the morning would ever come; and even in that time of
tension the habit of his mind reasserted its sway. This long, silent
waiting for the dawn in the depths of an African forest with death at
his very elbow--here was another sharp event of life in vivid contrast
with all the others which had gone before. The years in London, the
letter-box opposite the Abbey where he had posted his manuscripts at
three in the morning and bought a cup of coffee at the stall by the
kerb--times so very close to him--the terms at Oxford, the strange
hungry days on the quays of Spain, the moonlit wanderings on the
footpath over the rustic ridge and up the hill, when he composed poems
to the moon and pithy short, great thoughts--here was something fresh to
add to them if he didn't go down at daybreak under the hoofs of the
herd! Here was yet a further token, that out of the vicissitudes of his
life something more, something new, something altogether different and
unimagined was to come, as the crown and ultimate reason of all that had
gone before. Once more the shikari's hand touched him and pointed
eastwards. The tree-trunks were emerging from the darkness. Beyond them
the black cup of the sky was thinning to translucency. Very quickly the
grey light widened beyond this vast palisade of trees. Even in here
below the high branches, it began to steal vaporous and dim. About them
on every side now the buffalo were moving. The shikari's grip tightened
on Hillyard's arm. The moment of danger had come. It would be the smash
of his breast-bone against the forehead of the beast, hoofs and knees
kneading his broken body and the thrust and lunge of the short curled
horns until long after he was dead, or--the new test and preparation to
add to those which had gone before!

Suddenly the shikari cried aloud.

"They are off"; and while he spoke came a loud snapping of boughs, the
sound of heavy bodies crashing against trees and for a moment against
the grey light in that cathedral of a forest the huge carcases of the
buffalo in mad flight were dimly visible. Then silence came again for a
few moments, till the boughs above them shrilled with birds and the
morning in a splendour of gold and scarlet, like a roar of trumpets
stormed the stars.

Hillyard drew a breath.

"Let us go on," he said.

They advanced perhaps fifty yards before the second miracle of that
morning smote upon his eyes. A solitary Arab, driving a tiny, overladen
donkey, was advancing towards him, his white robes flickering in and out
among the tree-boles.

Hillyard looked at his shikari. But the shikari neither spoke nor
altered the regularity of his face. Hillyard put no question in
consequence. The Arab was ten days' journey from the nearest village
and, even so, his back was turned towards it. He was moving from
solitude into solitude still more silent and remote. It was impossible.
Hillyard's eyes were playing him false.

He shut them for an instant and opened them again, thinking that the
vision would have gone. But there was the Arab still nearer to them and
moving with a swift agility. A ray of sunlight struck through the
branches of a tree and burned suddenly like a dancing flame on something
the man carried--a carbine with a brass hammer. And the next moment a
sound proved beyond all doubt to Hillyard that his eyes did not deceive
him. For he heard the slapping of the Arab's loose slippers upon the
hard-caked earth.

Oh yes, the man was real enough. For the shikari suddenly swerved from
the head of the file towards the stranger and stopped. The two men
talked together and meanwhile Hillyard and the rest of his party halted.
Hillyard lit his pipe.

"Who is it, Hamet?" he cried, and the shikari turned with his companion
and came back.

"It is the postman," he said as though the delivery of letters along the
Dinder River were the most commonplace of events.

"The postman!" cried Hillyard. "What in the world do you mean?"

"Yes," Hamet explained. "He carries letters between Abyssinia and Senga
on the Blue Nile. He is now on his way back to Abyssinia."

"But how long does it take him?" Hillyard asked in amazement.

"He goes and returns once a year. The journey takes him four months each
way unless he meets with a party shooting. Then it takes longer for he
goes with the party to get meat."

Hillyard stared at the Arab in amazement. He was a lean slip of a man,
almost as black as a negro, with his hair running back above the
temples, and legs like walking-sticks. He stood wreathed in smiles and
nodding confirmation of Hamet's words. But to Hillyard, with the
emotions of the dark hour just past still shivering about him, he seemed
something out of nature. Hillyard leaned from his donkey and took the
carbine from the postman's hand. It was an ancient thing of Spanish
manufacture, heavy as a pig of lead.

"But this can't be of any use," he cried. "Is the man never attacked?"

Hamet talked with the Arab in a dialect Hillyard did not understand at
all; and interpreted the conversation.

"No. He has only once fired his rifle. One night--oh, a long way farther
to the south--he waked up to see an elephant fighting his little donkey
in the moonlight and he fired his rifle and the elephant ran away. You
must know that all these little Korans he carries on his arms and round
his neck have been specially blessed by a most holy man."

The postman's shoulders, elbows, wrists and neck were circled about by
chaplets on which little wooden Korans were strung. He fingered them and
counted them, smiling like a woman displaying her jewels to her less
fortunate friends.

"So he is safe," continued Hamet. "Yes, he will even have his picture
taken. Yes, he can afford to suffer that. He will stand in front of the
great eye and the machine shall go click, and it will not do him any
harm at all. He has a letter for you." Hamet dropped from his enthusiasm
over the wonderful immunity of the postman from the dangers of
photography into a most matter-of-fact voice.

"A letter for me? That's impossible," cried Hillyard.

But the Arab was thrusting his hand here and there in the load on the
donkey's back and finally drew out a goatskin bag. Hillyard, like other
Englishmen, had been brought up in a creed which included the
inefficiency of all Postmasters-general. A blight fell upon such
persons, withering their qualities and shrivelling them into the meanest
caricatures of bureaucrats. It could not be that the postal service was
now to reveal resource and become the servant of romance. Yet the Arab
drew forth a sealed envelope and handed it to Hillyard. And it bore the
inscription of his name.

Oh, but it bore much more than that! It was written in a hand which
Hillyard had not seen for seven years, and the mere sight of it swept
him back in a glory of recollections to Oxford, its towers and tall
roofs, which mean so much more to the man who has gone down than to the
youth who is up. The forest, with its patterns of golden sunlight and
its colonnades of trees crowding away into darkness, was less visible
than those towers to Hillyard, as he stood with the envelope in his
hand. Once more he swung down the High and across the Broad from a
lecture with a ragged gown across his arm. Merton and the House, New
College and Magdalen Tower--he saw the enchanted city across Christ
Church meadows from the river, he looked down upon it from Headington,
and again from those high fields where, at twilight, the scholar-gipsy
used to roam. For the letter was in the hand of Harry Luttrell.

He tore it open and read:

     "_Some one in London is asking for you. Who it is I don't
     know. But the message came through in a secret cipher and it
     might be important. I think you should pack your affs. and
     hurry along to Senga, where I shall expect you._"

Martin Hillyard folded the letter and put it away in his pocket.

"He will find food in our camp," he said to Hamet, with a nod towards
the postman. "We may as well go on."

Even if he returned to camp at once, it would be too late to start that
day. The sun would be high long before the baggage could be packed upon
the camels. The little party went on to the creek and built a tiny house
of reeds and boughs, in which Hillyard sat down to wait for the deer to
gather. He had one of the green volumes of "The Vicomte de Bragelonne"
in his pocket, but this morning the splendid Four for once did not
enchain him. Who was it in London who wanted him--wanted him so much
that cipher telegrams must find him out on the banks of the Dinder
River? Was this letter the summons to the something more and something
different? Was the postman to Abyssinia the expected messenger? The
miracle of that morning predisposed him to think so.

He sat thus for an hour, and then stepping daintily, with timid eyes
alert, a tall reed-buck and his doe came through the glade towards the
water. But they did not drink; they waited, cropping the grass.
Gradually, through a long hour, others gathered, tawny and yellow, and
dappled-brown, and stood and fed until--perhaps a signal was given,
perhaps a known moment had come--all like soldiers at a command, moved
down to the water's edge.

Six nights later Hillyard camped at Lueisa, near to that big tree under
which it is not wise to spread your bed. He took his bath at ten o'clock
at night under the moon, and the water from the river was hot. He
stretched himself out in his bed and waked again that night after the
moon had set, to fix indelibly in his memory the blazing dome of stars
above his head, and the Southern Cross burning in a corner of the sky.
The long, wonderful holiday was ended. To-morrow night he would sleep in
a house. Would he ever come this way again?

In the dark of the morning he struck westwards from the Dinder, across a
most tedious neck of land, for Senga and the Blue Nile.




CHAPTER VI

THE HONORARY MEMBER


At six o'clock in the evening Colin Rayne, a young civilian in the Sudan
Service, heard, as he sat on the balcony of the mess at Senga, the
rhythmical thud of camels swinging in to their rest in the freshness of
the night air.

"There's our man," he exclaimed, and running downstairs, he reached the
door just as Hillyard's twelve camels and his donkeys trooped into the
light. Hillyard was riding bareheaded, with his helmet looped to his
saddle, a young man, worn thin by sun and exercise, with fair burnt
hair, and a brown clean shaven face. Colin Rayne went up to him as he
dismounted.

"Captain Luttrell asked me to look after you. He has got some work on
hand for the moment. We'll see after your affs."

"Thank you."

"You might show me, by the way, where your cartridges are."

Hillyard selected the camel on which they were packed and Rayne called a
Sudanese sergeant to take them into the mess.

"Now we will go upstairs. I expect that you can do with a
whisky-and-soda," he said.

Hillyard was presented to a Doctor Mayle, who was conducting a special
research into the cause of an obscure fever; and to the other officers
of this headquarters of a Province. They were all young, Hillyard
himself was older than any of them.

"Oh, we have got some married ones, too," said Rayne, "but they live in
houses of their own like gentlefolk."

"There are some Englishwomen here then?" said Hillyard, and for an
appreciable moment there was silence. Then a shortish, square man, with
a heavy moustache explained, if explanation it could be called.

"No. They were sent off to Senaar this morning--to be out of the way.
Wiser."

Hillyard asked no questions but drank his whisky-and-soda.

"I haven't seen Luttrell since we were at Oxford together," he said.

"And it's by an accident that you see him now," said Rayne. "The
Governor of Senga was thrown from his horse and killed on the spot down
by the bridge there six weeks ago. The road gave way suddenly under his
horse's hoofs. Some one was wanted here immediately."

"Yes, there's no doubt of that," said Mr. Blacker, the short square man,
with emphasis.

"Captain Luttrell had done very well in Kordofan," Rayne resumed. "He
was fetched up here in a hurry as Acting-Governor. But no doubt the
appointment will be confirmed."

Mr. Blacker added another croak.

"Oh, it'll be confirmed all right, if----" and he left his sentence in
the air; but his gesture finished it.

"If there is any Luttrell left to confirm," Martin Hillyard interpreted,
though he kept his interpretation to himself.

There certainly was in that room with the big balcony a grim expectation
of trouble. It was apparent, not so much in words as in an attention to
distant noises, and a kind of strained silence. The sound of a second
caravan was heard. It was coming from the north. Rayne ran to the rail
of the balcony and looked anxiously out. The street here was very broad
and the huts upon the opposite side already dark except at one point,
where an unshaded kerosene lamp cast through on open door a panel of
glaring light upon the darkness. Rayne saw the caravan emerge spectrally
into the light and disappear again.

"They are our beasts," he said in a voice of relief, and a minute later
he called down to the soldier in charge. He spoke in the Dinka language
and the soldier replied in the same tongue. Hillyard understood enough
of it now to learn that the women had arrived safely at Senaar without
any incident or annoyance.

"That's good," said Colin Rayne. He turned to Hillyard. "Luttrell's a
long time. Shall we go and find him?"

Both Blacker and Dr. Mayle looked up with surprise, but Hillyard had
risen quickly, and they raised no objection. Rayne walked down the
stairs first and led the way towards the rear of the building across an
open stretch of ground. The moon had not yet risen, and it was pitch
dark so that Hillyard had not an idea whither he was being led. Colin
Rayne stopped at a small, low door in a high big wall and knocked. A
heavy key grated in a lock and the door was opened by a soldier.
Hillyard found himself standing inside a big compound, in the midst of
which stood some bulky, whitish erection, from which a light gleamed.

Colin Rayne led the way towards the light. It was shining through the
doorway of a chamber of new wood planks with a flat roof and some
strange, dimly-seen superstructure. Hillyard looked through the doorway
and saw a curious scene. Two Sudanese soldiers were present, one of whom
carried the lantern. The other, a gigantic creature with a skin like
polished mahogany, was stripped to the waist and held poised in his
hands a huge wooden mallet with a long handle. He stood measuring his
distance from the stem of a young tree which was wedged tightly between
a small square of stone on the ground and the flat roof above. Standing
apart, and watching everything with quiet eyes was Harry Luttrell.

Even at this first glance in the wavering light of the lantern Hillyard
realised that a change had come in the aspect of his friend. It was not
a look of age, but authority clothed him as with a garment. Rayne and
Hillyard passed into the chamber. Luttrell turned his head and welcomed
Hillyard with a smile. But he did not move and immediately afterwards he
raised his face to the roof.

"Are you ready up there?"

An English voice replied through the planks.

"Yes, sir," and immediately afterwards a dull and heavy weight like a
full sack was dumped upon the platform above their heads.

"Good!"

Luttrell turned towards the giant.

"Are you ready? And you know the signal?"

The Sudanese soldier grinned in delighted anticipation, with a flash of
big white teeth, and took a firmer grip of his mallet and swung it over
his shoulder.

"Good. Now pay attention," said Luttrell, "so that all may be well and
seemly done."

The Sudanese fixed his eyes upon Luttrell's foot and Luttrell began to
talk, rapidly and rather to himself than to his audience. Hillyard could
make neither head nor tail of the strange scene. It was evident that
Luttrell was rehearsing a speech, but why? And what had the Sudanese
with the mallet to do with it?

A sudden and rapid sequence of events brought the truth home to him with
a shock. At a point of his speech Luttrell stamped twice, and the
Sudanese soldier swung his mallet with all his force. The head of it
struck the great support full and square. The beam jumped from its
position, hopped once on its end, and fell with a crash. And from above
there mingled with the crash a most horrid clang, for, with the removal
of the beam, two trap-doors swung downwards. Hillyard looked up; he saw
the stars, and something falling. Instinctively he stepped back and shut
his eyes. When he looked again, within the chamber, midway between the
floor and roof, two sacks dangling at the end of two ropes spun and
jerked--as though they lived.

Rayne had stepped back and stood quivering from head to foot by
Hillyard's side; Hillyard himself felt sick. He knew very well now what
he was witnessing--the rehearsal of an execution. The Sudanese soldiers
were grinning from ear to ear with delight and pride. The one person
quite unmoved was Harry Luttrell, whose ingenuity had invented the
device.

"Let it be done just so," he said to the soldiers. "I shall not forgive
a mistake."

They saluted, and he dismissed them and turned at last to Martin
Hillyard.

"It's good to see you again," he said, as he shook hands; and then he
looked sharply into Hillyard's face and laughed. "Shook you up a bit,
that performance, eh? Well, they bungled things in Khartum a little
while ago. I can't afford awkwardness here."

Senga was in the centre of that old Khalifa's tribe which not so many
years ago ruled in Omdurman. It was always restless, always on the
look-out for a Messiah.

"Messiahs are most unsettling," said Luttrell, "especially when they
don't come. The tribe began sharpening its spear-heads a few weeks ago.
Then two of them got excited and killed. That's the consequence," and he
jerked his head towards the compound, from which the two friends were
walking away.

Hillyard was to hear more of the matter an hour later, as they all sat
at dinner in the mess-room. There were thousands of the tribe, all in a
ferment, and just half a battalion of Sudanese soldiers under Luttrell's
command to keep them in order.

"Blacker thinks we ought to have temporised, and that we shall get
scuppered," said Luttrell. He was the one light-hearted man at that
table, though he was staking his career, his life, and the life of the
colony on the correctness of his judgment. Sir Charles Hardiman would
never have recognised in the man who now sat at the head of the mess
table the young man who had been so torn by this and that discrimination
in the cabin of his yacht at Stockholm. There was something of the
joyous savage about him now--a type which England was to discover
shortly in some strength amongst the young men who were to officer its
armies.

"I don't agree. I have invited the chiefs to see justice done. I am
going to pitch them a speech myself from the scaffold--cautionary tales
for children, don't you know--and then, if old Fee-Fo-Fum with the
mallet don't get too excited and miss his stroke, everything will go
like clockwork."

Hillyard wondered how in the world he was going to deliver Stella
Croyle's message--a flimsy thing of delicate sentimentality--to this man
concerned with life and death, and discharging his responsibilities
according to the just rules of his race, without fear and without too
much self-questioning. Indeed, the Luttrell, Acting-Governor of Senga,
was a more familiar figure to Hillyard than he would have been to
Stella Croyle. For he had shaken off, under the pressure of immediate
work and immediate decisions, the thin and subtle emotions which were
having their way with him two years before. He had recaptured the high
spirit of Oxford days, and was lit along his path by that clear flame.

But there were tact and discretion too, as Hillyard was to learn. For
Mr. Blacker still croaked at the other end of the table.

"It's right and just and all that of course. But you are taking too high
a risk, Luttrell."

The very silence at the table made it clear to Hillyard that Luttrell
stood alone in his judgment. But Luttrell only smiled and said:

"Well, old man, since I disagree, the only course is to refer the whole
problem to our honorary member."

And at once every countenance lightened, and merriment began to flick
and dance from one to other of that company like the beads on the
surface of champagne. Only Hillyard was mystified.

"Your honorary member!" he inquired.

Luttrell nodded solemnly, and raised his glass.

"Gentlemen, the Honorary Member of the Senga Mess--Sir Chichester
Splay."

The toast was drunk with enthusiasm by all but Hillyard, who sat staring
about him and wondering what in the world the Mecaenas of the First
Nights had in common with these youthful administrators far-flung to the
Equator.

"You don't drink, Martin," cried Luttrell. A Socialist at a Public
Dinner who refused to honour the Royal Toast could only have scandalised
the chairman by a few degrees more than Hillyard's indifference did now.

"I beg your pardon," said Hillyard with humility. "I repair my error
now. It was due to amazement."

"Amazement!" Colin Rayne repeated, as Hillyard drained his glass.

"Yes. For I know the man."

There was the silence that follows some stupendous happening; eyes were
riveted upon Hillyard in admiration; and then the silence burst.

"He knows him!"

"It's incredible!"

"Actually knows him!"

And suddenly above the din Blacker's voice rose warningly.

"Don't let's lose our heads! That's the great thing! Let us keep as calm
as we can and think out our questions very carefully lest the
Heaven-sent Bearer of Great Tidings should depart without revealing all
he knows."

Chairs were hitched a little closer about Hillyard. The care which had
brooded in that room was quite dispelled.

"Have some more port, sir," said the youngest of that gathering, eagerly
pushing across the bottle. Hillyard filled his glass. Port was his, and
prestige too. He might write a successful play. That was all very well.
He might go shooting for eight months along by the two Niles and the
Dinder. That was all very well too. He was welcome at the Senga Mess.
But he knew Sir Chichester Splay! He acquired in an instant the
importance of a prodigy.

"But, since he is an honorary member of your mess, you must know him
too," cried Hillyard. "He must have come this way."

"My dear Martin!" Luttrell expostulated, as one upbraiding a child. "Sir
Chichester Splay out of London! The thing's inconceivable!"

"Inconceivable! Why, he lives in the country."

A moment of consternation stilled all voices. Then the Doctor spoke in a
whisper.

"Is it possible that we are all wrong?"

"He lives at Rackham Park, in Sussex."

Mr. Blacker fell back in relief.

"I know the house. He is a new resident. It is near to Chichester. He
went there on the Homoeopathic principle."

The conjecture was actually true. Sir Chichester Splay, spurred by his
ambition to be a country gentleman with a foot in town, had chosen the
neighbourhood on account of his name, so that it might come to be
believed that he had a territorial connection.

"Describe him to us," they all cried, and, when Hillyard had finished:

"Well, he might be like that," Luttrell conceded. "It was not our idea."

"No," said Colin Rayne. "You will remember I always differed from all of
you, but it seems that I am wrong too. I pictured him as a tall,
melancholy man, with a conical bald head and with a habit of plucking at
a black straggling beard--something like the portraits of Tennyson."

"To me," said Luttrell, "he was always fat and fussy, with white spats."

"But why are you interested in him at all?" cried Hillyard.

"We will explain the affair to you on the balcony," answered Luttrell,
as he rose.

They moved into the dark and coolness of this spacious place, and,
stretching themselves in comfort on the long cane chairs, they explained
to Hillyard this great mystery. Rayne began the tale.

"You see, we don't get a mail here so very often. Consequently we pay
attention when it comes. We read the _Searchlight_, for instance, with
care."

Mr. Blacker snatched the narrative away at this point.

"And Sir Chichester Splay occurs in most issues and in many columns. At
first we merely noticed him. Some one would say, 'Oh, here's old Splay
again,' as if--it seems incredible now--the matter was of no importance.
It needed Luttrell to discover the real significance of Sir Chichester,
the man's unique and astounding quality."

Harry Luttrell interrupted now.

"Yes, it was I," he said with pride. "Sir Chichester one day was seen at
a Flower Show in Chelsea. On another he attended the first performance
of a play. On a third day he honoured the Private View of an Exhibition
of Pictures. On a fourth he sat amongst the Distinguished Strangers in
the Gallery of the House of Commons. But that was all! This is what I
alone perceived. Always that was all!"

Luttrell leaned back and relit his cigar.

"When other people come to be mentioned in the newspapers day after day,
sooner or later some information about them slips out, some
characteristic thing. If you don't get to know their appearance, you
learn at all events their professions, their opinions. But of Sir
Chichester Splay--never anything at all. Yet he is there always, nothing
can happen without his presence, a man without a shadow, a being without
a history. To me, a simple soldier, he is admirable beyond words. For he
has achieved the inconceivable. He combines absolute privacy of life
with a world-wide notoriety. He may be a stamp-collector. Do I know
that? No. All I know is that if there were an Exhibition of Stamp
Collections, he would be the first to pass the door." Luttrell rose from
his chair.

"Therefore," he added in conclusion, "Sir Chichester is of great value
to us at Senga. We elected him to the mess with every formality, and
some day, when we have leisure, we shall send a deputation up the Nile
to shoot a Mrs. Grey's Antelope to decorate Rackham Park." He turned to
Hillyard. "We have a few yards to walk, and it is time."

The two friends walked down the stairs and turned along the road,
Hillyard still debating what was, after all, the value of Sir Chichester
Splay to the Senga mess. It had seemed to him that Luttrell had not
wished for further questions on the balcony, but, now that the two were
alone, he asked:

"I don't see it," he said; and Luttrell stopped abruptly and turned to
him.

"Don't you, Martin?" he asked gently. All the merriment had gone from
his face and voice. "If you were with us for a week you would. It's just
the value of a little familiar joke always on tap. Here are a handful of
us. We eat together, morning, noon, and night; we work together; we play
polo together--we can never get away from each other. And in consequence
we get on each other's nerves, especially in the months of hot weather.
Ill-temper comes to the top. We quarrel. Irreparable things might be
said. That's where Sir Chichester Splay comes in. When the quarrel's
getting bitter, we refer it to his arbitration. And, since he has no
opinions, we laugh and are saved." Luttrell resumed his walk to the
Governor's house.

"Yes, I see now," said Hillyard.

"You had an instance to-night," Luttrell added, as they went in at the
door. "It's a serious matter--the order of a Province and a great many
lives, and the cost of troops from Khartum, and the careers of all of us
are at stake. I think that I am right, and it is for me to say. They
disagree. Yes, Sir Chichester Splay saved us to-night, and"--a smile
suddenly broke upon his serious face--"I really should like to meet
him."

"I will arrange it when we are both in London," Hillyard returned.

He did not forget that promise. But he was often afterwards to recall
this moment when he made it--the silent hall, the door open upon the
hot, still night, the moon just beginning to gild the dark sky, and the
two men standing together, neither with a suspicion of the life-long
consequences which were to spring from the casual suggestion and the
careless assent.

"You are over there," said Luttrell, pointing to the other side of the
hall. He turned towards his own quarters, but a question from Hillyard
arrested him.

"What about that message for me?"

"I know nothing about it," Luttrell answered, "beyond what I wrote. The
telegram came from Khartum. No doubt they can tell you more at
Government House. Good night!"




CHAPTER VII

IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN


Just outside Senga to the north, in open country, stands a great walled
zareba, and the space enclosed is the nearest approach to the Garden of
Eden which this wicked world can produce. The Zoological Gardens of
Cairo and Khartum replenish their cages from Senga. But there are no
cages at Senga, and only the honey-badger lives in a tub with a chain
round his neck, like a bull-dog. The buffalo and the elephant, the
wart-hog and the reed-buck, roam and feed and sleep together. Nor do
they trouble, after three days' residence in that pleasant sanctuary,
about man--except that specimen of man who brings them food.

All day long you may see, towering above the wall close to the little
wooden door, the long necks and slim heads of giraffes looking towards
the city and wondering what in the world is the matter with the men
to-day, and why they don't come along with the buns and sugar. Once
within the zareba, once you have pushed your way between the giraffes
and got their noses out of your jacket-pockets, you have really only to
be wary of the ostrich. He, mincing delicately around you with his
little wicked red eye blinking like a camera shutter, may try with an
ill-assumed air of indifference to slip up unnoticed close behind you.
If he succeeds he will land you one. And one is enough.

Into this zareba Harry Luttrell led Martin Hillyard on the next morning.
Luttrell had an hour free, and the zareba was the one spectacle in
Senga. He kicked the honey-badger's tub in his little reed-house and
brought out that angry animal to the length of his strong chain and to
within an inch of his own calves.

"Charming little beast, isn't he? See the buffalo in the middle? The
little elephant came in a week ago from just south of the Khor Galagu.
You had something private to say to me? Now's your time. Mind the
ostrich, that's all. He looks a little ruffled."

They were quite alone in the zareba. The giraffes had fallen in behind
and were following them, and level with them, on Hillyard's side, the
ostrich stepped like a delicate lady in a muddy street. Hillyard found
it a little difficult to concentrate his thoughts on Stella Croyle's
message. But he would have delivered it awkwardly in any case. He had
seen enough of Harry Luttrell last night to understand that an ocean now
rolled between those two.

"On the first night of my play, 'The Dark Tower,'" he began, and
suddenly faced around as the ostrich fell back.

"Yes!" said Luttrell, and he eyed the ostrich indifferently. "That
animal's a brute, isn't he?"

He took a threatening step towards it, and the ostrich sidled away as if
it really didn't matter to him where he took his morning walk.

"Yes?" Luttrell repeated.

"I went to a supper-party given by Sir Charles Hardiman."

"Oh?"

Luttrell's voice was careless enough. But his eyes went watchfully to
Hillyard's face, and he seemed to shut suddenly all expression out of
his own.

"Hardiman introduced me to a friend of yours."

Luttrell nodded.

"Mrs. Croyle?"

"Yes."

"She was well?"

"In health, yes!"

"I am very glad." Unexpectedly some feeling of relief had made itself
audible in Luttrell's voice. "It would have troubled me if you had
brought me any other news of her. Yes, that would have troubled me very
much. I should not have been able to forget it," he said slowly.

"But she is unhappy."

Luttrell walked on in silence. His forehead contracted, a look of
trouble came into his face. Yet he had an eye all the while for the
movements of the animals in the zareba. At last he halted, struck out
at the ostrich with his stick, and turned to Hillyard with a gesture of
helplessness.

"But what can one do--except the single thing one can't do?"

"She gave me a message, if I should chance to meet you," answered
Hillyard.

Luttrell's face hardened perceptibly.

"Let me hear it, Martin."

"She said that she would like you to have news of her, and that from
time to time she would like to have a little line from you."

"That was all?"

"Yes."

Harry Luttrell nodded, but he made no reply. He walked back with
Hillyard to the door of the zareba, and the ostrich bore them company,
now on this side, now on that. The elephant was rolling in the grass
like a dog, the giraffes crowded about the little door like beggars
outside a restaurant. The two friends walked back towards the town in an
air shimmering with heat. The Blue Nile glittered amongst its sand-banks
like so many ribands of molten steel. They were close upon the house
before Luttrell answered Stella Croyle's message.

"All _that_," he cried, with a sharp gesture as of a man sweeping
something behind him, "all that happened in another age when I was
another man."

The gesture was violent, but the words were pitiful. He was not a man
exasperated by a woman's unseasonable importunity, but angry with the
grim, hard, cruel facts of life.

"It's no good, Martin," he added, with a smile. "Not all the king's
horses nor all the king's men----"

Hillyard was sure now that no little line would ever go from Senga to
the house in the Bayswater Road. The traditions of his house and of his
regiment had Harry Luttrell in their keeping. Messages? Martin Hillyard
might expect them, might indeed respond to and obey them, and with
advantage, just because they came out of the blue. But the men of
tradition, no! The messenger had knocked upon the doors of their
fathers' houses before ever they were born.

At the door of the Governor's house Harry Luttrell stopped.

"I expect you'll want to do some marketing, and I shall be busy, and
to-night we shall have the others with us. So I'll say now," and his
face brightened with a smile, as though here at all events were a matter
where the bitter laws of change could work no cruelties, "it has been
really good to see you again."

Certain excellent memories were busy with them both--Nuneham and Sanford
Lasher and the Cherwell under its overhanging branches. Then Luttrell
looked out across to the Blue Nile and those old wondrous days faded
from his vision.

"I should like you to get away bukra, bukra, Martin," he said.
"Half-past one at the latest, to-morrow morning. Can you manage it?"

"Why, of course," answered Hillyard in surprise.

"You see, I postponed that execution, whilst you were here. I think
it'll go off all right, but since it's no concern of yours, I would just
as soon you were out of the way. I have fixed it for eight. If you start
at half-past one you will be a good many miles away by then."

He turned and went into the house and to his own work. Martin Hillyard
walked down the road along the river bank to the town. Harry Luttrell
had said his last word concerning Stella Croyle. Of that he was sure and
was glad, though Stella's tear-stained face would rise up between his
eyes and the water of the Nile. Sooner or later Harry Luttrell would
come home, bearing his sheaves, and then he would marry amongst his own
people; and a new generation of Luttrells would hold their commissions
in the Clayfords. He had said his last word concerning Stella Croyle.

But Hillyard was wrong. For in the dark of the morning, when he had
bestridden his donkey and given the order for his caravan to march, he
was hailed by Luttrell's voice. He stopped, and Luttrell came down in
his pyjamas from the door of the house to him.

"Good luck," he said, and he patted the donkey's neck. "Good luck, old
man. We'll meet in England some time."

"Yes," said Hillyard.

It was not to speak these words that Harry Luttrell had risen, after
wishing him good-bye the night before. So he waited.

Luttrell was still, his hand on the little donkey's neck.

"You'll remember me to our honorary member, won't you?"

"Yes."

"Don't forget."

"I won't."

Nor was it for this reminder, either. So Hillyard still waited, and at
last the words came, jerkily.

"One thing you said yesterday.... I was very glad to hear it. That
Stella was well--quite well. You meant that, didn't you? It's the
truth?"

"Yes, it's the truth."

"Thank you ... I was a little afraid ... thank you!"

He took his hand from the donkey's neck, and Hillyard rode forward on
the long and dreary stage to the one camping ground between Senga and
Senaar.

For a little while he wondered at this insistence of Harry Luttrell upon
the physical health of Stella Croyle, and why he had been afraid. But
when the dawn came his thoughts reverted to his own affairs. The message
delivered to him in the forest of the River Dinder! It might mean
nothing. It was the part of prudence to make light of his hopes and
conjectures. But the hopes would not be stilled, now that he was alone.
This was the Summons, the great Summons for which, without his
knowledge, the experiences of his life, detail by detail, had builded
him.




CHAPTER VIII

HILLYARD HEARS NEWS OF AN OLD FRIEND


At Khartum, however, disappointment awaited him. He was received without
excitement by a young aide-de-camp at the Palace.

"I heard that you had come in last night. A good trip? Dine with me
to-night and you shall show me your heads. The Governor-General's in
England."

"There's a telegram."

"Oh yes. It came up to us from Cairo. Some one wanted to know where you
were. They'll know about it at Cairo. We just pushed it along, you
know," said the aide-de-camp. He dined with Hillyard, admired his heads,
arranged for his sleeping compartment, and assured him that the
execution had gone off "very nicely" at Senga.

"Luttrell made a palaver, and his patent drop worked as well as anything
in Pentonville, and every one went home cheered up and comfortable.
Luttrell's a good man."

Thus Hillyard took the train to Wadi Haifa in a chastened mood.
Obviously the message was of very little, if indeed of any, importance.
A man can hardly swing up to extravagant hopes without dropping to
sarcastic self-reproaches on his flightiness and vanity. He was not
aware that the young aide-de-camp pushed aside some pressing work to
make sure that he did go on the train; or that when the last carriage
disappeared towards the great bridge, the aide-de-camp cried, "Well,
that's that," like a man who has discharged one task at all events of
the many left to his supervision.

One consequence of Hillyard's new humility was that he now loitered on
his journey. He stayed a few days at Assouan and yet another few in
Luxor, in spite of the heat, and reached Cairo in the beginning of June
when the streets were thick with dust-storms and the Government had
moved to Alexandria. Hillyard was in two minds whether to go straight
home, but in the end he wandered down to the summer seat of government.

If Khartum had been chilly to the enthusiast, Alexandria was chillier.
It was civil and polite to Hillyard and made him a member of the Club.
But it was concerned with the government of Egypt, and gently allowed
Hillyard to perceive it. Khartum had at all events stated "There is a
cablegram." At Alexandria the statement became a question: "Is there a
cablegram?" In the end a weary and indifferent gentleman unearthed it.
He did not show it to Hillyard, but held it in his hand and looked over
the top of it and across a roll-top desk at the inquirer.

"Yes, yes. This seems to be what you are asking about. It is for us, you
know"--this with a patient smile as Hillyard's impatient hand reached
out for it. "Do you know a man called Bendish--Paul Bendish?"

"Bendish?" cried Hillyard. "He was my tutor at Oxford."

"Ah! Then it does clearly refer to you. Bendish has a friend who needs
your help in London."

Hillyard stared.

"Do you mean to say that I was sent for from the borders of Abyssinia
because Bendish has a friend in London who wants my help?"

The indifferent gentleman stroked his chin.

"It certainly looks like it, doesn't it? But I do hope that you didn't
cut your expedition short on that account." He looked remorsefully into
Hillyard's face. "In any case, the rainy season was coming on, wasn't
it?"

"Yes, my expedition was really ended when the message reached me,"
Hillyard was forced to admit.

"That's good," said the indifferent gentleman, brightening. "You will
see Bendish, of course, in England. By what ship do you sail? It's not
very pleasant here, is it?"

"I shall sail on the _Himalaya_ in a week's time."

"Right!" said the official, and he nodded farewell and dipped his nose
once more into his papers.

Hillyard walked to the door, conscious that he looked the fool he felt
himself to be. But at the door he turned in a sort of exasperation.

"Can't you tell me at all why Bendish's friend wants my help?" he asked.

It was at this moment that the indifferent gentleman had the inspiration
of his life.

"I haven't an idea, Mr. Hillyard," he replied. "Perhaps he has got into
difficulties in the writing of a revue."

The answer certainly drove Hillyard from the room without another word.
He stood outside the door purple with heat and indignation. Hillyard
neither overrated nor decried his work. But to be dragged away from the
buffalo and the reed-buck of the Dinder River in order to be told that
he was a writer of revues. No! That was carrying a bad joke too far.

Hillyard stalked haughtily along the corridor towards the outer door,
but not so fast but that a youth passed him with a sheet of paper in his
hand. The youth went into the room where Government cablegrams were
coded. The sheet of paper which he held in his hand was inscribed with a
message that Martin Hillyard would leave Alexandria in a week's time on
the s.s. _Himalaya_. And the message strangely enough was not addressed
to Paul Bendish at all. It was headed, "For Commodore Graham.
Admiralty." The great Summons had in fact come, although Hillyard knew
it not.

He travelled in consequence leisurely by sea. He started from Alexandria
after half the month of June had gone, and he was thus in the Bay of
Biscay on that historic morning of June the twenty-eighth, when the
Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophia Duchess of Hohenberg, were
murdered in the streets of Saravejo. London, when he reached it, was a
choir of a million voices not yet tuned to the ringing note of one. It
was incredible that the storm, foreseen so often over the port wine,
should really be bursting at last. Mediation will find a way. Not this
time; the moment has been chosen. And what will England do? Ride safe in
the calm centre of the hurricane? No ship ever did, and England won't.

A few degenerate ones threw up their hands and cried that all was
over--_they knew_.

Of these a gaunt-visaged man, stubborn and stupid and two generations
back a German, held forth in the hall of Hillyard's club.

"German organisation, German thoroughness and German brains--we are no
match for them. The country's thick with spies--wonderful men. Where
shall _we_ find their equals?"

A sailor slipped across the hall and dropped into a chair by Hillyard's
side.

"You take no part in these discussions? The crackling of thorns--what?"

"I have been a long time away."

"Thought so," continued the sailor. "A man was inquiring for you
yesterday--a man of the name of Graham."

Hillyard shook his head.

"I don't know him."

"No, but he is a friend of a friend of yours."

Hillyard sat up in his chair. He had been four days in London, and the
engrossing menace of those days had quite thrust from his recollections
the telegram which had, as he thought, befooled him.

"The friend of mine is possibly Paul Bendish," he said stiffly.

"Think that was the name. Graham's the man I am speaking of," and the
sailor paused. "Commodore Graham," he added.

Hillyard's indignation ebbed away. What if he had not been fooled? The
quenched hopes kindled again in him. There was all this talk of
war--alarums and excursions as the stage-directions had it. Service!
Suddenly he realised that ever since he had left Senga, a vague envy of
Harry Luttrell had been springing up in his heart. The ordered life of
service--authority on the one hand, the due execution of details on the
other! Was it to that glorious end in this crisis that all his life's
experience had slowly been gathering? He looked keenly at his companion.
Was it just by chance that he had crossed the hall in the midst of all
this thistle-down discussion and dropped in the chair by his side?

"But what could I do?"

He spoke aloud, but he was putting the question to himself. The sailor,
however, answered it.

"Ask Graham."

He wrote an address upon a sheet of notepaper and handed it to Hillyard.
Then he looked at the clock which marked ten minutes past three.

"You will find him there now."

The sailor went after his cap and left the club. Hillyard read the
address. It was a number in a little street of the Adelphi, and as he
read it, suspicion again seized upon Hillyard. After all, why should a
Commodore want to see him in a little street of the Adelphi. Perhaps,
after all, the indifferent official of Alexandria was right and the
Commodore had ambitions in the line of revues!

"I had better go and have it out with him," he decided, and, taking his
hat and stick, he walked eastwards to Charing Cross. He turned into a
short street. At the bottom a stone arch showed where once the Thames
had lapped. Now, beyond its grey-white curve, were glimpses of green
lawns and the cries of children at their play. Hillyard stopped at a
house by the side of the arch. A row of brass plates confronted him, but
the name of Commodore Graham was engraved on none of them. Hillyard rang
the housekeeper's bell and inquired.

"On the top floor on the left," he was told.

He climbed many little flights of stairs, and at the top of each his
heart sank a little lower. When the stairs ended he confronted a mean,
brown-varnished door; and he almost turned and fled. After all, the
monstrous thing looked possible. He stood upon the threshold of a set of
chambers. Was he really to be asked to collaborate in a revue? He rang
the bell, and a young woman opened the door and barred the way.

"Whom do you wish to see?" she asked.

"Commodore Graham."

"Commodore Graham?" she repeated with an air of perplexity, as though
this was the first time she had ever heard the name.

Across her shoulder Hillyard looked into a broad room, where three other
girls sat at desks, and against one wall stood a great bureau with many
tiny drawers like pigeon-holes. Several of these drawers stood open and
disclosed cards standing on their edges and packed against each other.
Hillyard's hopes revived. Not for nothing had he sat from seven to ten
in the office of a shipping agent at Alicante. Here was a card-index,
and of an amazing volume. But his interlocutor still barred the way.

"Have you an appointment with Commodore Graham?" she asked, still with
that suggestion that he had lunched too well and had lost his way.

"No. But he sent for me across half the world."

The girl raised a pair of steady grey eyes to his.

"Will you write your name here?"

She allowed him to pass and showed him some slips of paper on a table in
the middle of the room. Hillyard obeyed, and waited, and in a few
moments she returned, and opened a door, crossed a tiny ante-room and
knocked again. Hillyard entered a room which surprised him, so greatly
did its size and the wide outlook from its windows contrast with the
dinginess of its approach. A thin man with the face of a French abbe sat
indolently twiddling his thumbs by the side of a big bureau.

"You wanted to see me?"

"Mr. Hillyard?"

"Yes."

Commodore Graham nodded to the girl, and Hillyard heard the door close
behind him.

"Won't you sit down? There are cigarettes beside you. A match? Here is
one. I hope that I didn't bring you home before your time."

"The season had ended," replied Hillyard, who was in no mood to commit
himself. "In what way can I help you?"

"Bendish tells me that you know something of Spain."

"Spain?" cried Hillyard in surprise. "Spain means Madrid, Bilbao, and a
host of places, and a host of people, politicians, merchants, farmers.
What should I know of them?"

"You were in Spain for some years."

"Three," replied Hillyard, "and for most of the three years picking up a
living along the quays. Oh, it's not so difficult in Spain, especially
in summer time. Looking after a felucca while the crew drank in a cafe,
holding on to a dinghy from a yacht and helping the ladies to step out,
a little fishing here, smuggling a box of cigars past the customs
officer there--oh, it wasn't so difficult. You can sleep out in comfort.
I used to enjoy it. There was a coil of rope on the quay at Tarragona;
it made a fine bed. Lord, I can feel it now, all round me as I curled up
in it, and the stars overhead, seen out of a barrel, so to speak!"

Hillyard's face changed. He had the spark of the true wanderer within
him. Even recollections of days long gone could blow it into clear, red
flame. All the long glowing days on the hot stones of the water-side,
the glitter of the Mediterranean purple-blue under the sun, the coming
of night and the sudden twinkling of lights in the cave-dwellings above
Almeria and across the bay from Aguilas, the plunge into the warm sea at
midnight, the glorious evenings at water-side cafes when he had half a
dozen coppers in his pocket; the good nature of the people! All these
recollections swept back on him in a rush. The actual hardships, the
hunger, the biting winds of January under a steel-cold sky, these things
were all forgotten. He remembered the freedom.

"There weren't any hours to the day," he cried, and spoke the creed of
all the wanderers in the world. "I saw the finest bull-fights in the
world, and made money out of them by selling dulces and membrilla and
almond rock from Alicante. Oh, the life wasn't so bad. But it came to an
end. A shipping agent at Alicante used me as a messenger, and finally,
since I knew English and no one else in his office did, turned me into a
shipping clerk."

Hillyard had quite forgotten Commodore Graham, who sat patiently
twiddling his thumbs throughout the autobiography, and now came with
something of a start to a recognition of where he sat. He sprang up and
reached for his hat.

"So, you see, you might as well ask a Chinaman at Stepney what he knows
of England as ask me what I know of Spain. I am just wasting your time.
But I have to thank you," and he bowed with a winning pleasantness, "for
reviving in me some very happy recollections which were growing dim."

The Commodore, however, did not stir.

"But it is possible," he said quietly, "that you do know the very places
which interest me--the people too."

Hillyard looked at the Commodore. He put down his hat and resumed his
seat.

"For instance?"

"The Columbretes."

Hillyard laughed.

"Islands sixty miles from Valencia."

"With a lighthouse," interrupted Graham.

"And a little tumble-down inn with a vine for an awning."

"Oh! I didn't know there was an inn," said Graham. "Already you have
told me something."

"I fished round the Columbretes all one summer," said Hillyard, with a
laugh.

Graham nodded two or three times quickly.

"And the Balearics?"

"I worked on one of Island Line ships between Barcelona and Palma
through a winter."

"There's a big wireless," said Commodore Graham.

"At Soller. On the other side of Mallorca from Palma. You cross a
wonderful pass by the old monastery where Georges Sand and Chopin stayed
and quarrelled."

The literary reminiscence left Commodore Graham unmoved.

"Did you ever go to Iviza?"

"For a month with a tourist who dug for ancient pottery."

Graham swung round to his bureau and drummed with the tips of his
fingers upon the leather pad. He made no sign which could indicate
whether he was satisfied or no. He lit a cigarette and handed the box to
Hillyard.

"Did you ever come across a man called Jose Medina?"

Eleven years had passed since the strange days in Spain, and those
eleven years not without their sharp contrasts and full hours.
Hillyard's act of memory was the making of a picture. One by one he
called up the chain of coast cities wherein he had wandered. Malaga,
with its brown cathedral; Almeria and its ancient castle and bright
blue-painted houses glowing against the brown and barren hills; Aguilas,
with its islets; Cartagena, Gandia, Alicante of the palms; Valencia--and
under the trees and on the quays, the boatmen and the captains and the
resplendent officials whom he had known! They took shape before him and
assumed their names. He dived amongst them for one Jose Medina.

"Yes," he replied at last, "there was a Jose Medina. He was a young
peasant of Mallorca. He always said jo for yo."

Graham's eyes brightened and his lips twitched to a smile. He glanced
aside to his bureau, whereon lay a letter written by Paul Bendish at
Oxford.

"He probably has a larger acquaintance with the queer birds of the
Mediterranean ports than any one else in England. But he does not seem
to be aware of it. But if you persist in sitting quiet his knowledge
will trickle out."

Commodore Graham persisted, and facts concerning Jose Medina began to
trickle out. Jose's father had left him, the result of a Spanish
peasant's thrift, a couple of thousand pesetas. With this Jose Medina
had gone to Gibraltar, where he bought a felucca, with a native of
Gibraltar as its nominal owner; so that Jose Medina might fly the flag
of Britain and sleep more surely for its protection. At Gibraltar, with
what was left of his two thousand pesetas and the credit which his
manner gained him, he secured a cargo of tobacco.

"Gibraltar's a free port, you see," said Hillyard. "Jose ran the cargo
along the coast to Benicassim, a little watering-place with a good beach
about thirty kilometres east of Valencia. He ran the felucca ashore one
dark night." Suddenly he stopped and smiled to himself. "I expect Jose
Medina's in prison now."

"On the contrary," said Graham, "he's a millionaire."

Hillyard stared. Then he laughed.

"Well, those were the two alternatives for Jose Medina. But I am judging
by one night's experience. I never saw him again."

Commodore Graham touched with his heel a bell by the leg of his bureau.
The bell did not ring, but displaced a tiny shutter in front of the desk
of his secretary in the ante-room; and Hillyard had hardly ended when
the girl was in the room and announced:

"Admiral Carstairs."

Commodore Graham looked annoyed.

"What a nuisance! I am afraid that I must see him, Mr. Hillyard."

"Of course," said Hillyard. "Admirals are admirals."

"And they know it!" said Commodore Graham with a sigh.

Hillyard rose and took his hat.

"Well, I am very grateful to you, Mr. Hillyard," said Graham. "I can't
say anything more to you now. Things, as you know, are altogether very
doubtful. We may slip over into smooth water. On the other hand," and he
twiddled his thumbs serenely, "we may be at war in a month. If that were
to be the case, I might want to talk with you again. Will you leave your
address with Miss Chayne?"

Hillyard was led out by another door, no doubt so that he might not meet
the impatient admiral. He might have gone away disheartened from that
interview with its vague promises. But there are other and often surer
indications than words. When Miss Chayne took down his address, her
manner had quite changed towards him. She had now a frank and pleasant
comradeship. The official had gone. Her smile said as plainly as print
could do: "You are with us now."

Meanwhile Commodore Graham read through once more the letter of Paul
Bendish. He turned from that to a cabled report from Khartum of the
opinion which various governors of districts had formed concerning the
ways and the discretion of Martin Hillyard. Then once more he rang his
bell.

"There was a list of suitable private yachts to be made out," he said.

"It is ready," replied Miss Chayne, and she brought it to him.

Over that list Commodore Graham spent a great deal of time. In the end
his finger rested on the name of the steam-yacht _Dragonfly_, owned by
Sir Charles Hardiman, Baronet.




CHAPTER IX

ENTER THE HEROINE IN ANYTHING BUT WHITE SATIN


Goodwood in the year nineteen hundred and fourteen! There were some,
throwers of stones, searchers after a new thing on which to build a
reputation, who have been preaching these many years past that the
temper of England had changed, its solidity all dissolved into froth,
and that a new race of neurotics was born on Mafeking night. Just
ninety-nine years before this Goodwood meeting, when Napoleon and the
veterans of the Imperial Guard were knocking at the gates of Brussels, a
famous ball was given. Goodwood of the year nineteen-fourteen, _mutatis
mutandis_, did but repeat that scene, the same phlegmatic enjoyment of
the festival, the same light-heartedness and sure confidence under the
great shadow, and the same ending.

The whispered word went round so that there should be no panic or alarm,
and of a sudden every officer was gone. Goodwood of nineteen fourteen
and a July so perfect with sunlight and summer that it seemed some bird
at last must break the silence of the famed beech-grove! All the world
went to it. The motor-cars and the coaches streamed up over Duncton Hill
and wound down the Midhurst Road to pleasant Charlton, with its cottages
and gardens of flowers. Martin Hillyard went too.

As he walked away from Captain Graham's eyrie he met Sir Chichester
Splay in Pall Mall.

"Where have you been these eight months?" inquired Sir Chichester. "'The
Dark Tower' is still running, I see. A good play, Mr. Hillyard."

"But not a great play, of course," said Martin, his lips twitching to a
smile.

"I have been looking for you everywhere," remarked Sir Chichester. "You
must stay with us for Goodwood. My wife will never forgive me if I don't
secure you."

Hillyard gladly consented. It would be his first visit to the high
racecourse on the downs--and--and he might find Stella Croyle among the
company. It would be a little easier for him and for her too, if they
met this second time in a house of many visitors. He had no comfortable
news to give to her, and he had shrunk from seeking her out in the
Bayswater Road. Wrap the truth in words however careful, he could not
but wound her. Yet sooner or later she must hear of his return, and
avoidance of her would but tell the story more cruelly than his lips.

"Yes, I will gladly come," he said, "if I may come down on the first
day."

He was delayed in London until midday, and so motored after luncheon
through Guildford and Chiddingfold and Petworth to Rackham Park. The
park ran down to the Midhurst Road, and when Hillyard was shown into the
drawing-room he walked across to the window and looked out over a valley
of fields and hedges and low, dark ridges to the downs lying blue in the
sunlight and the black forests on their slopes.

From an embrasure a girl rose with a book in her hand.

"Let me introduce myself, Mr. Hillyard. I am Joan Whitworth, and make my
home here with my aunt. They are all at Goodwood, of course, but they
should be back at any moment."

She rang the bell and ordered tea. Somewhere Hillyard realised he had
seen the girl before. She was about eighteen years old, he guessed, very
pretty, with a wealth of fair hair deepening into brown, dark blue eyes
shaded with long dark lashes and a colour of health abloom in her
cheeks.

"You have been in Egypt, uncle tells me."

"In the Sudan," Hillyard corrected. "I have been shooting for eight
months."

"Shooting!"

Joan Whitworth's eyes were turned on him in frank disappointment. "The
author of 'The Dark Tower'--shooting!"

There was more than disappointment in her voice. There was a hint of
disdain.

Hillyard did not pursue the argument.

"I knew that I had seen you before. I remember where now. You were with
Sir Chichester at the first performance of 'The Dark Tower.' I peeped
out behind the curtain of my box and saw you."

Joan's face relaxed.

"Oh, yes, I was there."

"But----" Hillyard began, and caught himself up. He had been on the
point of saying that she had a very different aspect in the stalls of
the Rubicon Theatre. But he looked her up and down and held his peace.
Yet what he did substitute left him in no better case.

"So you have not gone to the races," he said, and once more her lip
curled in disdain. She drew herself up to her full height--she was not
naturally small, but a good honest piece of English maidenhood.

"Do I look as if I were likely to go to the races?" she asked superbly.

She was dressed in a sort of shapeless flowing gown, saffron in colour,
and of a material which, to Hillyard's inexperienced eye, seemed canvas.
It spread about her on the ground, and it was high at the throat. A
broad starched white collar, like an Eton boy's, surmounted it, and a
little black tie was fastened in a bow, and scarves floated untidily
around her.

"No, upon my word you do not," cried Hillyard, nettled at last by her
haughtiness, and with such a fervour of agreement, that suddenly all her
youth rose into Joan Whitworth's face and got the better of her pose.
She laughed aloud, frankly, deliciously. And her laugh was still
rippling about the room when motor-horns hooted upon the drive.

At once the laughter vanished.

"We shall be amongst horses in a minute," she observed with a sigh. "I
can smell the stables already," and she retired to her book in the
embrasure of the window.

A joyous and noisy company burst into the room. Sir Chichester, with
larger mother-of-pearl buttons on his fawn-coloured overcoat than ever
decorated even a welshing bookmaker on Brighton Downs, led Hillyard up
to Lady Splay.

"My wife. Millie, Mr. Hillyard."

Hints of Lady Splay's passion for the last new person had prepared
Hillyard for a lady at once gushing and talkative. He was surprised to
find himself shaking hands with a pleasant, unassuming woman of distinct
good looks. Hillyard was presented to Dennis and Miranda Brown, a young
couple two years married, and to Mr. Harold Jupp, a man of Hillyard's
age. Harold Jupp was a queer-looking person with a long, thin, brown
face, and a straight, wide mouth too close to a small pointed chin.
Harold Jupp carried about with him a very aura of horses. Horses were
his only analogy; he thought in terms of horses; and perhaps, as a
consequence, although he could give no reasons for his judgments upon
people, those judgments as a rule were conspicuously sound. Jupp shook
hands with Hillyard, and turned to the student at the window.

"Well, Joan, how have you lived without us? Aren't you bored with your
large, beautiful self?"

Joan looked at him with an annihilating glance, and crossed the room to
Millie Splay.

"Bored! How could I be? When I have so many priceless wasted hours to
make up for!"

"Yes, yes, my dear," said Millie Splay soothingly. "Come and have some
tea."

"That's it, Joan," cried Jupp, unrepressed by the girl's contempt. "Come
and have tea with the barbarians."

Joan addressed herself to Dennis Brown, as one condescending from
Olympus.

"I hope you had a good day."

"Awful," Dennis Brown admitted. "We ought to have had five nice wins on
form. But they weren't trying, Joan. The way Camomile was pulled. I
expected to see his neck shut up like a concertina."

"Never mind, boys," said Sir Chichester. "You'll get it back before
Friday."

Harold Jupp shook his head doubtfully.

"Never sure about flat-racing. Jumping's the only thing for the poor and
honest backer."

Joan Wentworth looked about her regretfully.

"I understand now why you have all come back so early."

Miranda Brown ran impulsively to her. She was as pretty as a picture,
and spoke as a rule in a series of charming explosions. At this moment
she was deeply wronged.

"Yes, Joan," she cried. "They would go! And I know that I have backed
the winner for the last race."

Dennis Brown contemplated his wife with amazement.

"Miranda, you are crazy," he cried. "He can't win."

Harold Jupp agreed regretfully.

"He's a Plater. That's the truth. A harmless, unnecessary Plater. I sit
at the feet of Miranda Brown, Joan, but as regards horses, she doesn't
know salt from sugar."

Miranda looked calmly at her watch.

"He has already won."

Tea was brought in and consumed. At the end of it Dennis Brown observed
to Harold Jupp:

"We ought to arrange what we are going to do to-morrow."

Both men rose, and each drew from one pocket a programme of the next
day's events, and from the other a little paper-covered volume called
"Form at a Glance." Armed with their paraphernalia, they retired to a
table in a window.

"Come and live the higher life with us, Joan," cried Harold Jupp. "What
are you reading?"

"Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau, Saviour of Society," Joan returned icily.
But pride burned through the ice, and was audible.

"He sounds just like a Plater," replied Harold Jupp.

Meanwhile Dennis Brown was immersed in his programme.

"The first race is too easy," he announced.

"Yes," said Jupp. "It's sticking out a foot. Peppercorn."

Dennis Brown stared at his friend.

"Don't be silly! Simon Jackson will romp home."

Harold Jupp consulted his little brown book.

"Peppercorn ran second to Petronella at Newbury, giving her nine pounds.
Petronella met Simon Jackson at even weights at Newcastle, and Simon
Jackson was left in the country. Peppercorn must win."

"Let us hear the names of the others," interrupted Miranda, running up
to the table.

Harold Jupp read out the names.

"Smoky Boy, Paper Crown, House on Fire, Jemima Puddleduck----" and
Miranda clapped her hands.

"Jemima Puddleduck's going to win."

Both the young men stared at her, then both plunged their noses into
their books.

"Jemima Puddleduck," Dennis Brown read, "out of Side Springs, by the
Quack."

"Oh, what a pedigree!" cried Miranda. "She must win."

Jupp wrinkled his forehead.

"But she's done nothing. Why must she win?" asked Dennis.

Miranda shrugged her shoulders at the ineffable stupidity of the young
man with whom she was linked.

"Listen to her name! Jemima Puddleduck! She can't lose!"

Both the young men dropped their books and gazed at one another
hopelessly. Here was the whole scientific business of spotting winners,
through research into pedigrees, weights, records, the favourite
distances and race courses of this or that runner, so completely
disregarded that racing might really be a matter of chance.

"I'll tell you, Miranda," said Harold Jupp. "Jemima Puddleduck's a
Plater."

The awful condemnation had no sooner been pronounced than the butler,
with his attendant footman, appeared to remove the tea.

"We have just heard over the telephone, sir," he said to Sir Chichester,
"the winner of the last race."

"Oh!" cried Miranda breathlessly. "Which was it?"

"Chewing Gum."

Miranda swept round to her husband, radiant. "There, what did I tell
you? Chewing Gum. What were the odds, Harper?" She turned again to the
butler. "Oh, you do know, don't you?"

"Yes, madam, twelve to one. They say he rolled home."

Miranda Brown jumped in the air.

"Oh, I have won a hundred and twenty pounds."

Harold Jupp was sympathetic and consolatory.

"Of course it's a mistake, Miranda. I am awfully sorry! Chewing Gum ran
nowhere to Earthly Paradise in the Newberry Stakes this year, and
Earthly Paradise, all out to win, was beaten a month ago by seven
lengths at Warwick, by Rollicking Lady. And Rollicking Lady was in this
race too. So you see it's impossible. Chewing Gum's a Plater."

Miranda wrung her hands.

"But, Harold, he _did_ win; didn't he, Harper?"

"There's no doubt about it, madam," replied the butler with dignity. "I
'av verified the hinformation from other sources."

He left the two experts blinking. Dennis was the first to recover from
the blow.

"What on earth made you back him, Miranda?"

Miranda sailed to the side of Joan Whitworth.

"You are both of you so very unpleasant that I am seriously inclined not
to tell you. But I always back horses with the names of things to eat."

The two scientists were dumb. They stared open-mouthed. Somewhere, it
seemed, a religion tottered upon its foundations. Sacrilege itself could
hardly have gone further than Miranda Brown had gone.

"But--but," Harold Jupp stammered feebly, "you don't _eat_ chewing gum."

Miranda flattened him out with a question.

"What becomes of it, then?" and there was no answer. But Miranda was not
content with her triumph. She must needs carry the war unwisely into the
enemy's camp.

"After all, what in the world can have possessed you, Dennis, to back a
silly old mare like Barmaid?"

Dennis Brown saw his opportunity.

"I always back horses with the names of things to kiss," he declared.

Jupp laughed aloud; Sir Chichester chuckled; Miranda looked as haughty
as good-humour and a dainty personality enabled her to do.

"Vulgar, don't you think?" she asked of Joan. "But racing men _are_
vulgar. Oh, Joan! have you thought out your book to-day? Can you now
begin to write it? Will you write it in the window, with the South Downs
in front of your eyes? Oh, it'll be wonderful!"

"What ho!" cried Mr. Jupp. "Miranda has joined the highbrows."

Dennis Brown was too seriously occupied to waste his time upon Miranda's
enthusiasms.

"It's a pity we can't get the evening papers," he said gloomily. "I
should dearly like to see the London forecasts for to-morrow."

"I brought some evening papers down with me," said Hillyard, and "Did
you?" cried Sir Chichester, and his eyes flashed with interest. But
Harold Jupp was already out of the room. He came back from the hall with
a bundle of newspapers in his hands, pink and white and yellow and
green. He carried them all relentlessly past Sir Chichester to the table
in the window. Sir Chichester to a newspaper, was a needle to a magnet;
and while Dennis Brown read out the selections for the morrow's races of
"The Man of Iron" in the _Evening Patriot_, and "Hitchy Koo" in _The
Lamppost_, Sir Chichester edged nearer and nearer.

Lady Splay invited Hillyard to play croquet with her in the garden; and
half-way through the game Hillyard approached the question which
troubled him.

"I was wondering whether I should meet Mrs. Croyle here."

Millicent Splay drove her ball before she answered, and missed her hoop.

"What a bore!" she cried. "Now I shall have to come back again. I didn't
know that you had met Stella."

"I met her only once. I liked her."

Millie Splay nodded.

"I am glad. There's always a room here for Stella. I told her so
immediately after I met her, and she took me at my word, as I meant her
to do. But she avoids Goodwood week and festivals generally, and she is
wise. For though I would take her anywhere myself, you know what long
memories people have for other people's sins. There might be
humiliations."

"I understand that," said Hillyard, and he added, "I gathered from Mrs.
Croyle that you had remained a very staunch friend."

Millie Splay shrugged her shoulders.

"I am a middle-aged woman with a middle-aged woman's comprehension.
There are heaps of things I loathe more and more each day, meanness, for
instance, and an evil tongue. But, for the other sins, more and more I
see the case for compassion. Stella was hungry of heart, and she let the
hunger take her. She had her blind, wild hour or two; she was a fool;
she was--well, everything the moralists choose to call her. But she has
been paying for her hour ever since, and will go on paying. Now, if I
can only hit your yellow ball from here, I shall have rather a good game
on."

Lady Splay succeeded and, carrying the four croquet balls with her, went
round the rest of the hoops and pegged out.

"I must go in and change," she said, and suddenly, in a voice of
melancholy, she cried, "Oh, I do wish----" and stopped.

"What?"

"Oh, it doesn't matter," she answered. But her eyes were upon the
window, where Joan Whitworth stood in full view in all her disfiguring
panoply. Lady Splay wrung her hands helplessly. "Oh, dear, dear, if she
weren't so thorough!" she moaned.

When they returned into the drawing-room, Sir Chichester was still
standing near to Harold Jupp and Dennis Brown, shifting from one foot to
another, and making little inarticulate sounds in his throat.

"Haven't you two finished yet?" asked Millicent Splay.

"Just," said Dennis Brown, rubbing his hands together with a laugh, "and
we ought to have four nice wins to-morrow."

"Good!" said Sir Chichester. "Then might I have a newspaper?"

"But of course," said Dennis Brown, and he handed one over the table to
him. "You haven't been waiting for it all this time, Sir Chichester?"

"Oh no, no, no," exclaimed Sir Chichester, quickly. He glanced with a
swift and experienced eye down the columns, and tossed the paper aside.

"Might I have another?"

"But of course, sir."

The second paper was disposed of as rapidly as the first, and the others
followed in their turn.

"Nothing in them," said Sir Chichester with a resigned air. "Nothing in
them at all."

Millie Splay laughed.

"All that my husband means is that his name is not to be found in any
one of them."

"The occurrence seems so rare that he has no great reason to complain,"
said Hillyard; and, in order to assuage any disappointment which might
still be rankling in the baronet's bosom, Hillyard related at the
dinner-table, with the necessary discretions, his election to the mess
at Senga.

Sir Chichester was elated. "So far away my name is known! Really, that
is very pleasant hearing!"

There was no offence to him in the reason of his honorary membership of
the Senga mess, which, however carefully Hillyard sought to hide it,
could not but peep out. Sir Chichester neither harboured illusions
himself as to his importance nor sought to foster them in others. There
was none of the "How do these things get into the papers?" about _him_.

"I am not a public character. So I have to take trouble to keep myself
in print. And I do--a deuce of a lot of trouble."

"Now, why?" asked Harold Jupp, who possessed an inquiring mind and was
never satisfied by anything but the most definite statements.

"Because I like it," replied Sir Chichester. "I am used to it, and I
like it. Unless I see my name in real print every morning, I have all
day the uncomfortable sensation that I am not properly dressed."

Millie Splay and the others round the table, with the exception of one
person, laughed. To that one person, Sir Chichester here turned
good-humouredly:

"All right, you can turn your nose up, Joan. It seems extraordinary to
you that I should like to see my name in print. I can tell you something
more extraordinary than that. The public likes it too. Just because I am
not a public character, every reference to me must be of an exclusively
personal kind. And that's just the sort of reference which the public
eats. It is much more thrilled by the simple announcement that a Sir
Chichester Splay, of whom it has never heard, has bought a new pair of
purple socks with white stripes than it would be by a full account of a
Cabinet crisis."

Once more the company laughed at Sir Chichester's apology for his
foible.

Lady Splay turned to Hillyard.

"And who is the ingenious man who discovered this way of keeping the
peace at Senga?"

Hillyard suddenly hesitated.

"A great friend of mine," he answered with his eyes on Millie Splay's
face. "He was with me at Oxford. A Captain Luttrell."

But it was clear almost at once that the name had no associations in
Lady Splay's mind. She preferred to entertain her friends in the country
than to live in town. She knew little of what gossip might run the
streets of London; and since Luttrell was, as yet, like Sir Chichester,
in that he was not a public character, there had been no wide-run gossip
about Stella Croyle or himself which Millicent Splay was likely to meet.

Hillyard thought at first, that with a woman's self-control she turned a
blank face to him of a set purpose. But one little movement of hers
reassured him. Her eyes turned towards Joan Whitworth, as though asking
whether this Harry Luttrell was a match for her, and she said:

"You must bring your friend down to see us, when he comes back to
England. We are almost acquainted as it is."

No! Millicent Splay did not connect Harry Luttrell with Stella Croyle.
It would have been better if Hillyard, that very night, had enlightened
her. But he was neither a gossip nor a meddler. It was not possible that
he should.




CHAPTER X

THE SUMMONS


It is curious to recollect how smoothly the surface water ran during
that last week of peace. Debates there were, of course, and much
argument across the table. It was recognised that great changes, social,
economic, military, would come and great adaptations have to be made.
But, meanwhile, to use the phrase which was soon to be familiar in half
a million mouths, people carried on. The Brown couple, for instance.
Each morning they set out gaily, certain of three or four nice wins;
each evening they returned after a day which was "simply awful." Harold
Jupp was at hand with his unfailing remedy.

"We'll go jumping in the winter and get it all back easily. Flat
racing's no good for the poor. The Lords don't come jumping."

Joan Whitworth carried on too, in her sackcloth and sashes. She was
moved by the enthusiastic explosions of Miranda Brown to reveal some
details of the great novel which was then in the process of incubation.

"_She_ insists on being married in a violet dress," said Joan, "with the
organ playing the 'Funeral March of a Marionette.'"

"Oh, isn't that thrilling!" cried Miranda.

"But why does she insist upon these unusual arrangements?" asked Harold
Jupp.

Joan brushed his question aside.

"It was symbolical of her."

"Yes. Linda would have done that," said Miranda. "I suppose her marriage
turns out very unhappily?"

"It had to," said Joan, quite despondent over this unalterable
necessity.

"Now, why?" asked Jupp in a perplexity.

"Her husband never understood her."

"What ho!" cried Dennis Brown, looking up from his scientific researches
into "Form at a Glance."

"I expect that he talked racing all day," said Miranda.

Dennis Brown treated the rejoinder with contempt. His eyes were fixed
sympathetically on the young writer-to-be.

"I hate crabbing any serious effort to elevate us, Joan, but, honestly,
doesn't it all sound a little conventional?"

He could have used no epithet more deplorable. Joan shot at him one
annihilating glance. Miranda bubbled with indignation.

"Don't notice them, Joan dear! They don't know the meaning of words.
They are ribald, uneducated people. You call your heroine Linda?
Linda--what?"

Mr. Jupp supplied a name.

"Linda Spavinsky," said he. "She comes of the ancient Scottish family of
that name."

"Pig! O pig!" cried Joan, routed at last from her superior serenity; and
a second afterwards her eyes danced and with a flash of sound white
teeth she broke into honest laughter. She did her best to suppress her
sense of fun, but it would get the better of her from time to time.

This onslaught upon Joan Whitworth took place on the Wednesday evening.
Sir Chichester came into the room as it ended, with a telegram in his
hand.

"Mario Escobar wires, Millie, that he is held up in London by press of
work and will only be able to run down here on Friday for the night."

Hillyard looked up.

"Mario Escobar?"

"Do you know him?" asked Millie Splay.

"Slightly," answered Hillyard. "Press of work! What does he do?"

"Runs about with the girls," said Dennis Brown.

Sir Chichester Splay would not have the explanation.

"Nonsense, my dear Dennis, nonsense, nonsense! He has a great many
social engagements of the most desirable kind. He is, I believe,
interested in some shipping firms."

"I like him," said Millie Splay.

"And so do I," added Joan, "very much indeed." The statement was
defiantly thrown at Harold Jupp.

"I think he is charming," said Miranda.

Harold Jupp looked from one to the other.

"That seems to settle it, doesn't it? But----"

"But what?" asked Sir Chichester.

"Need we listen to the ridiculous exhibitions of male jealousy?" Miranda
asked plaintively.

"But," Harold Jupp repeated firmly, "I do like a man to have another
address besides his club. Now, I will lay a nice five to one that no one
in this room knows where Mario Escobar goes when he goes home."

A moment's silence followed upon Harold Jupp's challenge. To the men,
the point had its importance. The women did not appreciate the
importance, but they recognised that their own menfolk did, and they did
not interrupt.

"It's true," said Sir Chichester, "I always hear from him with his club
as his address. But it simply means that he lives at an hotel and is not
sure that he will remain on."

Thus the little things of every day occupied the foreground of Rackham
Park. Millicent Splay had her worries of which Joan Whitworth was the
cause. She loved Joan; she was annoyed with Joan; she admired Joan; she
was amused at Joan; and she herself could never have told you which of
these four emotions had the upper hand. So inextricably were they
intermingled.

She poured them out to Martin Hillyard, as they drove through the Park
at Midhurst on the Thursday morning.

"What do you think of Joan?" she asked. "She is beautiful, isn't she,
with that mass of golden hair and her eyes?"

"Yes, she is," answered Hillyard.

"And what a fright she is making of herself! She isn't _dressed_ at all,
is she? She is just--protected by her clothes."

Hillyard laughed and Millicent Splay sighed. "And I did hope she would
have got over it all by Goodwood. But no! Really I could slap her. But I
might have known! Joan never does things by halves."

"She seems thorough," said Hillyard, although he remembered, with some
doubts as to the truth of his comment, moments now and again when more
primitive impulses had bubbled up in Joan Whitworth.

"Thorough! Yes, that's the word. Oh, Mr. Hillyard, there was a time when
she really dressed--_dressed_, you understand. My word, she was thorough
then, too. I remember coming out of the Albert Hall on a Melba
afternoon, when we could get nothing but a hansom cab, and a policeman
actually had to lift her up into it like a big baby because her skirt
was so tight. And look at her now!"

Millicent Splay thumped the side of the car in her vexation.

"But you mustn't think she's a fool." Lady Splay turned menacingly on
the silent Hillyard.

"But I don't," he protested.

"That's the last thing to say about her."

"I never said it," declared Martin Hillyard.

"I should have lost my faith in you, if you had," rejoined Millicent
Splay, even now hardly mollified.

But she could not avoid the subject. Here was a new-comer to Rackham
Park. She could not bear that he should carry away a wrong impression of
her darling.

"I'll tell you the truth about Joan. She has lived her sheltered life
with us, and no real things have yet come near her. No real troubles, no
deep joys. Her parents even died when she was too young to know them.
But she is eighteen and alive to her finger-tips. Therefore
she's--expectant."

"Yes," Hillyard agreed.

"She is searching for the meaning, for the secrets of life, sure that
there is a meaning, sure that there are secrets, if only she could get
hold of them. But she hasn't got hold of them. She runs here. She runs
there. She explores, she experiments. That's why she's dressed like a
tramp and thinking out a book where the heroine gets married to the
Funeral March of a Marionette. Oh, my dear person, it just means, as it
always means with us poor creatures, that the right man hasn't come
along."

Millie Splay leaned back in her seat.

"When he does!" she cried. "When he does! Did you see the magnolia this
morning? It burst into flower during the night. Joan! I thought once
that it might be Harold Jupp. But it isn't."

Lady Splay spoke with discouragement. She had the matchmaking fever in
her blood. Martin Hillyard remembered her glance when he had casually
spoken of Harry Luttrell. Then she startled him with words which he was
never to forget, and in which he chose to find a real profundity.

"The right man has not come along. So Joan mistakes anything odd for
something great, and thinks that to be unusual is to be strong. It's a
mood of young people who have not yet waked up."

They drove to the private stand and walked through into the paddock.
Millie Splay looked round at the gay and brilliant throng. She sighed.

"There she is, moping in the drawing-room over Prince
Hohenstiel--whatever his name is. She _won't_ come to Goodwood. No, she
just won't."

Yet Joan Whitworth did come to Goodwood that year, though not upon this
day.

No one in that household had read the newspapers so carefully each day
as Martin Hillyard. As the prospect darkened each morning, he was in a
distress lest a letter should not have been forwarded from his flat in
London, or should have been lost in the post. Each evening when the
party returned from the races his first question asked whether there was
no telegram awaiting him. So regular and urgent were his inquiries that
the house-party could not be ignorant of his preoccupation. And on the
afternoon of the Thursday a telegram in its orange envelope was lying
upon the hall-table.

"It's for you, Mr. Hillyard," said Lady Splay.

Hillyard held it in his hands. So the summons had come, the summons
hoped for, despaired of, made so often into a whip wherewith he lashed
his arrogance, the summons to serve.

"I shall have to go up to town this evening," he said.

Anxious faces gathered about him.

"Oh, don't do that!" said Harold Jupp. "We have just got to like you."

"Yes, wait until to-morrow, my dear boy," Sir Chichester suggested.
Even Joan Whitworth descended to earth and requested that he should
stay.

"It's awfully kind of you," stammered Martin. "But I am afraid that this
is very important."

Lady Splay was practical.

"Hadn't you better see first?" she asked.

Hillyard, with his thoughts playing swiftly in the future like a rapier,
was still standing stock-still with the unopened telegram in his hand.

"Of course," he said. "But I know already what it is."

The anxious little circle closed nearer as he tore open the envelope. He
read:

     "_I have refused the Duke. Money is cash--I mean trash.
     Little one I am yours._--LINDA SPAVINSKY."

The telegram had been sent that afternoon from Chichester.

Hillyard gazed around at the serious faces which hemmed him in. It
became a contest as to whose face should hold firm longest. Joan herself
was the first to flee, and she was found rocking to and fro in silent
laughter in a corner of the library. Then Hillyard himself burst into a
roar.

"I bought that fairly," he admitted, and he went up several points in
the estimation of them all.

The last day of the races came--all sunshine and hot summer; lights and
shadows chasing across the downs, the black slopes of Charlton forest on
the one side, parks and green fields and old brown houses, sloping to
the silver Solent, upon the other; and in the centre of the plain, by
Bosham water, the spire of Chichester Cathedral piercing the golden air.
Paddock and lawn and the stands were filled until about two in the
afternoon. Then the gaps began to show to those who were concerned to
watch. Especially about the oval railings in the paddock, within which,
dainty as cats and with sleek shining skins, the racehorses stepped, the
crowd grew thin. And in a few moments, the word had run round like fire,
"The officers had gone."

Hillyard stood reflecting upon the stupendous fact. Never had he so
bitterly regretted that physical disqualification which banned him from
their company. Never had he so envied Luttrell. He was in the uttermost
depression when a small, brown-gloved hand touched his arm. He turned
and saw Joan Whitworth at his side, her lovely face alive with
excitement, her eyes most friendly. It was hardly at all the Joan he
knew. Joan had courage, but to face Goodwood in the clothes she affected
at Rackham Park was beyond it. From her grey silk stockings and suede
shoes to the little smart blue hat which sat so prettily on her hair,
she was, as Millicent Splay would have admitted, really dressed.

"There is a real telegram for you," she said. She held it out to him
enclosed in an envelope which had been already opened.

"_Please come to see me--Graham_," he read, and the actual receipt of
the message stirred within him such a whirl of emotion that, for a
moment or two, Joan Whitworth spoke and he was not aware of it.
Suddenly, however, he understood that she was speaking words of
importance.

"I hope I did right to open it," she said. "Colonel Brockley rode over
this morning to tell us that his son had been recalled to his battalion
by a telegram. I knew you were expecting one. When this one came, I
thought that it might be important and that you ought to have it at
once. On the other hand it might be another telegram," and her face
dimpled into smiles, "from Linda Spavinsky. I didn't know what to do
about it. But Mario Escobar was quite certain that I ought to open it."

"Mario Escobar?" cried Hillyard.

"Yes. He had just arrived. He was quite certain that we ought to open
it, so we did."

"We?" A note of regret in his voice made her ask anxiously:

"Was I wrong?"

Hillyard hastened to reassure her.

"Not a bit. Of course you were quite right, and I am very grateful."

Joan's face cleared again.

"You see, I thought that if it was important I could bring it over and
drive you back again."

"Will you?" Hillyard asked eagerly. "But now you are here you ought to
stay."

Joan would not hear of the proposal, and Hillyard himself was in a fever
to be off. They found Sir Chichester and his wife in the paddock, and
Hillyard wished his hosts good-bye. Mario Escobar, who had driven over
with Joan Whitworth, was talking to them. Escobar turned to Martin
Hillyard.

"We met at Sir Charles Hardiman's supper party. You have not forgotten?
You are off? A new play, I hope, to go into rehearsal."

He smiled and bowed, and waved his hands. Hillyard went away with Joan
Whitworth and mounted beside her into a little two-seated car which she
had been accustomed to drive in her unregenerate days. She had not
forgotten her skill, and she sent the little car spinning up and down
the road into the hills. It was an afternoon of blue and gold, with the
larks singing out of sight in the sky. The road wound up and down, dark
hedges on one side, fields yellow with young wheat upon the other, and
the scent of the briar-rose in the air. Joan said very little, and
Hillyard was content to watch her as she drove, the curls blowing about
her ears and her hands steady and sure upon the wheel as she swung the
car round the corners and folds of the hills. Once she asked of him:

"Are you glad to go?"

He made no pretence of misunderstanding her.

"Very," he answered. "If the great trial is coming, I want to fall back
into the rank and file. Pushing and splashing is for peace times."

"Oh, I understand that!" she cried.

These were the young days. The jealousies of Departments, the intrigues
to pull this man down and put that man up, not because of his capacity
or failure, but because he fitted or did not fit the inner politics of
the Office, the capture of honours by the stay-at-homes--all the little
miseries and horrors that from time immemorial have disfigured the
management of wars--they lay in the future. With millions of people, as
with this couple speeding among the uplands, the one thought was--the
great test is at hand.

"You go up to London to-night, and it may be a long while before we see
you," said Joan. She brought the car to a halt on the edge of Duncton
Hill. "Look for luck and for memory at the Weald of Sussex," she cried
with a little catch in her throat.

Fields and great trees, and here and there the white smoke of a passing
train and beyond the Blackdown and the misty slopes of Leith
Hill--Hillyard was never to forget it, neither that scene nor the eager
face and shining eyes of Joan Whitworth against the blue and gold of the
summer afternoon.

"You will remember that you have friends here, who will be glad to hear
news of you," she said, and she threw in the clutch and started the car
down the hill.




CHAPTER XI

STELLA RUNS TO EARTH


"You have been back in England long?" asked Stella Croyle.

"A little while," said Hillyard evasively.

It was the first week of September. But since his return from Rackham
Park to London his days had been passed in the examination of files of
documents; and what little time he had enjoyed free from that labour had
been given to quiet preparations for his departure.

"You might have come to see me," Stella Croyle suggested. "You knew that
I wished to see you."

"Yes, but I have been very busy," he answered. "I am going away."

Stella Croyle looked at him curiously.

"You too! You have joined up?"

Hillyard shook his head.

"No good," he answered. "I told you my lungs were my weak point. I am
turned down--and I am going abroad. It's not very pleasant to find
oneself staying on in London, going to a little dinner party here and
there where all the men are oldish, when all of one's friends have
gone."

Stella Croyle's face and voice softened.

"Yes. I can understand that," she said.

Hillyard watched her narrowly, but there was no doubt that she was
sincere. She had received him with an air of grievance, and a hard
accent in her voice. But she was entering now into a comprehension of
the regrets which must be troubling him.

"I am sorry," she continued. "I never cared very much for women. I have
very few friends amongst them. And so I am losing--every one." She held
out her hand to him in sympathy. "But if I were a man and had been
turned down by the doctors, I don't think that I could stay. I should
go like you and hide."

She smiled and poured out two cups of tea.

"That is a habit of yours, even though you are not a man," Hillyard
replied.

"What do you mean?"

"You run away and hide."

Stella looked at her visitor in surprise.

"Who told you that?"

"Sir Charles Hardiman."

Stella Croyle was silent for a few moments.

"Yes, that's true," and she laughed suddenly. "When things go wrong, I
become rather impossible. I have often made up my mind to live entirely
in the country, but I never carry the plan out."

She let Hillyard drink his tea and light a cigarette before she
approached the question which was torturing her.

"You had a good time in the Sudan!" she began. "Lots of heads?"

"Yes. I had a perfect time."

"And your friend? Captain Luttrell. Did you meet him?"

Hillyard had pondered on the answer which he would give to her when she
asked that question. If he answered, "Yes,"--why, then he must go on, he
must tell her something of what passed between Luttrell and himself, how
he delivered his message and what answer he received. Let him wrap that
answer up in words, however delicate and vague, she would see straight
to the answer. Her heart would lead her there. To plead forgetfulness
would be merely to acknowledge that he slighted her; and she would not
believe him. So he lied.

"No. I never met Luttrell. He was away down in Khordofan when I was on
the White Nile."

Stella Croyle had turned a little away from Hillyard when she put the
question; and she sat now with her face averted for a long while.
Nothing broke the silence but the ticking of the clock.

"I am sorry," said Hillyard.

No doubt her disappointment was bitter. She had counted very much, no
doubt, on this chance of the two men meeting; on her message reaching
her lover, and a "little word" now and again from him coming to her
hands. Some morning she would wake up and find an envelope in the
familiar writing waiting upon the tray beside her tea--that, no doubt,
had been the hope which she had lived on this many a day. Hillyard was
not fool enough to hold that he understood either the conclusions at
which women arrived, or the emotions by which they jumped to them. But
he attributed these hopes and thoughts with some confidence to Stella
Croyle--until she turned and showed him her face. The sympathy and
gentleness had gone from it. She was white with passion and her eyes
blazed.

"Why do you lie to me?" she cried. "I met Harry this morning."

Hillyard was more startled by the news of Luttrell's presence in London
than confused by the detection of his lie.

"Harry Luttrell!" he exclaimed. "You are sure? He is in England?"

"Yes. I met him in Piccadilly outside Jerningham's"--she mentioned the
great outfitters and provision merchants--"he told me that he had run
across you in the Sudan. What made you say that you hadn't?"

Hillyard was taken at a loss.

"Well?" she insisted.

Hillyard could see no escape except by the way of absolute frankness.

"Because I gave him your message, Mrs. Croyle," he replied slowly, "and
I judged that he was not going to answer it."

Stella Croyle was inclined to think that the world was banded against
her, to deceive her and to do her harm. They had all been engaged,
Hardiman and the rest of them, in keeping Harry Luttrell away from her:
in defending him, whether he wished it or not, from the wiles of the
enchantress. Stella Croyle was quick enough in the up-take where her
wounded heart was not concerned, but she was never very clear in any
judgment which affected Harry Luttrell. Passion and disappointment and
hope drew veils between the truth and her, and she dived below the plain
reason to this or that far-fetched notion for the springs of his
conduct. Almost she had persuaded herself that Harry Luttrell, by the
powerful influence of friends, was being kept against his will from her
side. Her anger against Hillyard had sprung, not from the mere fact that
he had lied to her, but from her fancy that he had joined the imaginary
band of her enemies. She understood now that in this she had been wrong.

"I see," she said gently. "It was to spare me pain?"

"Yes."

Suddenly Stella Croyle laughed--and with triumph. She showed to Hillyard
a face from which all the anger had gone.

"You need not have been so anxious to spare me. Harry is coming here
this afternoon."

She saw the incredulity flicker in Hillyard's eyes, but she did not
mind.

"Yes," she asserted. "He goes down this evening to a camp in the New
Forest where his battalion is waiting to go to France. He starts at six
from Waterloo. He promised to run in here first."

Hillyard looked at the clock. It was already half-past four. He had not
the faintest hope that Luttrell would come. Stella had no doubt pressed
him to come. She had probably been a little importunate. Luttrell's
promise was an excuse, just an excuse to be rid of her--nothing more.

"Luttrell has probably a great deal to do on this last afternoon," he
suggested.

"Of course, he won't be able to stay long," Stella Croyle agreed.
"Still, five minutes are worth a good deal, aren't they, if you have
waited for them two years?"

She was impenetrable in her confidence. It clothed her about like
armour. Not for a moment would she doubt--she dared not! Harry was
coming back to the house that afternoon. Would he break something--some
little china ornament upon the mantel-shelf? He generally knocked over
something. What would it be to-day, the mandarin with the nodding head,
or the funny little pot-bellied dwarf which she had picked up at
Christie's the day before? Stella smiled delightedly as she selected
this and that of her little treasures for destruction. Oh, to-day Harry
Luttrell could sweep every glass or porcelain trinket she possessed
into the grate--when once he had passed through the doorway--when once
again he stood within her room. She sat with folded hands, hope like a
rose in her heart, sure of him, so sure of him that she did not even
watch the hands of her clock.

But the hands moved on.

"I will stay, if I may," said Hillyard uncomfortably. "I will go, of
course, when----" and he could not bring himself to complete the
sentence.

Stella, however, added the words, though in a quieter voice and with
less triumph than she had used before.

"When he comes. Yes, do stay. I shall be glad."

Slowly the day drew in. The sunlight died away from the trees in the
park. In the tiny garden great shadows fell. The dusk gathered and
Hillyard and Stella Croyle sat without a word in the darkening room. But
Stella had lost her pride of carriage. On the mantelpiece the clock
struck the hour--six little tinkling silvery strokes. At that moment a
guard was blowing his whistle on a platform of Waterloo and a train
beginning slowly to move.

"He will have missed his train," said Stella in an unhappy whisper. "He
will be here later."

"My dear," replied Hillyard, and leaning forward he took and gently
shook her hand. "Soldiers don't miss their trains."

Stella did not answer. She sat on until the lamps were lit in the
streets outside and in this room the dusk had changed to black night.

"No, he will not come," she said at last, in a low wail of anguish. She
rose and turned to Hillyard. Her face glimmered against the darkness
deathly white and her eyes shone with sorrow.

"It was kind and wise of you to wish to spare me," she said. "Oh, I can
picture to myself how coldly he heard you. He never meant to come here
this afternoon."

Stella Croyle was wrong, just as Hillyard had been. Harry Luttrell had
meant to pay his farewell visit to Stella Croyle, knowing well that he
was unlikely ever to come back, and understanding that he owed her it.
But an incident drove the whole matter from his thoughts, and the
incident was just one instance to show how wide a gulf now separated
these two.

He had called at a nursing home close to Portland Place where a Colonel
Oakley lay dying of a malignant disease. Oakley had been the chief
spirit of reviving the moral and the confidence of the disgraced
Clayfords. He had laboured unflinchingly to restore its discipline, to
weld it into one mind, with dishonour to redeem, and a single arm to
redeem it. He had lived for nothing else--until the internal trouble
laid him aside. Luttrell called at half-past three to tell him that all
was well with his old battalion, and was met by a nurse who shook her
head.

"The last two days he has been lying, except for a minute here and
there, in a coma. You may see him if you like, but it is a question of
hours."

Luttrell went into the bedroom where the sick man lay, so thin of face
and hand, so bloodless. But it seemed that the Fates wished to deal the
Colonel one last ironic stroke, before they let him die. For, while
Luttrell yet stood in the room, Colonel Oakley's eyes opened. This last
moment of consciousness was his, the very last; and while it still
endured, suddenly, down Portland Place, with its drums beating, its
soldiers singing, marched a battalion. The song and the music swelled,
the tramp of young, active, vigorous soldiers echoed and reached down
the quiet street. Colonel Oakley turned his face to his pillow and burst
into tears; the bitterness of death was given him to drink in
overflowing measure. It seemed as though a jibe was flung at him.

The tramp of the battalion had not yet died away when Oakley sank again
into unconsciousness.

"It was pretty rough that he should just wake up to hear that and to
know that he would never have part in it, eh?" said Luttrell, speaking
in a low voice more to himself than to the nurse. "What he did for us!
Pretty hard treatment, eh?"

Luttrell left the home with one thought filling his mind--the regiment.
It had got to justify all Oakley's devotion; it had got somehow to make
amends to him, even if he never was to know of it, for this last unfair
stroke of destiny. Luttrell walked across London, dwelling upon the
qualities of individual men in the company which was his command--how
this man was quick, and that man stupid, and that other inclined to
swank, and a fourth had a gift for reading maps, and a fifth would make
a real marksman; and so he woke up to find himself before the bookstall
in the station at Waterloo. Then he remembered the visit he had
promised, but there was no longer any time. He took the train to the New
Forest, and three days later went to France.

But of Luttrell's visit to Colonel Oakley, Stella Croyle never knew.
And, again, very likely it would not have mattered if she had. They were
parted too widely for insight and clear vision.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hillyard carried away with him a picture of Stella's haunted and
despairing face. It was over against him as he dined at his club,
gleaming palely from out of darkness, the lips quivering, the eyes sad
with all the sorrows of women. He could blame neither the one nor the
other--neither Stella Croyle nor Harry Luttrell. One heart called to the
other across too wide a gulf, and this heart on the hither side was
listening to quite other voices and was deaf to her cry for help. But
Hillyard was on the road along which Millicent Splay had already
travelled. More and more he felt the case for compassion. He carried the
picture of Stella's face home with him. It troubled his sleep; by
constant gazing upon it he became afraid....

He waked with a start to hear a question whispered at his ear. "Where is
she? How has she passed this night?" The morning light was glimmering
between the curtains. The room was empty. Yet surely those words had
been spoken, actually spoken by a human voice.... He took his telephone
instrument in his hand and lifted the receiver. In a little while--but a
while too long for his impatience--his call was acknowledged at the
exchange. He gave Stella Croyle's number and waited. Whilst he waited he
looked at his watch. The time was a quarter past seven.

An unfamiliar and sleepy voice answered him from her house.

"Will you put me on to Mrs. Croyle?" he requested, and the reply came
back:

"Mrs. Croyle went away with her maid last night."

"Last night?" cried Hillyard incredulously. "But I did not leave the
house myself until well after six, and she had then no plans for
leaving."

Further details, however, were given to him. Mrs. Croyle had called up a
garage whence cars can be hired. She had packed hurriedly. She had left
at nine by motor.

"Where for?" asked Hillyard.

The name of an hotel in the pine country of Surrey was given.

"Thank you," said Hillyard, and he rang off.

She had run to earth in her usual way, when trouble and grief broke
through her woman's armour and struck her down--that was all! Hillyard
lighted a cigarette and rang for his tea. Yes, that was all! She was
acting true to her type, as the jargon has it. But against his will, her
face took shape before him, as he had seen it in the darkness of her
room and ever since--ever since!

He rang again, and more insistently. He possessed a small, swift
motor-car. Before the clocks of London had struck eight he was
travelling westwards along the King's Road. Hillyard was afraid. He did
not formulate his fears. He was not sure of what he feared. But he was
afraid--terribly afraid; and for the first time anger rose up in his
heart against his friend. Luttrell! Harry Luttrell! At this very moment
he was changing direction in columns of fours upon the drill ground,
happy in the smooth execution of the manoeuvre by his men and
untroubled by any thought of the distress of Stella Croyle. Well, little
things must give way to great--women to the exigencies of drill!

Meanwhile, Hillyard grew more afraid, and yet more afraid. He swept down
the hill to Cobham, passed between the Hut and the lake, and was through
Ripley before the shutters in the shops were down. The dew was heavy in
the air; all the fresh, clean smell of the earth was in that September
morning. And as yet the morning itself was only half awake. At last the
Hog's Back rose, and at a little inn, known for its comfort--and its
_chef_--Hillyard's car was stopped.

"Mrs. Croyle?" Hillyard asked at the office.

"Her maid is here," said the girl clerk, and pointed.

Hillyard turned to a girl, pretty and, by a few years, younger than
Stella Croyle.

"I have orders not to wake Mrs. Croyle until she rings," said the maid.
Jenny Prask, she was called, and she spoke with just a touch of pleasant
Sussex drawl. "Mrs. Croyle has not been sleeping well, and she looked
for a good night's rest in country air."

The maid was so healthful in her appearance, so reasonable in her
argument, that Hillyard's terrors, fostered by solitude, began to lose
their vivid colours.

"I understand that," he stammered. "Yet, Jenny----"

Jenny Prask smiled.

"You are Mr. Hillyard, I think?"

"Yes."

"I have heard my mistress speak of you." Hillyard knew enough of maids
to understand that "mistress" was an unusual word with them. Here, it
seemed, was a paragon of maids, who was quite content to be publicly
Stella Croyle's maid, whose gentility suffered no offence by the
recognition of a mistress.

"If you wish, I will wake her."

Jenny Prask went up the stairs, Hillyard at her heels. She knocked upon
the door. No answer was returned. She opened it and entered.

Stella Croyle was up and dressed. She was sitting at a table by the
window with some sheets of notepaper and some envelopes in front of her,
and her back was towards Hillyard and the open door. But she was dressed
as she had been dressed the evening before when he had left her; the
curtains in the room were drawn, and the electric lights on the
writing-table and the walls were still burning. The bed had not been
slept in.

Stella Croyle rose and turned towards her visitors. She tottered a
little as she stood up, and her eyes were dazed.

"Why have you come here?" she asked faintly, and she fell rather than
sat again in her chair.

Hillyard sprang forward and tore the curtains aside so that the
sunlight poured into the room, and Stella opened and shut her eyes with
a contraction of pain.

"I had so many letters to write," she explained, "I thought that I would
sit up and get through with them."

Hillyard looked at the table. There were great black dashes on the
notepaper and lines, and here and there a scribbled picture of a face,
and perhaps now and again half a word. She had sat at that table all
night and had not even begun a letter. Hillyard's heart was torn with
pity as he looked from her white, tired face to the sheets of notepaper.
What misery and unhappiness did those broad, black dashes and idle lines
express?

"You must have some breakfast," he said. "I'll order it and have it
ready for you downstairs by the time you are ready. Then I'll take you
back to London."

The blood suddenly mounted into her face.

"You will?" she cried wildly. "In a reserved compartment, so that I may
do nothing rash and foolish? Are you going to be kind too?"

She broke into a peal of shrill and bitter laughter. Then her head went
down upon her hands, and she gave herself up to such a passion of
sobbing and tears as was quite beyond all Hillyard's experience. Yet he
would rather hear those sobs and see her bowed shoulders shaking under
the violence of them than listen again to the dreadful laughter which
had gone before. He had not the knowledge which could enable him to
understand her sudden outburst, nor did he acquire that knowledge until
long afterwards. But he understood that quite unwittingly he had touched
some painful chord in that wayward nature.

"I am going to take you back in my motor-car," he said. "I'll be
downstairs with the breakfast ready."

She had probably eaten nothing, he reckoned, since teatime the day
before. Food was the steadying thing she needed now. He went to the door
which Jenny Prask held open for him.

"Don't leave her!" he breathed in a whisper.

Jenny Prask smiled.

"Not me, sir," she said fervently.

Hillyard remembered with comfort some words which she had spoken in
appreciation of the loving devotion of her maid.

"In three-quarters of an hour," said Jenny; and later on that morning,
with a great fear removed from his heart, Hillyard drove Stella Croyle
back to London.




CHAPTER XII

IN BARCELONA


It was nine o'clock on a night of late August.

The restaurant of the Maison Doree in the Plaza Cataluna at Barcelona
looks across the brilliantly-lighted square from the south side. On the
pavement in front of it and of its neighbour, the Cafe Continental, the
vendors of lottery tickets were bawling the lucky numbers they had for
sale. Even in this wide space the air was close and stale. Within, a few
people left over in the town had strayed in to dine at tables placed
against the walls under flamboyant decorations in the style of
Fragonard. At a table Hillyard was sitting alone over his coffee. Across
the room one of the panels represented a gleaming marble terrace
overlooking a country-side bathed in orange light; and on the terrace
stood a sedan chair with drawn curtains, and behind the chair stood a
saddled white horse. Hillyard had dined more than once during the last
few months at the Maison Doree; and the problem of that picture had
always baffled him. A lovers' tryst! But where were the lovers? In some
inner room shaded from the outrage of that orange light which never was
on sea or land? Or in the sedan chair? Or were their faces to be
discovered, as in the puzzle pictures, in the dappling of the horse's
flanks, or the convolutions of the pillars which supported the terrace
roof, or the gilded ornamentations of the chair itself? Hillyard was
speculating for the twentieth time on these important matters with a
vague hope that one day the door of the sedan chair would open, when
another door opened--the door of the restaurant. A sharp-visaged man
with a bald forehead, a clerk, one would say, or a commercial traveller,
looked round the room and went forward to Hillyard's table. He went
quite openly.

The two men shook hands, and the new-comer seated himself in front of
Hillyard.

"You will take coffee and a cigar?" Hillyard asked in Spanish, and gave
the order to the waiter.

The two men talked of the heat, the cinematograph theatres at the side
of the Plaza, the sea-bathing at Caldetas, and then the sharp-faced man
leaned forward.

"Ramon says there is no truth in the story, senor."

Hillyard struck a match and held it to his companion's cigar.

"And you trust Ramon, Senor Baeza?"

Lopez Baeza leaned back with a gesture of unqualified assent.

"As often and often you can trust the peasant of my country," he said.

Hillyard agreed with a nod. He gazed about the room.

"There is no one interesting here to-night," he said idly.

"No," answered Lopez Baeza. "The theatres are closed, the gay people
have gone to St. Sebastian, the families to the seaside. Ouf, but it is
hot."

"Yes."

Hillyard dropped his voice to a whisper and returned to the subject of
his thoughts.

"You see, my friend, it is of so much importance that we should make no
mistake here."

"_Claro!_" returned Lopez Baeza. "But listen to me, senor. You know that
our banks are behind the times and our post offices not greatly trusted.
We have therefore a class of messengers."

Hillyard nodded.

"I know of them."

"Good. They are not educated. Most of them can neither read nor write.
They are simply peasants. Yet they are trusted to carry the most
important letters and great sums of money in gold and silver from place
to place. And never do they betray their trust. It is unknown. Why,
senor, I know myself of cases where rich men have entrusted their
daughters to the care of the messengers, sure that in this way their
daughters will arrive safely at their destination."

"Yes," said Hillyard. "I know of these men."

"Ramon Castillo is as honest as the best of them."

"Yes, but he is not one of them," said Hillyard. "He is a stevedore with
thirty years of the quayside and at the port of Barcelona, where there
are German ships with their officers and crews on board."

Hillyard was troubled. He drew from his pocket creased letters and read
them for the twentieth time with a frowning countenance.

"There is so much at stake. Two hundred feluccas--two hundred
motor-driven feluccas! And eighteen thousand men, on shore and sea? See
what it means! On our side, the complete surveillance of the Western
Mediterranean! On the other side--against us--two hundred travelling
supply bases for submarines, two hundred signal stations. I want to be
sure! I want neither to give the enemy the advantage by putting him upon
his guard, nor to miss the great opportunity myself."

Lopez Baeza nodded.

"Why not talk with Ramon Castillo yourself?" he asked.

"That is what I want to do."

"I will arrange for it. When?"

"To-night," said Hillyard.

Lopez Baeza lifted his hands in deprecation.

"Yes. I can take you to his house--now. But, senor, Ramon is a poor man.
He lives in a little narrow street."

Hillyard looked quietly at Lopez Baeza. He had found men on the
Mediterranean littoral whom he could trust with his life and everything
that was his. But a good working principle was to have not overmuch
faith in any one. A noisome little street in the lower quarters of
Barcelona--who could tell what might happen after one had plunged into
it?

"I will come with you," he said.

"Good," said Lopez. "I will go on ahead." And once more Hillyard's quiet
eyes rested upon Baeza's face. "It is not wise that we should walk out
together. There is no one here, it is true, but in the chairs outside
the cafes--who shall say?"

"Yes. You go on ahead," Hillyard agreed. "That is wise."

Lopez rose.

"Give me five minutes, senor. Then down the Rambla. The second turning
to the right, beyond the Opera House. You will see me at the corner.
When you see me, follow!"

Hillyard rose and shook hands cordially with Lopez Baeza with the air of
a man who might never see his friend again for years. Baeza commended
him to God and went out of the restaurant on to the lighted footway.

Hillyard read through the two creased letters again, though he knew them
by heart. They had reached him from William Lloyd, an English merchant
at Barcelona, at two different dates. The first, written six weeks ago,
related how Pontiana Tabor, a servant of the firm, had come into Lloyd's
private office and informed him that on the night of the 27th June a
German submarine had entered a deep cove at the lonely north-east point
of the island of Mallorca, and had there been provisioned by Jose
Medina's men, with Jose Medina's supplies, and that Jose Medina had
driven out of Palma de Mallorca in his motor-car, and travelling by
little-known tracks, had been present when the operation was in process.
The name of a shoemaker in a street of Palma was given as corroboration.

The second letter, which had brought Hillyard post-haste off the sea
into Barcelona, was only three days old. Once more Pontiana Tabor had
been the bearer of bad news. Jose Medina had been seen entering the
German Consulate in Barcelona, between eleven and twelve o'clock of the
morning of August 22nd.

Hillyard was greatly troubled by these two letters.

"We can put Jose Medina out of business, of course," he reflected. For
Jose Medina's tobacco factories were built at a free port in French
territory. "But I want the man for my friend."

He put the letters back in his pocket and paid his bill. As he went out
of the Maison Doree, he felt in the right-hand pocket of his jacket to
make sure that a little deadly life preserver lay ready to his hand.

He did not distrust Lopez Baeza. All the work which Baeza had done for
him had, indeed, been faithfully and discreetly done. But--but there was
always a certain amount of money for the man who would work the double
cross--not so very much, but still, a certain amount. And Hillyard was
always upon his guard against the intrusion of a contempt for the
German effort. That contempt was easy enough for a man who, having read
year after year of the wonders of the loud-vaunted German system of
espionage, had come fresh from his reading into contact with the actual
agents. Their habit of lining their pockets at the expense of their
Government, their unfulfilled pretensions, their vanity and
extravagance, and, above all, their unimaginative stupidity in their
estimation of men--these things were apt in the early years of the war
to bewilder the man who had been so often told to fall down before the
great idol of German efficiency.

"The German agent works on the assumption that the mind of every
foreigner reasons on German lines, but with inferior intelligence. But
behind the agent is the cunning of Berlin, with its long-deliberated
plans and its concocted ingenuity of method. And though on the whole
they are countered, as with amazement they admit, by the amateurs from
England, still every now and then--not very often--they do bring
something off."

Thus Hillyard reasoned as he turned the corner of the Plaza Cataluna
into the wide Rambla. It might be that the narratives of Pontiana Tabor
and the denials of Ramon Castillo were all just part of one little
subsidiary plan in the German scheme which was to reach its achievement
by putting an inconvenient Englishman out of the way for good in one of
the dark, narrow side streets of Barcelona.

After the hot day the Rambla, with its broad tree-shaded alley in the
middle, its carriage-ways on each side of the alley, and its shops and
footwalks beyond the carriage-ways, was crowded with loiterers. The
Spaniard, to our ideas, is simple in his pleasure. To visit a
cinematograph, to take a cooling temperance drink at the Municipal
Kiosque at the top of the Rambla, and to pace up and down the broad walk
with unending chatter--until daybreak--here were the joys of Barcelona
folk in the days of summer. Further down at the lower end of the Rambla
you would come upon the dancing halls and supper-cafes, with separate
rooms for the national gambling game, "Siete y Media," but they had
their own clientele amongst the bloods and the merchant captains from
the harbour. The populace of Barcelona walked the Rambla under the
great globes of electric light.

Hillyard could only move slowly through the press. Every one dawdled.
Hillyard dawdled too. He passed the Opera House, and a little further
down saw across the carriage-way, Lopez Baeza in front of a lighted
tobacco shop at the corner of a narrow street. Hillyard crossed the
carriage-way and Baeza turned into the street, a narrow thoroughfare
between tall houses and dark as a cavern. Hillyard followed him. The
lights of the Rambla were left behind, the houses became more slatternly
and disreputable, the smells of the quarter were of rancid food and bad
drains. Before a great door Baeza stopped and clapped his hands.

A jingle of keys answered him, and rising from the step of another house
the watchman of the street crossed the road. He put a key into the door,
opened it, and received the usual twopence. Baeza and Hillyard passed
in.

"Ramon is on the top floor. We have to climb," said Baeza.

He lit a match, and the two men mounted a staircase with a carved
balustrade, made for a king. Two stories up, the great staircase ended,
and another of small, steep and narrow steps succeeded it. When Baeza's
match went out there was no light anywhere; from a room somewhere above
came a sound of quarrelling voices--a woman's voice high and shrill, a
man's voice hoarse and drunken, and, as an accompaniment, the wailing of
a child wakened from its sleep.

At the very top of the house Baeza rapped on a door. The door was
opened, and a heavy, elderly man, wearing glasses on his nose, stood in
the entrance with the light of an unshaded lamp behind him.

"Ramon, it is the chief," said Baeza.

Ramon Castello crossed the room and closed an inner door. Then he
invited Hillyard to enter. The room was bare but for a few pieces of
necessary furniture, but all was scrupulously clean. Ramon Castillo set
forward a couple of chairs and asked his visitors to be seated. He was
in his shirt-sleeves, and he wore the rope-soled sandals of the Spanish
peasant, but he was entirely at his ease. He made the customary little
speech of welcome with so simple a dignity and so manifest a sincerity
that Hillyard could hardly doubt him afterwards.

"It is my honour to welcome you not merely as my chief, but as an
Englishman. I am poor, and I take my pay, but Senor Baeza will assure
you that for twenty-five years I have been the friend of England. And
there are thousands and thousands of poor Spaniards like myself, who
love England, because its law-courts are just, because there is a real
freedom there, because political power is not the opportunity of
oppression."

The little speech was spoken with great rapidity and with deep feeling;
and, having delivered it, Ramon seated himself on the side of the table
opposite to Hillyard and Baeza and waited.

"It is about Pontiana Tabor," said Hillyard. "He is making a mistake?"

"No, senor; he is lying," and he used the phrase which has no exact
equivalent in the English. "He is a _sin verguenza_."

"Tell me, my friend," said Hillyard.

"Pontiana Tabor swears that Jose Medina was seen to enter the German
Consulate before noon on August the 22nd. But on August the 21st Medina
was in Palma, Mallorca; he was seen there by a captain of the Islana
Company, and a friend of mine spoke to him on the quay. If, therefore,
he was in the German Consulate here on the 22nd, he must have crossed
that night by the steamer to Barcelona. But he did not. His name was not
on the list of passengers, and although he might have avoided that, he
was not seen on board or to come on board. I have spoken with officers
and crew. Jose Medina did not cross on the 21st. Moreover, Senor Baeza
has seen a letter which shows that he was certainly in Palma on the
23rd."

"That is true," said Baeza. "Medina was in Palma on the 21st, and in
Palma on the 23rd, and he did not cross to Barcelona on the night of the
21st, nor back again to Palma on the night of the 22nd. Therefore he was
not seen to visit the German Consulate on the morning of the 22nd, and,
as Ramon says, Pontiana is lying."

"Why should Pontiana lie?" asked Hillyard.

Ramon took his pince-nez from the bridge of his nose, and, holding them
between his finger and thumb, tapped with them upon his knee.

"Because, senor, there are other contrabandists besides Jose Medina; one
little group at Tarragona and another near Garucha--and they would all
be very glad to see Jose Medina get into trouble with the British and
the French. His feluccas fly the British flag and his factories are on
French soil. There would be an end of Jose Medina."

The letters were put in front of Hillyard. He read them over carefully,
and at the end he said:

"If Pontiana Tabor lied in this case of the Consulate--and that seems
clear--it is very likely that he lied also in the other. Yes."

As a matter of fact, Hillyard had reasons of his own to doubt the truth
of the story which ascribed to Medina the actual provisioning of a
submarine--reasons which had nothing whatever to do with Jose Medina
himself.

The destruction of shipping by German submarines in this western section
of the Mediterranean had an intermittent regularity. There would be ten
successive days--hardly ever more than ten days--during which ships were
sunk. Thereafter for three weeks, steamships and sailing ships would
follow the course upon which they were ordered, without hurt or loss.
After three weeks, the murderous business would begin again. There was
but one explanation in Hillyard's opinion.

"The submarines come out of Pola. When they reach the line between the
Balearics and the Spanish coast, they have oil for ten days' cruising,
and then return to their base," he argued.

Now, if a submarine had been provisioned by Jose Medina in a creek of
Mallorca, the ten days' cruise would be extended to three weeks. This
had never happened. Moreover, the date fixed by Pontiana Tabor happened
to fall precisely in the middle of one of those periods of three weeks
during which the terror did not haunt those seas. Pontiana Tabor had not
known enough. He had fixed his date at a venture.

"Yes," said Hillyard, rising from his chair. "I agree with you, Senor
Ramon. Tabor is a liar. What troubled me was that I had no clue as to
why he should lie. You have given me it, and with all my heart I thank
you."

He shook the stevedore's hand and stood for a moment talking and joking
with him upon other subjects. Hillyard knew the value of a smile and a
jest and a friendly manner. Your very enemy in Spain will do you a good
turn if you meet him thus. Then he turned to Baeza.

"I shall be back, perhaps, in a week, but perhaps not. I will let you
know in the usual way."

The two men went down the stairs and into the street. It was empty now
and black, but at the far end, as at the end of a tunnel, the Rambla
blazed and roared and the crowds swung past like a procession.

"It is best that we should separate here," said Lopez Baeza, "if you
have no further instructions."

"Touching the matter of those ships," Hillyard suggested.

"Senor Fairbairn has it in hand."

"Good. Then, my friend, I have no further instructions," said Hillyard.
"I agree with you about Ramon. I will go first."

He shook hands with Baeza, crossed the road and disappeared into the
mouthway of an alley which ran up the hill parallel to the Rambla. The
alley led into another side street, and turning to the right, Hillyard
slipped out into the throng beneath the trees. He sauntered, as idle and
as curious as any in that broad walk. He took a drink at a cafe, neither
hiding himself unnaturally nor ostentatiously occupying a chair at the
edge of the awning. He sat there for half an hour. But when he rose
again he made sure that no one was loitering to watch his movements. He
sauntered up to the very end of the Rambla past the ice-cream kiosque.
The great Plaza spread in front of him, and at the corner across the
road stood a double line of motor-cars, some for hire, others waiting
for parties in the restaurants opposite. He walked across the roadway
and disappeared in between the motor-cars as if he intended to cross the
Plaza by the footway to the Paseo de la Reforma. A second later a
motor-car shot out from the line and took the road to Tarragona.

Hillyard was inside the car. The tall houses of the city gave place to
villas draped in bougainvillea behind gardens of trees. Then the villas
ceased and the car sped across the flats of Llobegrat and climbed to the
finest coast-road in the world. It was a night for lovers. A full moon,
bright as silver, sailed in the sky; the broad, white road rose and
dipped and wound past here and there a blue cottage, here and there a
peasant mounted on his donkey and making his journey by night to escape
the burning day. Far below the sea spread out most gently murmuring, and
across a great wide path of glittering jewels, now a sailing-ship glided
like a bird, now the black funnels of a steamer showed. So light was the
wind that Hillyard could hear the kick of its screw, like the beating of
some gigantic clock. He took his hat from his head and threw wide open
his thin coat. After the heavy days of anxiety he felt a nimbleness of
heart and spirit which set him in tune with the glory of that night.
Suspicions, vague and elusive, had for so long clustered about Jose
Medina, and then had come the two categorical statements, dates and
hours, chapter and verse! He was still not sure, he declared to himself
in warning. But he was sure enough to risk the great move--the move
which he alone could make! He should no doubt have been dreaming of Joan
Whitworth and fitting her into the frame of that August night. But he
had not thought of her by one o'clock in the morning; and by one o'clock
in the morning his motor-car had come to a stop on the deserted quay of
Tarragona harbour under the stern of an English yacht.




CHAPTER XIII

OLD ACQUAINTANCE


At six o'clock on the second morning after Hillyard's visit to
Barcelona, the steam-yacht _Dragonfly_ swept round the point of La
Dragonera and changed her course to the south-east. She steamed with a
following breeze over a sea of darkest sapphire which broke in sparkling
cascades of white and gold against the rocky creeks and promontories on
the ship's port side. Peasants working on the green terraces above the
rocks stopped their work and stared as the blue ensign with the Union
Jack in the corner broke out from the flagstaff at the stern.

"But it's impossible," cried one. "Only yesterday a French mail-steamer
was chased in the passage between Mallorca and Minorca. It's
impossible."

Another shaded his eyes with his hand and looked upon the neat yacht
with its white deck and shining brass in contemptuous pity.

"Loco Ingles," said he.

The tradition of the mad Englishman has passed away from France, but it
has only leaped the Pyrenees. Some crazy multi-millionaire was just
running his head into the German noose. They gave up their work and
settled down contentedly to watch the yacht, multi-millionaire, captain
and crew and all go up into the sky. But the _Dragonfly_ passed from
their sight with the foam curling from her bows and broadening out into
a pale fan behind her; and over the headlands for a long time they saw
the streamer of her smoke as she drove in to Palma Bay.

Hillyard, standing by the captain's side upon the bridge, watched the
great cathedral rise from out of the water at the end of the bay, towers
and flying buttresses and the mass of brown stone, before even a house
was visible. The _Dragonfly_ passed a German cargo steamer which had
sought refuge here at the outbreak of war. She was a large ship, full of
oil, and she had been moved from the quay-side to an anchorage in the
bay by the captain of the port, lest by design or inadvertence she
should take fire and set the town aflame. There she lay, a source of
endless misgiving to every allied ship which sailed these waters, kept
clean and trim as a yacht, her full crew on board, her dangerous cargo
below, in the very fairway of the submarine; and there the scruples of
the Allies allowed her to remain while month followed month. Historians
in later years will come across in this or that Government office in
Paris, in London and in Rome, warnings, appeals, and accounts of the
presence of this ship; and those anxious for a picturesque contrast may
set against the violation of Belgium and all the "scrap of paper"
philosophy, the fact that for years in the very centre of the German
submarine effort in the Western Mediterranean, the German steamer
_Fangturm_, with her priceless cargo of oil, was allowed by the
scrupulous honour of the Allies to swing unmolested at her anchor in
Palma Bay. Hillyard could never pass that great black ship in those
neutral waters without a hope that his steering-gear would just at this
moment play him false and swing his bows at full speed on to her side.
The _Dragonfly_ ran past her to the arm of the great mole and was moored
with her stern to the quay. A small crowd of gesticulating idlers
gathered about the ropes, and all were but repeating the phrases of the
peasants upon the hill-side, as Hillyard walked ashore down the gangway.

"But it's impossible that you should have come."

"Just outside there is one. The fisherman saw her yesterday."

"She rose and spoke to one of the fishing-boats."

"But it is impossible that you should have come here."

"Yet I am here," answered Hillyard, the very mad multi-millionaire.
"What will you, my friends? Shall I tell you a secret? Yes, but tell no
one else! The Germans would be most enraged if they found out that we
knew it. There aren't any submarines."

A little jest spoken in a voice of good-humour, with a friendly smile,
goes a long way anywhere, but further in Spain than anywhere else in
the world. The small crowd laughed with Hillyard, and made way for him.

A man offered to him with a flourish and a bow a card advertising a
garage at which motor-cars could be hired for expeditions in the island.
Hillyard accepted it and put it into his pocket. He paid a visit to his
consul, and thereafter sat in a cafe for an hour. Then he strolled
through the narrow streets, admired this and that massive archway, with
its glimpse of a great stone staircase within, and mounted the hill.
Almost at the top, he turned sharply into a doorway and ran up the
stairs to the second floor. He knocked upon the door, and a maid-servant
answered.

"Senor Jose Medina lives here?"

"Yes, senor."

"He is at home?"

"No, senor. He is in the country at his _finca_."

Hillyard thanked the girl, and went whistling down the stairs. Standing
in the archway, he looked up and down the street with something of the
air of a man engaged upon a secret end. One or two people were moving in
the street; one or two were idling on the pavement. Hillyard smiled and
walked down the hill again. He took the advertisement card from his
pocket and, noting the address, walked into the garage.

"It will please me to see something of the island," he said. "I am not
in Mallorca for long. I should like a car after lunch." He gave the name
of a cafe between the cathedral and the quay. "At half-past two? Thank
you. And by which road shall I go for all that is most of Mallorca?"

This was Spain. A small group of men had already invaded the garage and
gathered about Hillyard and the proprietor. They proceeded at once to
take a hand in the conversation and offer their advice. They suggested
the expedition to Miramar, to Alcudia, to Manacor, discussing the time
each journey would take, the money to be saved by the shorter course,
the dust, and even the gradients of the road. They had no interest in
the business in the garage, and they were not at all concerned in the
success of Hillyard's excursion. That a stranger should carry away with
him pleasant recollections of the beauties of Mallorca, was a matter of
supreme indifference to them all. But they were engaged in the favourite
pursuit of the Spaniards of the towns. They were getting through a
certain small portion of the day, without doing any work, and without
spending any money. The majority favoured the road past Valdemosa, over
the Pass of Soller to Miramar and its rocky coast on the north-east side
of the island, as indeed Hillyard knew the majority must. For there is
no road like it for beauty in the Balearics, and few in all Spain.

"I will go that way, then," said Hillyard, and he strolled off to his
luncheon.

He drove afterwards over the plain, between groves of olive and almond
trees with gnarled stems and branches white with dust, mounted by the
twisting road, terraces upon his left and pine-clothed mountainside upon
his right, past Valdemosa to the Pass. The great sweep of rock-bound
coast and glittering sea burst upon his view, and the boom of water
surging into innumerable caves was like thunder to his ears. At a little
gate upon the road the car was stopped at a word from Hillyard.

"I am going in here," he said. "I may be a little while."

The chauffeur looked at Hillyard with surprise. Hillyard had never been
to the house before, but he could not mistake it from the description
which he had been given. He passed through an orchard to the door of an
outrageous villa, built in the style of a Swiss chalet and glaring with
yellow paint. A man in his shirt-sleeves came to the door.

"Senor Jose Medina?" Hillyard inquired.

He held out his card and was ushered into the room of ceremony which
went very well with the exterior of the yellow chalet. A waxed floor,
heavy white lace curtains at the windows, a table of walnut-wood, chairs
without comfort, but with gold legs, all was new and never to be used
and hideous. Hillyard looked around him with a nod of comprehension.
This is what its proprietor would wish for. With a hundred old houses to
select from for a model--no! This is the way his fancies would run. The
one beauty of the place, its position, was Nature's. Hillyard went to
the window, which was on the side of the house opposite to the door. He
looked down a steep terraced garden of orange trees and bright flowers
to the foam sparkling on the rocks a thousand feet below.

"You wished to see me, senor," and Hillyard turned with curiosity.

Twelve years had passed since he had seen Jose Medina, but he had
changed less than Hillyard expected. Martin remembered him as small and
slight, with a sharp mobile face and a remarkable activity which was the
very badge of the man; and these characteristics he retained. He was
still like quick-silver. But he was fast losing his hair, and he wore
pince-nez. The dress of the peasant and the cautious manner of the
peasant, both were gone. In his grey lounge suit he had the look of a
quick-witted clerk.

"You wished to see me, senor," he repeated, and he laid the card upon
the table.

"For a moment. I shall hope not to detain you long."

"My time and my house are yours."

Jose Medina had clearly become a _caballero_ since those early days of
adventure. Hillyard noted the point for his own guidance, thanking his
stars meanwhile that the gift of the house was a meaningless politeness.

"I arrived at Palma this morning, in a yacht," said Hillyard.

Jose Medina was prepared for the information. He bowed. There had been
neither smile nor, indeed, any expression whatever upon his face since
he had entered the room.

"I have heard of the yacht," he said. "It is a fine ship."

"Yes."

Jose Medina looked at Hillyard.

"It flies the English flag."

Hillyard bowed.

"As do your feluccas, senor, I believe."

A mere twitch of the lips showed that Medina appreciated the point.

"But I," continued Hillyard, "am an Englishman, while you, senor----"

Jose Medina was not, if he could help it, to be forced to cry "a hit"
again.

"Whereas I, senor, am a neutral," he answered. The twitch of the lips
became a smile. He invited Hillyard to a chair, he drew up another
himself, and the two men sat down over against one another in the middle
of that bare and formal room.

That one word neutral, so delicately emphasised, warned Hillyard that
Jose Medina was quite alive to the reason of his visit. He could, of
course, have blurted it out at once. He could have said in so many
words, "Your tobacco factories are on French soil, and your two hundred
feluccas are nominally owned in Gibraltar. Between French and English we
shall close you down unless you help." But he knew very well that he
would have got no more than fair words if he had. It is not thus that
delicate questions are approached in Spain. Even the blackmailer does
not dream of bluntly demanding money, or exposing his knowledge that he
will get it. He pleads decently the poverty of his family and the long
illness of his mother-in-law; and with the same decency the blackmailed
yields to compassion and opens his purse. There is a gentlemanly
reticence to be observed in these matters and Hillyard was well aware of
the rules. He struck quite a different note.

"I shall speak frankly to you, Senor Medina, as one _caballero_ to
another"; and Jose Medina bowed and smiled.

"I put my cards upon the table. I ask you whether in your heart you are
for the Germans or for us."

Jose Medina hitched his chair a little closer and holding up one hand
with fingers spread ticked off his points, as he spoke them, with the
other.

"Let us see! First, you come to me, senor, saying you are English, and
speaking Spanish with the accent of Valencia. Good! I might reply,
senor, how do I know? I might ask you how I am to be sure that when that
British flag is hauled down from your yacht outside the bay over there,
it is not a German one which should take its place. Good! But I do not
make these replies. I accept your word as a _caballero_ that you are
English and not an enemy of England laying a trap for me. Good!" He took
off his eye-glasses and polished them.

"Now listen to me!" he continued. "I am a Spaniard. We of Spain have
little grievances against England and France. But these are matters for
the Government, not for a private person. And the Government bids us be
neutral. Good! Now I speak as a private person. For me England means
opportunity for poor men to become great and rich. You may say I have
become rich without the opportunities of England. I answer I am one in
many thousands. England means Liberty, and within the strict limits of
my neutrality I will do what a man may for that great country."

Hillyard listened and nodded. The speech was flowing and spoken with
great fervour. It might mean much. It might mean nothing at all. It
might be the outcome of conviction. But it might again be nothing more
than the lip-service of a man who knew very well that England and France
could squeeze him dry if they chose.

"I wish," said Hillyard cordially, "that the captains of the ports of
Spain spoke also with your voice."

Jose Medina neither assumed an ignorance of the German leanings of the
port officials nor expressed any assent. But, as if he had realised the
thought which must be passing in Hillyard's mind, he said:

"You know very well, senor, that I should be mad if I gave help to the
Germans. I am in your hands. You and France have but to speak the word,
and every felucca of mine is off the seas. But what then! There are
eighteen thousand men at once without food or work thrown adrift upon
the coast of Spain. Will not Germany find use for those eighteen
thousand men?"

Hillyard agreed. The point was shrewd. It was an open, unanswerable
reply to the unuttered threat which perhaps Hillyard might be prompted
to use.

"I have spoken," continued Jose Medina. "Now it is for you, senor. Tell
me what within the limits of my neutrality I can do to prove to you the
sincerity of my respect for England?"

Hillyard took a sheet of paper and a pencil from his pocket. He drew a
rough map.

"Here are the Balearic Islands; here, farther to the west, the
Columbretes; here the African coast; here the mainland of Spain. Now
watch, I beg you, senor, whilst I sketch in the routes of your feluccas.
At Oran in Africa your factories stand. From them, then, we start. We
draw a broad thick line from Oran to the north-east coast of Mallorca,
that coast upon which we look down from these windows, a coast
honeycombed with caves and indented with creeks like an edge of fine
lace--a very storehouse of a coast. Am I not right, Senor Don Jose?" He
laughed, in a friendly good-humoured way, but the face of Jose Medina
did not lose one shade of its impassiveness. He did not deny that the
caves of this coast were the storehouse of his tobacco; nor did he
agree.

"Let us see!" he said.

"So I draw a thick line, since all your feluccas make for this island
and this part of the island first of all. From here they diverge--you
will correct me, I hope, if I am wrong."

"I do not say that I shall correct you if you are wrong," said Jose
Medina.

Hillyard was now drawing other and finer lines which radiated like the
sticks of an outspread fan from the north-east coast of Mallorca to the
Spanish mainland; and he went on drawing them, unperturbed by Jose's
refusal to assist in his map-making. Some of the lines--a few--ended at
the Islands of the Columbretes, sixty miles off Valencia.

"Your secret storehouse, I believe, senor," he remarked pleasantly.

"A cruiser of our Government examined these islands most carefully a
fortnight ago upon representations from the Allies, and found nothing of
any kind to excite interest," replied Jose Medina.

"The cruiser was looking for submarine bases, I understand, not
tobacco," Martin Hillyard observed. "And since it was not the cruiser's
commission to look for tobacco, why should it discover it?"

Jose Medina shrugged his shoulders. Jose Medina's purse was very long
and reached very high. It would be quite impolitic for that cruiser to
discover Jose Medina's tobacco stores, as Medina himself and Martin
Hillyard, and the captain of the cruiser, all very well knew.

Martin Hillyard continued to draw fine straight lines westwards from the
northern coast of Mallorca to the mainland of Spain, some touching the
shore to the north of Barcelona, some striking it as far south as
Almeria and Garrucha. When he had finished his map-making he handed the
result to Jose Medina.

"See, senor! Your feluccas cut across all the trade-routes through the
Mediterranean. Ships going east or going west must pass between the
Balearics and Africa, or between the Balearics and Spain. We are here in
the middle, and, whichever course those ships take, they must cross the
lines on which your feluccas continually come and go."

Jose Medina looked at the map. He did not commit himself in any way. He
contented himself with a question: "And what then?"

"So too with the German submarines. They also must cross and cross again
in their cruises, those lines along which your feluccas continually come
and go."

Jose Medina threw up his hands.

"The submarines! Senor, if you listen to the babblers on the quays, you
would think that the seas are stiff with them! Schools of them like
whales everywhere! Only yesterday Palma rang with the account of one. It
pursued a French steamer between Minorca and Mallorca. It spoke to a
fishing boat! What did it not do? Senor, there was no submarine
yesterday in the channel between Minorca and Mallorca. If there had been
I must have known."

And he sat back as though the subject were disposed of.

"But submarines do visit these waters, Senor Medina, and they do sink
ships," replied Hillyard.

Jose Medina shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands.

"_Claro!_ And it is said that I supply them with their oil." He turned
swiftly to Hillyard. "Perhaps you have heard that story, senor?"

Hillyard nodded.

"Yes. I did not believe it. It is because I did not believe it that I am
here, asking your help."

"I thank you. It is the truth. I will tell you something now. Not one of
my captains has ever seen one of those submarines, neither on this side
nor on that," and Medina touched the lines which Hillyard had drawn on
both sides of the Balearics on his chart. "Now, what can I do?"

"One simple thing, and well within your scruples as a neutral," replied
Hillyard. "These submarines doubly break the laws of nations. They
violate your territorial waters, and they sink merchant ships without
regard for the crews."

"Yes," said Jose Medina.

"You have agents along the coast. I have friends too in every town,
Englishmen who love both England and Spain, Spaniards who love both
Spain and England. We will put, if you permit, your agents in touch with
my friends."

"Yes," said Jose Medina innocently. "How shall we do that? We must have
lists prepared."

Hillyard smiled gently.

"That is not necessary, senor. We know your agents already. If you will
secretly inform them that those who speak in my name," and he took his
card from the table, and gave it into Medina's hands, "are men to be
trusted, it will be enough."

Jose Medina agreed.

"I will give them instructions."

"And yet another instruction if you will be so kind, to all your
captains."

"Yes?"

"That they shall report at the earliest possible moment to your nearest
agent ashore, the position of any submarine they have seen."

Jose Medina assented once more.

"But it will take a little time, senor, for me to pass that instruction
round. It shall go from captain to captain, but it will not be prudent
to give it out more widely. A week or two--no more--and every captain in
my fleet shall be informed. That is all?"

Hillyard was already rising from his chair. He stood straight up.

"All except that they will be forbidden too," he added with a smile,
"to supply either food or drink or oil to any enemy vessel."

Jose Medina raised his hands in protest.

"That order was given months ago. But it shall be repeated, and you can
trust me, it shall be obeyed."

The two men went to the door of the villa, and stood outside in the
garden. It seemed the interview was over, and the agreement made. But
indeed the interview as Hillyard had planned it had hardly begun. He had
a series of promises which might be kept or broken, and the keeping or
breaking of them could not be checked. Jose Medina was very likely to be
holding the common belief along that coast that Germany would surely win
the war. He was in the perfect position to keep in with both sides were
he so minded. It was not to content himself with general promises that
Hillyard had brought the _Dragonfly_ to Palma.

He turned suddenly towards Jose Medina with a broad laugh, and clapped
him heartily upon the back.

"So you do not remember me, Senor Jose?"

Medina was puzzled. He took a step nearer to Hillyard. Then he shook his
head, and apologised with a smile.

"I am to blame, senor. As a rule, my memory is not at fault. But on this
occasion--yes."

Through the apology ran a wariness, some fear of a trick, some hint of
an incredulity.

"Yet we have met."

"Senor, it must be so."

"Do you remember, Senor Jose, your first venture?" asked Hillyard.

"Surely."

"A single sailing-felucca beached at one o'clock in the morning on the
flat sand close to Benicassim."

Jose Medina did not answer. But the doubt which his politeness could not
quite keep out of his face was changing into perplexity. This history of
his first cargo so far was true.

"That was more than thirteen years ago," Hillyard continued. "Thirteen
years last April."

Jose Medina nodded. Date, place, hour, all were correct. His eyes were
fixed curiously upon his visitor, but there was no recognition in them.

"There were two carts waiting, to carry the tobacco up to the hills."

"Two?" Jose Medina interrupted sharply. "Let me think! That first cargo!
It is so long ago."

Medina reflected carefully. Here was a detail of real importance which
would put this Senor Hillyard to the test--if only he could himself
remember. It was his first venture, yes! But there had been so many like
to it since. Still--the very first. He ought to remember that! And as he
concentrated his thoughts the veil of the years was rent, and he saw, he
saw quite clearly the white moonlit beach, the felucca with its mast
bent like a sapling in a high wind, and the great yard of the sail
athwart the beam of the boat, the black shadow of it upon the sand, and
the carts--yes, the carts!

"There were two carts," he agreed, and a change was just faintly audible
in his voice--a change for which up till now Hillyard had listened with
both his ears in vain. A ring of cordiality, a suggestion that the
barriers of reserve were breaking down.

"Yes, senor, there were two carts."

Medina was listening intently now. Would his visitor go on with the
history of that night!

And Hillyard did go on.

"The tobacco barrels were packed very quickly into the carts, and the
carts were driven up the beach and across the Royal road, and into a
track which led back to the hills."

Jose Medina suddenly laughed. He could hear the groaning and creaking of
those thin-wheeled springless carts which had carried all his fortunes
on that night thirteen years ago, the noise of them vibrating for miles
in the air of that still spring night! What terror they had caused him!
How his heart had leaped when--and lo! Hillyard was carrying on the
tale.

"Two of the Guardia Civil stepped from behind a tree, arrested your
carts, and told the drivers to turn back to the main road and the
village."

"Yes."

"You ran in front of the leading cart, and stood there blocking the way.
The Guardia told you to move or he would fire. You stood your ground."

"Yes."

"Why the Guardia did not fire," continued Hillyard, "who shall say? But
he did not."

"No, he did not," Jose Medina repeated with a smile. "Why? It was
Fate--Fortune--what you will."

"You sent every one aside, and remained alone with the guards--for a
long time. Oh, for a long time! Then you called out, and your men came
back, and found you alone with your horses and your carts. How you had
persuaded the guards to leave you alone----"

"Quien sabe?" said Medina, with a smile.

"But you had persuaded them, even on that first venture. So," and now
Hillyard smiled. "So we took your carts up in to the mountains."

"We?" exclaimed Jose. He took a step forward, and gazed keenly into
Martin Hillyard's face. Hillyard nodded.

"I was one of your companions on that first night venture of yours
thirteen years ago."

"_Claro!_ You were certainly there," returned Jose Medina, and he was no
longer speaking either with doubt or with the exaggerated politeness of
a Spaniard towards a stranger. He was not even speaking as _caballero_
to _caballero_ the relationship to which, in the beginning, Hillyard had
most wisely invited him. He was speaking as associate to associate, as
friendly man to friendly man. "On that night you were certainly with me!
No, let me think! There were five men, yes, five and a boy from
Valencia--Martin."

He pronounced the word in the Spanish way as Marteen.

"Who led the horse in the first cart," said Hillyard, and he pointed to
his visiting card which Jose Medina still held in his hand. Jose Medina
read it again.

"Marteen Hillyard." He came close to Hillyard, and looked in his eyes,
and at the shape of his features, and at the colour of his hair. "Yes,
it is the little Marteen," he cried, "and now the little Marteen swings
into Palma in his great steam yacht. Dios, what a change!"

"And Jose Medina owns two hundred motor-feluccas and employs eighteen
thousand men," answered Hillyard.

Jose Medina held out his hand suddenly with a great burst of cordial,
intimate laughter.

"Yes, we were companions in those days. You helped me to drive my carts
up into the mountains. Good!" He patted Hillyard on the shoulder. "That
makes a difference, eh? Come, we will go in again. Now I shall help
you."

That reserve, that intense reserve of the Spaniard who so seldom admits
another into real intimacy, and makes him acquainted with his private
life, was down now. Hillyard had won. Jose Medina's house and his
chattels were in earnest at Martin Hillyard's disposal. The two men went
back through the house into a veranda above the steep fall of garden and
cliff, where there were chairs in which a man could sit at his ease.

Jose Medina fetched out a box of cigars.

"You can trust these. They are good."

"Who should know if you do not?" answered Hillyard as he took one; and
again Jose Medina patted him on the shoulder, but this time with a
gurgle of delight.

"_El pequeno_ Martin," he said, and he clapped his hands. From some
recess of the house his wife appeared with a bottle of champagne and two
glasses on a tray.

"Now we will talk," said Jose Medina, "or rather I will talk and you
shall listen."

Hillyard nodded his head, as he raised the glass to his lips.

"I have learnt in the last years that it is better to listen than to
talk," said he. "_Salut!_"




CHAPTER XIV

"TOUCHING THE MATTER OF THOSE SHIPS"


It has been said that Hillyard joined a service with its traditions to
create. Indeed, it had everything to create, its rules, its methods, its
whole philosophy. And it had to do this quickly during the war, and just
for the war; since after the war it would cease to be. Certain
conclusions had now been forced by experience quite definitely on
Hillyard's mind. Firstly, that the service must be executive. Its
servants must take their responsibility and act if they were going to
cope with the intrigues and manoeuvres of the Germans. There was no
time for discussions with London, and London was overworked in any case.
The Post Office, except on rare occasions, could not be used; telegrams,
however ingenious the cipher, were dangerous; and even when London
received them, it had not the knowledge of the sender on the spot,
wherewith to fill them out. London, let it be admitted, or rather that
one particular small section of London with which Hillyard dealt, was at
one with Hillyard. Having chosen its men it trusted them, until such
time as indiscretion or incapacity proved the trust misplaced; in which
case the offender was brought politely home upon some excuse, cordially
thanked, and with a friendly shake of the hand, shown the door.

Hillyard's second conclusion was that of one hundred trails, ten at the
most would lead to any result: but you must follow each one of the
hundred up until you reach proof that you are in a blind alley.

The third was the sound and simple doctrine that you can confidently
look to Chance to bring you results, probably your very best results, if
you are prepared and equipped to make all your profit out of chance the
moment she leans your way. Chance is an elusive goddess, to be seized
and held prisoner with a swift, firm hand. Then she'll serve you. But if
the hand's not ready and the eye unexpectant, you'll see but the trail
of her robe as she vanishes to offer her assistance to another more
wakeful than yourself.

In pursuit of this conviction, Hillyard steamed out of Palma Bay on the
morning of the day after his interview with Jose Medina, and crossing to
the mainland cruised all the next night southwards. At six o'clock in
the morning he was off a certain great high cape. The sea was smooth as
glass. The day a riot of sunlight and summer, and the great headland
with its high lighthouse thrust its huge brown knees into the water.

The _Dragonfly_ slowed down and dawdled. Three men stood in the stern
behind the white side-awning. Hillyard was on the bridge with his
captain.

"I don't really expect much," he said, seeking already to discount a
possible disappointment. "It's only a possibility, I don't count on it."

"Six o'clock off the cape," said the captain. "We are on time."

"Yes."

Both men searched the smooth sea for some long, sluggish, inexplicable
wave which should break, or for a V-shaped ripple such as a fixed stake
will make in a swiftly running stream.

"Not a sign," said the captain, disconsolately.

"No. Yet it is certainly true that the keeper of that lighthouse paid an
amount equal to three years' salary into a bank three weeks ago. It is
true that oil could be brought into that point, and stored there, and no
one but the keeper be the wiser. And it is true that the _Acquitania_ is
at this moment in this part of the Mediterranean steaming east for
Salonika with six thousand men on board. Let's trail our coat a bit!"
said Hillyard, and the captain with a laugh gave an order to the signal
boy by his side.

The boy ran aft and in a few seconds the red ensign fluttered up the
flagstaff, and drooped in the still air. But even that provocation
produced no result. For an hour and a half the _Dragonfly_ steamed
backwards and forwards in front of the cape.

"No good!" Hillyard at last admitted. "We'll get on to the
_Acquitania_, and advise her. Meanwhile, captain, we had better make for
Gibraltar and coal there."

Hillyard went to the wireless-room, and the yacht was put about for the
great scarped eastern face of the Rock.

"One of the blind alleys," said Hillyard, as he ate his breakfast in the
deck-saloon. "Next time perhaps we'll have better luck. Something'll
turn up for sure."

Something was always turning up in those days, and the yacht had not
indeed got its coal on board in Gibraltar harbour when a message came
which sent Hillyard in a rush by train through Madrid to Barcelona. He
reached Barcelona at half past nine in the morning, took his breakfast
by the window of the smaller dining-room in the hotel at the corner of
the Plaza Cataluna, and by eleven was seated in a flat in one of the
neighbouring streets. The flat was occupied by Lopez Baeza who turned
from the window to greet him.

"I was not followed," said Hillyard as he put down his hat and stick.
Habit had bred in him a vigilance, or rather an instinct which quickly
made him aware of any who shadowed him.

"No, that is true," said Baeza, who had been watching Hillyard's
approach from the window.

"But I should like to know who our young friend is on the kerb opposite,
and why he is standing sentinel."

Lopez Baeza laughed.

"He is the sign and token of the commercial activity of Spain."

From behind the curtains, stretched across the window, both now looked
down into the street. A youth in a grey suit and a pair of
orange-coloured buttoned boots loitered backwards and forwards over
about six yards of footwalk; now he smoked a cigarette, now he leaned
against a tree and idly surveyed the passers by. He apparently had
nothing whatever to do. But he did not move outside the narrow limits of
his promenade. Consequently he had something to do.

"Yes," continued Baeza with a chuckle, "he is a proof of our initiative.
I thought as you do three days ago. For it is just three days since he
took his stand there. But he is not watching this flat. He is not
concerned with us at all. He is an undertaker's tout. In the house
opposite to us a woman is lying very ill. Our young friend is waiting
for her to die, so that he may rush into the house, offer his
condolences and present the undertaker's card."

Hillyard left the youth to his gruesome sentry-go and turned back into
the room. A man of fifty, with a tawny moustache, a long and rather
narrow face and eyeglasses, was sitting at an office table with some
papers in front of him.

"How do you do, Fairbairn?" Hillyard asked.

Fairbairn was a schoolmaster from the North of England, with a knowledge
of the Spanish tongue, who had thrown up schoolmastering, prospects,
everything, in October of 1914.

"Touching the matter of those ships," said Hillyard, sitting down
opposite to Fairbairn.

Fairbairn grinned.

"It worked very well," said he, "so far."

Hillyard turned towards Lopez and invited him to a seat. "Let me hear
everything," he said.

Spanish ships were running to England with the products of Cataluna and
returning full of coal, and shipowners made their fortunes and wages ran
high. But not all of them were content. Here and there the captains and
the mates took with them in their cabin to England lists of questions
thoughtfully compiled by German officers; and from what they saw in
English harbours and on English seas and from what secret news was
brought to them, they filled up answers to the questions and brought
them back to the Germans in Spain. So much Hillyard already knew.

"A pilot, Juan de Maestre, went on board the ships, collected the
answers, made a report and took it up to the German headquarters here.
That Ramon Castillo found out," said Fairbairn. "Steps were taken with
the crew. The ships would be placed on the black list. There would be no
coal for them. They must be laid up and the crews dismissed. The crew of
the _Saragossa_ grasped the position, and the next time Juan de Maestre
stepped on board he was invited to the forecastle, thumped, dropped
overboard into the salubrious waters of the dock and left to swim
ashore. Juan de Maestre has had enough. He won't go near the Germans any
more. He is in a condition of extreme terror and neutrality. Oh, he's
wonderfully neutral just now."

"We might catch him perhaps on the rebound!" Hillyard suggested.

"Lopez thinks so," said Fairbairn, with a nod towards Baeza.

"I can find him this evening," Baeza remarked.

The three men conferred for a little while, and as a consequence of that
conference Lopez Baeza walked through the narrow streets of the old town
to a cafe near the railway station. In a corner a small, wizened, square
man was sitting over his beer, brooding unhappily. Baeza took a seat by
his side and talked with Juan de Maestre. He went out after a few
minutes and hired a motor-car from the stand in front of the station. In
the car he drove to the park and went once round it. At a junction of
two paths on the second round the car was stopped. A short, small man
stepped out from the shadow of a great tree and swiftly stepped in.

"Drive towards Tibidabo," Baeza directed the driver, and inside the
dark, closed car Baeza and Juan de Maestre debated, the one persuading,
the other refusing. It was long before any agreement was reached, but
when Baeza, with the perspiration standing in beads upon his face,
returned to his flat in the quiet, respectable street, he found Martin
Hillyard and Fairbairn waiting for him anxiously.

"_Hecho!_" he cried. "It is done! Juan de Maestre will continue to go on
board the ships and collect the information and write it out for the
Germans. But we shall receive an exact copy."

"How?" asked Hillyard.

"Ramon will meet a messenger from Juan. At eight in the morning of every
second day Ramon is to be waiting at a spot which from time to time we
will change. The first place will be the cinema opposite to the old Bull
Ring."

"Good," said Hillyard. "In a fortnight I will return."

He departed once more for Gibraltar, cruised up the coast, left his
yacht once more in the harbour of Tarragona and travelled by motor-car
into Barcelona.

Fairbairn and Lopez Baeza received him. It was night, and hot with a
staleness of the air which was stifling. The windows all stood open in
the quiet, dark street, but the blinds and curtains were closely drawn
before the lamps were lit.

"Now!" said Hillyard. "There are reports."

Fairbairn nodded grimly as he went to the safe and unlocked it.

"Pretty dangerous stuff," he answered.

"Reliable?" asked Hillyard.

Fairbairn returned with some sheets of blue-lined paper written over
with purple ink, and some rough diagrams.

"I am sure," he replied. "Not because I trust Juan de Maestre, but
because he couldn't have invented the information. He hasn't the
knowledge."

Lopez Baeza agreed.

"Juan de Maestre is keeping faith with us," he said shortly, and, to the
judgment of Lopez Baeza, Hillyard had learnt to incline a ready ear.

"This is the real thing, Hillyard," said Fairbairn, pulling at his
moustache. "Look!"

He handed to Martin a chart. The points of the compass were marked in a
corner. Certain courses and routes were given, and fixed lights
indicated by which the vessel might be guided. There was a number of
patches as if to warn the navigator of shallows, and again a number of
small black cubes and squares which seemed to declare the position of
rocks. There was no rough work in this chart. It was elaborately and
skilfully drawn, the work of an artist.

"This is a copy made by me. Juan de Maestre left the original document
with us for an hour," said Fairbairn, and he allowed Hillyard to
speculate for a few seconds upon the whereabouts of that dangerous and
reef-strewn sea. "It's not a chart of any bay or water at all. It's a
plan of Cardiff by night for the guidance of German airships. Those
patches are not shallows, but the loom in the sky of the furnaces. The
black spots are the munition factories. Here are the docks," he pointed
with the tip of his pencil. "The _Jesus-Maria_ brought that back a week
ago. Let it get from here to Germany, as it will do, eh? and a Zeppelin
coming across England on a favourable night could make things hum in
Cardiff."

Hillyard laid the sketch down and took another which Fairbairn held out
to him.

"Do you see this?" Fairbairn continued. "This gives the exact line of
the nets between the English and the Irish coasts, and the exact points
of latitude and longitude where they are broken for the passage of
ships, and the exact number and armament of the trawlers which guard
those points."

Hillyard gazed closely at the chart. It gave the positions clearly
enough, but it was a roughly-made affair, smudged with dingy fingers and
uneven in its drawing. He laid it upon the table by the side of the map
of Cardiff and compared one with the other.

"This," he said, touching the roughly-drawn map of a section of the
Channel, "this is the work of the ship's captain?"

"Yes."

"But what of this?" and Hillyard lifted again the elaborate chart of
Cardiff by night. "Some other hand drew this."

Fairbairn agreed.

"Yes. Here is the report which goes with the charts. The chart of
Cardiff was handed to the captain in an inn on shore. It came from an
unknown person, who is mentioned as B.45."

Hillyard seized upon the report and read it through, and then the others
upon the top of that. Cloth, saddlery, equipment of various kinds were
needed in England, and a great sea-borne trade had sprung up between the
two countries, so that ships constantly went to and fro. In more than
one of these reports the hieroglyph B.45 appeared. But never a hint
which could lead to his detection--never anything personal, not a clue
to his age, his business, his appearance, even his abode--nothing but
this baffling symbol B.45.

"You have cabled all this home, of course," Hillyard observed to
Fairbairn.

"Yes. They know nothing of the B.45. They are very anxious for any
details."

"He seems to be a sort of letter-box," said Hillyard, "a centre-point
for the gathering in of information."

Fairbairn shook his head.

"He is more active than that," he returned, and he pointed to a passage
here and there, which bore him out. It was the first time that Martin
Hillyard had come across this symbol, and he was utterly at a loss to
conjecture the kind of man the symbol hid. He might be quite obscure,
the tenant of some suburban shop, or, again, quite prominent in the
public eye, the owner of a fine house, and generous in charities; he
might be of any nationality. But there he was, somewhere under the
oak-trees of England, doing his secret, mean work for the ruin of the
country. Hillyard dreamed that night of B.45. He saw him in his dreams,
an elusive figure without a face, moving swiftly wherever people were
gathered together, travelling in crowded trains, sitting at the
dinner-tables of the great, lurking at the corners of poor tenements.
Hillyard hunted him, saw him deftly pocket a letter which a passing
stranger as deftly handed him, or exchange some whispered words with
another who walked for a few paces without recognition by his side, but
though he hurried round corners to get in front of him and snatch a
glance at his face, he could never come up with him. He waked with the
sunlight pouring in between the lattices of his shutters from the Plaza
Cataluna, tired and unrefreshed. B.45! B.45! He was like some figure
from a child's story-book! Some figure made up of tins and sticks and
endowed with malevolent life. B.45. London asked news of him, and he
stalked through London. Where should Hillyard find his true image and
counterpart?

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not the purpose of this narrative to describe how one Christobal
Quesada, first mate of the steamship _Mondragon_, utterly overreached
himself by sending in a report of a British hospital ship, sure to leave
the harbour of Alexandria with gun-carriages upon her deck; how the
report was proved to be a lie; how it was used as the excuse for the
barbarous sinking of the great ships laden with wounded, and ablaze from
stern to stern with green lights, the red cross glowing amidships like a
wondrous jewel; how Christobal Quesada was removed from his ship in a
French port, and after being duly arraigned for his life, met his death
against a prison wall. Fairbairn wrote to Martin Hillyard:

     "_The execution of Quesada has put an end to the whole
     wicked question. So long as the offender was only put in
     prison with the certainty of release at the end of the war,
     whilst his family lived comfortably on German money, the
     game went merrily on. But the return of the "Mondragon,"
     minus her executed mate, has altered the whole position.
     Juan de Maestre has nothing whatever to do nowadays._"

Hillyard smiled with contentment. He could understand a German going to
any lengths for Germany. He was prepared to do the same himself for his
country. But when a neutral under the cloak of his neutrality meddles in
this stupendous conflict for cash, for his thirty miserable pieces of
silver, he could feel no inclination of mercy.

"Let the neutrals keep out!" he murmured. "This is not their affair. Let
them hold their tongues and go about their own business!"

He received Fairbairn's letter in the beginning of the year 1916. He was
still no nearer at that date to the discovery of B.45; nor were they any
better informed in London. Hillyard could only wait upon Chance to slip
a clue into his hand.




CHAPTER XV

IN A SLEEPING-CAR


The night express from Paris to Narbonne and the Spanish frontier was
due to leave the Quai d'Orsay station at ten. But three-quarters of an
hour before that time the platform was already crowded, and many of the
seats occupied. Hillyard walked down the steps a little before half-past
nine with the latest of the evening papers in his hand.

"You have engaged your seat, monsieur," the porter asked, who was
carrying Hillyard's kit-bag.

"Yes," said Martin absently. He was thinking that on the boulevards the
newsboys might now be crying a later edition of the papers than that
which he held, an edition with still more details. He saw them
surrounded in the darkened street by quiet, anxious groups.

"Will you give me your ticket, monsieur?" the porter continued, and as
Hillyard looked at him vacantly, "the ticket for your seat."

Hillyard roused himself.

"I beg your pardon. I have a compartment in the sleeping-car, numbers
eleven and twelve."

Amongst many old principles of which Martin Hillyard had first learned
the wisdom during these last years, none had sunk deeper than this--that
the head of an organisation cannot do the work of any of its members and
hope that the machine will run smoothly. His was the task of supervision
and ultimate direction. He held himself at the beck and call of those
who worked under him. He responded to their summons. And it was in
response to a very urgent summons from Fairbairn that he had hurried the
completion of certain arrangements with the French authorities in Paris
and was now returning to the south! But he was going very reluctantly.

It was July, 1916. The first battle of the Somme, launched some days
past, was at its very climacteric. The casualties had been and were
terrible. Even at this moment of night the fury of the attack was not
relaxed. All through the day reports, exasperating in their brevity, had
been streaming into Paris, and rumour, as of old, circled swift-winged
above the city, making good or ill the deficiencies of the telegrams.
One fact, however, had leaped to light, unassailably true. The
Clayfords, stationed on the north of the line at Thiepval, had redeemed
their name and added a new lustre to their erstwhile shining record. The
devotion of the officers, the discipline of the men, had borne their
fruits. At a most critical moment the Clayfords had been forced to
change front against a flank attack, under a galling fire and in the
very press of battle, and the long extended line had swung to its new
position with the steadiness of veterans, and, having reached it, had
stood fast. Hillyard rejoiced with a sincerity as deep as if he himself
held his commission in that regiment. But the losses had been terrible;
and Martin Hillyard was troubled to the roots of his heart by doubts
whether Harry Luttrell were at this moment knowing the deep contentment
that the fixed aim of his boyhood and youth had been fulfilled; or
whether he was lying out on the dark ground beneath the stars unaware of
it and indifferent. Hillyard nursed a hope that some blunder had been
made, and that he would find his compartment occupied.

The controller, in his brown uniform with the brass buttons and his
peaked cap, stood at the steps of the car with the attendant.

"Eleven and twelve," said Hillyard, handing to him his ticket.

The attendant, a middle-aged, stout man with a black moustache and a
greasy face, shot one keen glance from under the peak of his cap at the
occupant of numbers 11 and 12, and then led the way along the corridor.

The compartment was empty. Hillyard looked around it with a grudging
eye.

"I am near the middle of the coach here, I think," he said.

"Yes, monsieur, quite in the middle."

"That is well," answered Hillyard. "I am an invalid, and cannot sleep
when there is much motion."

He spoke irritably, with that tone of grievance peculiar to the man who
thinks his health is much worse than it is.

"Can I get coffee in the morning?" he asked.

"At half-past six, monsieur. But you must get out of the train for it."

Hillyard uttered an exclamation of disgust, and shrugged his shoulders.
"What a country!" the gesture said as plainly as speech.

"But it is the war, monsieur!" the attendant expostulated with
indignation.

"Oh, yes, I know! The war!" Hillyard retorted with ill-humour. "Do I
want a bath? I cannot have it. It is the war. If a waiter is rude to me,
it is the war. If my steak is over-cooked it is the war. The war! It is
the excuse for everything."

He told the porter to place his bag upon the upper berth, and, still
grumbling, gave him some money. He turned sharply on the attendant, who
was smiling in the doorway.

"Ah, it seems to you funny that an invalid should be irritable, eh?" he
cried. "I suppose it must be--damnably funny."

"Monsieur, there are very many men who would like to-night to be
invalids with a sleeping compartment to themselves," returned the
attendant severely.

"Well, I don't want to talk about it any more," said Hillyard roughly,
and he shouldered his way out again on to the platform.

The attendant followed him. The smile upon his face was sleeker than
ever. He was very amused and contented with his passenger in the
compartment numbers 11 and 12. He took the cap off his head and wiped
the perspiration from his forehead.

"Ouf! It is hot to-night." He looked after Hillyard with a chuckle, and
remarked to the controller, "This is a customer who does not like his
little comforts to be disarranged!"

The controller nodded contemptuously.

"They must travel--the English! The tourism--that is sacred, even if all
Europe burns."

Hillyard strolled towards the stairs, and as he drew near to them his
eyes brightened. A man about six years older than himself, tall,
broad-shouldered, slim of waist, with a short, fair moustache, was
descending towards him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The war has killed many foolish legends, but none more foolish than the
legend of the typical Frenchman, conceived as a short, rotund, explosive
person, with a square, brown beard of curly baby-hair and a shiny silk
hat with a flat brim. There have been too many young athletes of clean
build on view whose nationality, language and the uniforms of
powder-blue and khaki could alone decide. The more curious might,
perhaps, if the youth were in mufti, cast a downward glance at the
boots; but even boots were ceasing to be the sure tell-tale they once
used to be. This man descending the stairs with a limp was the
Commandant Marnier, of the 193rd Regiment, wounded in 1915, and now
attached to the General Staff. He was in plain clothes; he was looking
for Martin Hillyard, and no stranger but would have set him and the man
for whom he was looking in the same category of races.

The Commandant Marnier saw Martin Hillyard clearly enough long before he
reached the foot of the stairs. But nevertheless he greeted him with an
appearance of surprise.

"But what luck!" he said aloud. "You leave by this train?"

"Yes. It may be that I shall find health."

"Yes, yes. So your friends will pray," returned the Commandant, falling
into Hillyard's pace.

"The telegram we sent for you----" Marnier began.

"Yes!"

"There is an answer already. Your friend is unhurt. I have brought you a
copy. I thought that perhaps I might catch you before your train
started."

He gave the slip of typewritten message into Hillyard's hand.

"That was most kind of you," said Hillyard. "You have removed a great
anxiety. It would have been many days before I should have received this
good news if you had not gone out of your way to hurry with it here."

Hillyard was moved, partly by the message, partly by the consideration
of Marnier, who now waved his thanks aside.

"Bah! We may not say 'comrade' as often as the Boche, but perhaps we are
it all the more. I will not come further with you towards your carriage,
for I have still a few things to do."

He shook Hillyard by the hand and departed. Hillyard turned from him
towards his sleeping-car, but though his chief anxiety was dispelled,
his reluctance to go was not. And he looked at the long, brightly-lit
train which was to carry him from this busy and high-hearted city with a
desire that it would start before its time, and leave him a derelict
upon the platform. He could not bend his thoughts to the work which was
at his hand. The sapphire waters of the South had quite lost their
sparkle and enchantment. Here, here, was the place of life! The
exhilaration of his task, its importance, the glow of thankfulness when
some real advantage was won, a plot foiled, a scheme carried to
success--these matters were all banished from his mind. Even the
war-risk of it was forgotten. He thought with envy of the men in
trenches. Yet the purpose of his yacht was long since known to the
Germans; the danger of the torpedo was ever present on her voyages, and
the certainty that if she were sunk, and he captured, any means would be
taken to force him to speak before he was shot, was altogether beyond
dispute. Even at this moment he carried hidden in a match-box a little
phial, which never left him, to put the sure impediment between himself
and a forced confession of his aims and knowledge. But he was not aware
of it. How many times had he seen the red light at Europa Point on
Gibraltar's edge change to white, sometimes against the scarlet bars of
dawn, sometimes in the winter against a wall of black! But on the
platform of the Quai d'Orsay station, in a bustle of soldiers going on
short leave to their homes, and rattling with pannikins and
iron-helmets, he could remember none of these consolations.

He reached his carriage.

"Messieurs les voyageurs, en route!" cried the controller.

"What a crowd!" Hillyard grumbled. "Really, it almost disposes one to
say that one will never travel again until this war is over."

He walked along the corridor to his compartment and sat down as the
train started with a jerk. The door stood open, and in a few minutes the
attendant came to it.

"Who is in the next compartment on the other side of the lavatory?"
Hillyard asked.

"A manufacturer of Perpignan and his wife."

"Does he snore?" Hillyard asked. "If he snores I shall not sleep. It
should be an offence against your bye-laws for a traveller to snore."

He crossed one leg across his knee and unlaced his shoe.

The attendant came into the room.

"It is possible, monsieur, that I might hurry and fetch you your coffee
in the morning," he said.

"It is worth five francs to you if you do," replied Hillyard.

"Then monsieur will not move from his compartment until luncheon. I will
see to it. Monsieur will bolt his door, and in the morning I will knock
when I bring the coffee."

"Good," returned Hillyard ungraciously.

The attendant retired, and Hillyard closed the door. But the ventilating
lattice in the lower part of the door was open, and Hillyard could see
the legs of the attendant. He was waiting outside--waiting for what?
Hillyard smiled to himself and took down his bag from the upper berth.
He had hardly opened it when the attendant knocked and entered.

"You will not forget, monsieur, to bolt your door. In these days it is
not wise to leave it on the latch."

"I won't forget," Hillyard replied surlily, and once more the attendant
retired; and again he stood outside the door. He did not move until the
bolt was shot. The attendant seemed very pleased that this fool of a
tourist who thought of nothing but his infirmities should safely bolt
the door of the compartments numbers 11 and 12; and very pleased, too,
to bring to this churlish, discontented traveller his coffee in the
morning, so that he need not leave compartments numbers 11 and 12
unguarded. Hillyard chuckled as the attendant moved away.

"I am to be your watch-dog, am I? Your sentinel? Very well! Come, let me
deserve your confidence, my friend."

The train thundered out of the tunnel and through the suburbs of Paris.
Hillyard drew a letter from Fairbairn out of his pocket and read it
through.

"Compartments numbers 11 and 12 on the night train from the Quai d'Orsay
station to Cerbere. Good!" murmured Hillyard. "Here I am in compartments
numbers 11 and 12. Now we wait until the married couple from Perpignan
and the attendant are comfortably asleep."

He undressed and went to bed, but he did not sleep. He lay in the berth
in the darkness, listening intently as the train rushed out of Paris
across the plains of France. Once or twice, as the hours passed, he
heard a stealthy footstep in the corridor outside, and once the faintest
possible little click told that the latch of his door had been lifted to
make sure that the bolt was still shot home in its socket. Hillyard
smiled.

"You are safe, my friend," he breathed the words towards the anxious one
in the corridor. "No one can get in. The door is locked. The door of the
dressing-room too. Sleep in your corner in peace."

The train sped over a moonlit country, spacious, unhurt by war. It moved
with a steady, rhythmical throb, like an accompaniment to a tune or a
phrase, ever repeated and repeated Hillyard found himself fitting words
to the pulsation of the wheels. "Berlin ... Berne ... Paris ... Cerbere
... Barcelona ... Madrid ... Aranjuez and the world"; and back again,
reversing the order: "Madrid ... Barcelona ... Cerbere ... Paris ...
Berne ... Berlin."

But the throb of the train set the interrogation at the end of the
string of names. So that the sequence of them was like a question
demanding confirmation....

Towards three in the morning, when there was no movement in the corridor
and the lights were blue and dim, Hillyard silently folded back his
bedclothes and rose. In the darkness he groped gently for the door of
the lavatory between his compartment and the compartment of the
manufacturer of Perpignan. He found the handle, and pressed it down
slowly; without a creak or a whine of the hinges the door swung open
towards him. Through the clatter he could hear that the manufacturer of
Perpignan was snoring. But Hillyard did not put his trust in snores. He
crept with bare feet across the washing-room, and, easing over the
handle of the further door, locked the manufacturer out. Again there had
been no sound. He shut the door of his own compartment lest the swing of
the train should set it banging and arouse the sleepers. Towards the
corridor there was a window of painted glass, and through this window a
pale, dim light filtered in. Hillyard noticed, for the first time, that
a small diamond-shaped piece of the coloured glass was missing, at about
the level of a man's head. It was advisable that Martin Hillyard should
be quick--or he might find the tables turned. With his ears more than
ever alert, he set up the steps for the upper berth, in the lavatory,
and whilst he worked his eyes watched that little aperture at the level
of a man's head, which once a diamond-shaped piece of coloured glass had
closed....

The door of the manufacturer was unlocked, the steps folded in their
place, and Hillyard back again in his bed before two minutes had passed.
And once more the throb of the train beat into a chain of towns which
went backwards and forwards like a shuttle in his brain. But there was
no note of interrogation now.

"Berlin ... Berne ... Paris ... Cerbere ... Barcelona ... Madrid ...
Aranjuez and the world"; and with a thump the train set a firm full stop
to the sequence. Across the broad plain, meadowland and plough,
flower-garden and fruit the train thundered down to the Pyrenees. Paris
was far away now, and the sense of desolation at quitting it quite gone
from Hillyard's breast.

"Berlin ... Berne ... Paris ... Cerbere ... Barcelona ... Madrid."

Here was one of the post-roads by which Germany reached the outer world.
Others there were beyond doubt. Sweden and Rotterdam, Mexico and South
America--but here was one, and to-morrow, nay, to-day, the communication
would be cut, and Germany so much the poorer.

The train steamed into Cerbere at one o'clock of the afternoon.

"Every one must descend here, monsieur, for the examination of luggage
and passports," said the attendant.

"But I am leaving France!" cried Hillyard. "I go on into Spain. Why
should France, then, examine my luggage?"

"It is the war, monsieur."

Hillyard lifted up his hands in indignation too deep for words. He
gathered together his bag and his coat and stick, handed them to a
porter and descended. He passed into the waiting-room, and was directed
by a soldier with a fixed bayonet to take his place in the queue of
passengers. But he said quietly to the soldier:

"I would like to see M. de Cassaud, the Commissaire of Police."

Hillyard was led apart; his card was taken from him; he was ushered
instantly into an office where an elderly French officer sat in mufti
before a table. He shook Hillyard cordially by the hand.

"You pass through? I myself hope to visit Barcelona again very soon.
Jean, wait outside with monsieur's baggage," this to the porter who had
pushed in behind Hillyard. M. de Cassaud rose and closed the door. He
had looked at Hillyard's face and acted quickly.

"It is something more than compliments you want from me, monsieur. Well,
what can I do?"

"The second sleeping-car, compartments numbers 11 and 12," said Hillyard
urgently. "In the water-tank of the lavatory there is a little metal
case with letters from Berlin for Barcelona and Madrid. But wait,
monsieur!"

M. de Cassaud was already at the door.

"It is the attendant of the sleeping-car who hides them there. If he can
be called into an office quietly on some matter of routine and held
there whilst your search is made, then those in Madrid and Barcelona to
whom these letters are addressed may never know they have been sent at
all!"

M. de Cassaud nodded and went out. Hillyard waited nervously in the
little whitewashed room. It was impossible that the attendant should
have taken fright and bolted. Even if he bolted, it would be impossible
that he should escape across the frontier. It was impossible that he
should recover the metal case from the water-tank, while the carriage
stood openly at the platform of Cerbere station. He would be certain to
wait until it was shunted into the cleaning shed. But so many
certainties had been disproved, so many possibilities had come to pass
during the last two years, that Hillyard was sceptical to his
finger-tips. M. de Cassaud was a long time away. Yes, certainly M. de
Cassaud was a very long----and the door opened, and M. de Cassaud
appeared.

"He is giving an account of his blankets and his towels. There are two
soldiers at the door. He is safe. Come!" said the Commissaire.

They crossed the platform to the carriage, whilst Hillyard described the
attendant's anxiety that he should bolt his door. "No doubt he gave the
same advice to the manufacturer of Perpignan," Hillyard added.

It was M. de Cassaud who arranged and mounted the steps in the tiny
washing-room.

"Look, monsieur," said Hillyard, and he pointed to the little aperture
in the coloured glass of the window. "One can see from the corridor what
is going on in this room. That is useful. If a traveller complains--bah,
it is the war!" and Hillyard laughed.

M. de Cassaud looked at the window.

"Yes, that is ingenious," he said.

He drained off the water, folded back his sleeve, and plunged his arm
into the tank. Then he uttered a little cry. He drew up into the light
an oblong metal can, like a sandwich-case, with the edges soldered
together to make it water-tight. He slipped it into his pocket and
turned again to the window. He looked at it again curiously.

"Yes, that is ingenious," he said softly, like a man speaking to
himself. Then he led the way back to his office, looking in at the
guard-room on the platform to give an order on the way.

The soldered edges of the case were quickly split asunder and a small
package of letters written on very thin paper revealed.

"You will let me take these on with me," pleaded Martin. "You shall have
them again. But some of them may want a special treatment of which we
have the secret."

M. de Cassaud was doubtful about the propriety of such a procedure.

"After all I found them," Martin urged.

"It would be unusual," said M. de Cassaud. "The regulations, you
know----"

Martin Hillyard smiled.

"The regulations, for you and me, my friend, are those we make
ourselves."

M. de Cassaud would admit nothing so outrageous to his trained and
rather formal mind. But he made a list of these letters and of their
addresses as though he was undecided. He had not finished when a
sergeant entered and saluted. The attendant of the sleeping-car had been
taken to the depot. He had been searched and a pistol had been found
upon him. The sergeant laid a very small automatic Colt upon the table
and retired. M. de Cassaud took up the little weapon and examined it.

"Do you know these toys, Monsieur Hillyard?" he asked.

"Yes. They are chiefly used against the mosquitoes."

"Oh, they will kill at twenty-five paces," continued the Commissaire;
and he looked quickly at Hillyard. "I will tell you something. You ran
some risk last night when you explored that water-tank. Yes, indeed! It
would have been so easy. The attendant had but to thrust the muzzle of
this through the opening of the window, shoot you dead, raise an alarm
that he had caught you hiding something, and there was he a hero and you
a traitor. Yes, that is why I said to you the little opening in the
window was ingenious! Ah, if he had caught you! Yes, if he had caught
you!"

Martin was quick to take advantage.

"Then let me have those letters! I will keep my French colleagues
informed of everything."

"Very well," said M. de Cassaud, and he suddenly swept the letters
across to Hillyard, who gathered them up hastily and buttoned them away
in his pocket before de Cassaud could change his mind.

"It is all very incorrect," said the Commissaire reproachfully.

"Yes, but it is the war," replied Hillyard. "I have the authority of the
attendant of the sleeping-car for saying so."




CHAPTER XVI

TRICKS OF THE TRADE


"Now!" said Hillyard.

Fairbairn fetched a couple of white porcelain developing dishes to the
table. Hillyard unlocked a drawer in his bureau. They were in the
deck-saloon of the _Dragonfly_, steaming southwards from Valencia.
Outside the open windows the brown hill-sides, the uplands of olive
trees and the sun-flecked waves slipped by in a magical clear light; and
the hiss of the beaded water against the ship's planks filled the cabin
with a rustle as of silk. Hillyard drew a deep breath of excitement as
he took out from the drawer the letters he had carried off from M. de
Cassaud. He had travelled straight through Barcelona to Valencia with
the letters in his pocket, picking up Fairbairn at the Estacion de
Francia on the way, and now, in the sunlight and in the secrecy of the
open sea, they were to appraise the value of their catch.

They sat at the table and examined them, opening the envelopes with the
skill and the care which experience had taught them. For, even though
this post-road was henceforth closed it might possibly be worth while to
send forward these letters. One or two were apparently family letters
for German soldiers, interned at Pampluna; one or two were business
communications from firms in Berlin to their agents in Spain; and these
seemed genuine enough.

"They may be of value to the War Trade Board," said Fairbairn; and he
put them aside for dispatch to London. As he turned back Hillyard cried
suddenly:

"Here we are!"

He had come to the last letter of the little heap. He was holding the
envelope in front of him and he read out the address:

     _"Mr. Jack Williams,_
           _"Alfredo Menandez, 6,_
                  _"Madrid."_

Fairbairn started up, and tugging at his moustache, stared at the
envelope over Hillyard's shoulder.

"By Jove!" he said. "We may have got something."

"Let us see!" returned Hillyard, and he opened the envelope.

As he spread out the letter both men laughed. The date of the month had
been corrected by the writer--thus:

              8
     "_July_ 27th, 1916."

[Transcriber's note: The original text has a slash through the 7.]

There was no doubt any longer in either of these two men's minds that
hidden away under the commonplaces of a letter of affection was a
message of grave importance.

"They are full of clever tricks in Berlin," said Hillyard cheerfully. He
could afford to contemplate that cleverness with complacency, for it was
now to serve his ends.

There was a German official of high importance living in the Calle
Alfredo Menandez, although not at number 6 in that street. The street
was a short one with very few numbers in it; and it had occurred to the
German official to point out to the postman in that street that if
letters came to English names in that street of which the owners could
not be discovered, they were probably for the governess of his children,
who had a number of English relations moving about Spain, and was
accustomed to receive their letters for them, and in any case, five
pesetas would be paid for each of them. Shortly after, letters had begun
to arrive addressed to English nonexistent people in the quiet little
Calle Alfredo Menandez, sometimes from Allied countries, sometimes from
Holland, or from Port-Bou over against Cerbere in Spain; and every one
of these found its natural way to the house of the German official. The
choice of English names had a certain small ingenuity in that, when
passing through the censorship of Allied countries, they were a little
more likely to be taken at their face value than letters addressed to
foreigners.

So far so good. But the German high official was a very busy person; and
letters might find their way into his hands which were really intended
for English persons and not for him at all. Accordingly, to make all
clear, to warn him that here indeed was a letter deserving his kind
attention, that little trifling alteration in the date was adopted; as
though a man writing on the 28th had mislaid the calendar or newspaper
and assigned the 27th to the day of writing, and afterwards had
discovered his mistake. It was no wonder accordingly that hope ran high
in both Fairbairn and Hillyard as they read through this letter;
although, upon the face of it, it was nothing but a sentimental effusion
from a sister to a brother.

"We have got to clear all this nonsense away first," said Hillyard.

Fairbairn took the letter, and placing it on one of the developing
dishes, poured over it a liquid from a bottle.

"That won't take very long," he said.

Meanwhile Hillyard busied himself with the second of the two white
porcelain dishes. He brought out a cruet stand from a cupboard at the
side of the stove and filled the dish half full of vinegar. He added
water until the liquid rose within half an inch of the rim, and rocked
the dish that the dilution might be complete. Next he took a new
copying-pencil from the pen-tray on his bureau and stripping the wood
away with his knife, dropped the blue lead into the vinegar and water.
This lead he carefully dissolved with the help of a glass pestle.

"There! It's ready," he said.

"I, too," added Fairbairn.

He lifted out of the developing dish a wet sheet of writing paper which
was absolutely blank. Not one drop of the black ink which had recorded
those sentimental effusions remained. It was just a sheet of notepaper
which had accidentally fallen into a basin of water.

"That's all right," said Hillyard; and Fairbairn gently slid the sheet
into the dish in front of Hillyard. And for a while nothing happened.

"It's a clever trick, isn't it?" Hillyard used the words again, but now
with a note of nervousness. "No unlikely paraphernalia needed. Just a
copying pencil and some vinegar, which you can get anywhere. Yes, it's a
clever trick!"

"If it works," Fairbairn added bluntly.

Both men watched the dish anxiously. The paper remained blank. The
solution did not seem to work. It was the first time they had ever made
use of it. The coast slid by unnoticed.

"Lopez was certain," said Fairbairn, "quite certain that this was the
developing formula."

Hillyard nodded gloomily, but he did not remove his eyes from that
irresponsive sheet.

"There may be some other ingredient, something kept quite
secret--something known only to one man or two."

He sat down, hooking his chair with his foot nearer to the table.

"We must wait."

"That's all there is to be done," said Fairbairn, and they waited; and
they waited. They had no idea, even if the formula should work, whether
the writing would flash up suddenly like an over-exposed photographic
plate, or emerge shyly and reluctantly letter by letter, word by word.
Then, without a word spoken, Fairbairn's finger pointed. A brown stain
showed on the whiteness of the paper--just a stroke. It was followed by
a curve and another stroke. Hillyard swiftly turned the oblong
developing dish so that the side of it, and not the end, was towards him
now.

"The writing is across the sheet," he said, and then with a cry, "Look!"

A word was coming out clear, writing itself unmistakably in the middle
of the line, at the bottom of the sheet--a signature. Zimmermann!

"From the General Staff!" said Hillyard, in a whisper of excitement. "My
word!" He looked at Fairbairn with an eager smile of gratitude. "It's
your doing that we have got this--yours and Lopez Baeza's!"

Miraculously the brown strokes and curves and dots and flourishes
trooped out of nothing, and fell in like sections and platoons and
companies with their due space between them, some quick and trim, some
rather slovenly in their aspect, some loitering; but in the end the
battalion of words stood to attention, dressed for inspection. The brown
had turned black before Hillyard lifted the letter from the solution and
spread it upon a sheet of blotting paper.

"Now let us see!" and they read the letter through.

One thousand pounds in English money were offered for reliable
information as to the number of howitzers and tanks upon the British
front.

A second sum of a thousand pounds for reliable information as to the
manufacture of howitzers and tanks in England.

"So far, it's not very exciting," Hillyard remarked with disappointment,
as he turned the leaf. But the letter progressed in interest.

A third sum of a thousand pounds was offered for a list of the postal
sections on the British front, with the name, initials and rank of a
really good and reliable British soldier in each section who was
prepared to receive and answer correspondence.

Fairbairn chuckled and observed:

"I think Herr Zimmermann might be provided with a number of such good
and reliable soldiers selected by our General Staff," and he added with
a truculent snort, "We could do with that sum of a thousand pounds here.
You must put in a claim for it, Hillyard. Otherwise they'll snaffle it
in London."

Fairbairn, once a mild north-country schoolmaster, of correct
phraseology and respectable demeanour, had, under the pressure of his
service, developed like that white sheet of notepaper. He had suffered

               "A sea-change
     Into something rich and strange"

and from a schoolmaster had become a buccaneer with a truculent manner
and a mind of violence. London, under which name he classed all
Government officials, offices, departments, and administrations,
particularly roused his ire. London was ignorant, London was stupid,
London was always doing him and the other buccaneers down, was always
snaffling something which he ought to have. Fairbairn, uttering one
snort of satisfaction, would have shot it with his Browning.

"Get it off your chest, old man," said Hillyard soothingly, "and we'll
go on with this letter. It looks to me as if----" He was glancing
onwards and checked himself with an exclamation. His face became grave
and set.

"Listen to this," and he read aloud, translating as he went along.

     "_Since the tubes have been successful in France, the device
     should be extended to England. B45 is obviously suitable for
     the work. A submarine will sink letters for the Embassy in
     Madrid and a parcel of the tubes between the twenty-seventh
     and the thirtieth of July, within Spanish territorial waters
     off the Cabo de Cabron. A green light will be shown in three
     short flashes from the sea and it should be answered from
     the shore by a red and a white and two reds._"

Hillyard leaned back in his chair.

"B45," he cried in exasperation. "We get no nearer to him."

"Wait a bit!" Fairbairn interposed. "We are a deal nearer to him through
Zimmermann's very letter here. What are these tubes which have been so
successful in France? Once we get hold of them and understand them and
know what end they are to serve, we may get an idea of the kind of man
obviously suitable for handling them."

"Like B45," said Hillyard.

"Yes! The search will be narrowed to one kind of man. Oh, we shall be
much nearer, if only we get the tubes--if only the Germans in Madrid
don't guess this letter's gone astray to us."

Hillyard had reflected already upon that contingency.

"But why should they? The sleeping-car man is held _incomunicado_. There
is no reason why they should know anything about this letter at all, if
we lay our plans carefully."

He folded up the letter and locked it away in the drawer. He looked for
a while out of the window of the saloon. The yacht had rounded the Cabo
San Antonio. It was still the forenoon.

"This is where Jose Medina has got to come in," he declared. "You must
go to Madrid, Fairbairn, and keep an eye on Mr. Jack Williams.
Meanwhile, here Jose Medina has got to come in."

Fairbairn reluctantly agreed. He would much rather have stayed upon the
coast and shared in the adventure, but it was obviously necessary that a
keen watch should be kept in Madrid.

"Very well," he said, "unless, of course, you would like to go to Madrid
yourself."

Hillyard laughed.

"I think not, old man."

He mounted the ladder to the bridge and gave the instructions to the
Captain, and early that evening the _Dragonfly_ was piloted into the
harbour of Alicante. Hillyard and Fairbairn went ashore. They had some
hours to get through before they could take the journey they intended.
They sauntered accordingly along the esplanade beneath the palm trees
until they came to the Casino. Both were temporary members of that club,
and they sat down upon the cane chairs on the broad side-walk. A
military band was playing on the esplanade a little to their right, and
in front of them a throng of visitors and townspeople strolled and sat
in the evening air. Hillyard smiled as he watched the kaleidoscopic
grouping and re-grouping of men and children and women. The revolutions
of his life, a subject which in the press of other and urgent matters
had fallen of late into the background of his thoughts, struck him again
as wondrous and admirable. He began to laugh with enjoyment. He looked
at Fairbairn. How dull in comparison the regular sequences of his
career!

"I wandered about here barefoot and penniless," he said, "not so very
long ago. On this very pavement!" He struck it with his foot, commending
to Fairbairn the amazing fact. "I have cleaned boots," and he called to
a boy who was lying in wait with a boot-black's apparatus on his back
for any dusty foot. "Chico, come and clean my shoes." He jested with the
boy with the kindliness of a Spaniard, and gave him a shining peseta.
Hillyard was revelling in the romance of his life under the spur of the
excitement which the affair of the letter had fired in him. "Yes, I
wandered here, passing up and down in front of this very Casino."

And Fairbairn saw his face change and his eyes widen as though he
recognised some one in the throng beneath the trees.

"What is it?" Fairbairn asked, and for a little while Hillyard did not
answer. His eyes were not following any movements under the trees. They
saw no one present in Alicante that day. Slowly he turned to Fairbairn,
and answered in voice of suspense:

"Nothing! I was just remembering--and wondering!"

He remained sunk in abstraction for a long time. "It can't be!" at grips
with "If it could be!" and a rising inspiration that "It was!" A man had
once tried him out with questions about Alicante, a man who was afraid
lest he should have seen too much. But Hillyard had learnt to hold his
tongue when he had only inspirations to go upon, and he disclosed
nothing of this to Fairbairn.

Later on, when darkness had fallen, the two men drove in a motor-car
southwards round the bay and through a shallow valley to the fishing
village of Torrevieja. When you came upon its broad beach of shingle and
sand, with its black-tarred boats hauled up, and its market booths, you
might dream that you had been transported to Broadstairs--except for one
fact. The houses are built in a single story, since the village is
afflicted with earthquakes. Two houses rise higher than the rest, the
hotel and the Casino. In the Casino Hillyard found Jose Medina's agent
for those parts sitting over his great mug of beer; and they talked
together quietly for a long while.

Thus Martin Hillyard fared in those days. He played with life and death,
enjoying vividly the one and ever on the brink of the other, but the
deep, innermost realities of either had as yet touched him not at all.




CHAPTER XVII

ON A CAPE OF SPAIN


The great cape thrusts its knees far out into the Mediterranean, and
close down by the sea on the very point a lighthouse stands out from the
green mass like a white pencil. South-westwards the land runs sharply
back in heights of tangled undergrowths and trees, overhangs a wide bay
and drops at the end of the bay to the mouth of a spacious, empty
harbour. Eastwards the cape slopes inland at a gentler angle with an
undercliff, a narrow plateau, and behind the plateau mountain walls. Two
tiny fishing villages cluster a mile or two apart at the water's edge,
and high up on the cape's flanks here and there a small rude settlement
clings to the hillside. There are no roads to the cape. From the east
you may ride a horse towards it, and lose your way. From the west you
must approach by boat. So remote and unvisited is this region that the
women in these high villages, their homes cut out of the actual brown
rock, still cover their faces with the Moorish veil.

There are no roads, but Jose Medina was never deterred by the lack of
roads. His business, indeed, was a shy one, and led him to prefer wild
country. A high police official in one great town said of him:

"For endurance and activity there is no one like Jose Medina between the
sea and the Pyrenees. You think him safe in Mallorca and look! He lands
one morning from the steamer, jumps into a motor-car, and in five
minutes--whish!--he is gone like the smoke of my cigarette. He will
drive his car through our mountains by tracks, of which the guardia
civil does not even know the existence."

By devious tracks, then, now through narrow gullies in brown and barren
mountains, now striking some village path amidst peach trees and
marguerites, Jose Medina drove Martin Hillyard down to the edge of the
sea. Here amongst cactus bushes in flower, with turf for a carpet, a
camp had been prepared near to one of the two tiny villages. Jose Medina
was king in this region. The party arrived in the afternoon of the
twenty-sixth day of the month, all of the colour of saffron from the
dust-clouds the car had raised, and Hillyard so stiff and bruised with
the intolerable jolting over ruts baked to iron, that he could hardly
climb down on to the ground. He slept that night amidst such a music of
birds as he had never believed possible one country could produce.
Through the night of the twenty-sixth he and Jose Medina watched; their
lanterns ready to their hands. Lights there were in plenty on the sea,
but they were the lights of acetylene lamps used by the fishermen of
those parts to attract the fish; and the morning broke with the
lighthouse flashing wanly over a smooth sea, pale as fine jade.

"There are three more nights," said Hillyard. He was a little dispirited
after the fatigue of the day before and the long, empty vigil on the top
of the day.

The next watch brought no better fortune. There was no moon; the night
was of a darkness so clear that the stars threw pale and tremulous paths
over the surface of the water, and from far away the still air vibrated
from time to time with the throbbing of propellers as the ships without
lights passed along the coast.

Hillyard rose from the blanket on which he and Jose Medina had been
lying during the night. It had been spread on a patch of turf in a break
of the hill some hundreds of feet above the sea. He was cold. The
blanket was drenched and the dew hung like a frost on bush and grass.

"It looks as if they had found out," he said.

"This is only the second night," said Jose Medina.

"It all means so much to me," replied Hillyard, shivering in the
briskness of the morning.

"Courage, the little Marteen!" cried Jose Medina. "After breakfast and a
few hours' sleep, we shall take a rosier view."

Hillyard, however, could not compose himself to those few hours. The
dread lest the Germans should have discovered the interception of their
letters weighed too heavily upon him. Even in the daylight he needs
must look out over that placid sunlit sea and imagine here and there
upon its surface the low tower and grey turtle-back of a submarine.
Success here might be so great a thing, so great a saving of lives, so
dire a blow to the enemy. Somehow that day slowly dragged its burning
hours to sunset, the coolness of the evening came, and the swift
darkness upon its heels, and once more, high up on the hillside, the
vigil was renewed. And at half-past one in the morning, far away at sea,
a green light, bright as an emerald, flashed thrice and was gone.

"Did I not say to you, 'Have courage'?" said Jose Medina.

"Quick! the Lanterns!" replied Hillyard. "The red first! Good! Now the
white. So! And the red again. Now we must wait!" and he sank down again
upon the blanket. All the impatience and languor were gone from him. The
moment had come. He was at once steel to meet it.

"Yes," said Jose Medina, "we shall see nothing more now for a long
while."

They heard no sound in that still night; they saw no gleam of lights. It
seemed to Hillyard that aeons passed before Jose touched him on the elbow
and pointed downwards.

"Look!" he whispered excitedly.

Right at their very feet the long, grim vessel lay, so near that
Hillyard had the illusion he could pitch a stone on to the conning
tower. He now held his breath, lest his breathing should be heard. Then
the water splashed, and a moment afterwards the submarine turned and
moved to sea. They gave it five minutes, and then climbed down to a tiny
creek. A rowing-boat lay in readiness there, with one man at the tiller
and two at the oars.

"You saw it, Manuel?" said Medina as he and Hillyard stepped in.

"Yes, Senor Jose. It was very close. Oh, they know these waters!"

The oars churned the phosphorescent water into green fire, and the foam
from the stem of the boat sparkled as though jewels were scattered into
it by the oarsmen as they rowed. They stopped alongside a little white
buoy which floated on the water. The buoy was attached to a rope; that
again to a chain. A mat was folded over the side of the boat and the
chain drawn cautiously in and coiled without noise. Hillyard saw the two
men who were hauling it in bend suddenly at their work and heave with a
greater effort.

"It is coming," said one of them, and the man at the tiller went forward
to help them. Hillyard leaned over the side of the heavy boat and stared
down into the water. But the night was too dark for him to see anything
but the swirl of green fire made by the movement of the chain and the
fire-drops falling from the links. At last something heavy knocked
against the boat's flanks.

"Once more," whispered the man from the tiller. "Now!"

And the load was perched upon the gunwale and lowered into the boat. It
consisted of three square and bulky metal cases, bound together by the
chain.

"We have it, my friend Marteen," whispered Jose Medina, with a laugh of
sheer excitement. He was indeed hardly less stirred than Hillyard
himself. "Not for nothing did the little Marteen lead the horse across
the beach of Benicassim. Now we will row back quickly. We must be far
away from here by the time the world is stirring."

The boatmen bent to their oars with a will, and the boat leaped upon the
water. They had rowed for fifty yards when suddenly far away a cannon
boomed. The crew stopped, and every one in the boat strained his eyes
seawards. Some one whispered, and Hillyard held up his hand for silence.
Thus they sat immobile as figures of wax for the space of ten minutes.
Then Hillyard relaxed from his attention.

"They must have got her plump with the first shot," he said; and,
indeed, there was no other explanation for that boom of a solitary
cannon across the midnight sea.

Jose Medina laughed.

"So the little Marteen had made his arrangements?"

"What else am I here for?" retorted the little Marteen, and though he
too laughed, a thrill of triumph ran through the laugh. "It just needed
that shot to round all off. I was so afraid that we should not hear it,
that it might never be fired. Now it will never be known, if your men
keep silent, whether they sunk their cargo or were sunk with it on
board."

The crew once more drove the blades of their oars through the water, and
did not slacken till the shore was reached. They clambered up the rocks
to their camp bearing their treasure, and up from the camp again to the
spot where Jose's motor-car was hidden. Jose talked to the boatmen while
the cans were stowed away in the bottom of the car, and then turned to
Hillyard.

"There will be no sign of our camp at daybreak. The tent will be
gone--everything. If our luck holds--and why should it not?--no one need
ever know that the Senor Marteen and his friend Jose Medina picnicked
for three days upon that cape."

"But the lighthouse-keepers! What of them?" objected Hillyard. In him,
too, hope and excitement were leaping high. But this objection he
offered up on the altars of the gods who chastise men for the insolence
of triumph.

"What of them?" Jose Medina repeated gaily. "They, too, are my friends
this many a year." He seated himself at the wheel of the car. "Come, for
we cannot drive fast amongst these hills in the dark."

Hillyard will never forget to the day of his death that wild passage
through the mountains. Now it was some sudden twist to avoid a
precipice, now a jerk and a halt whilst Jose stared into the darkness
ahead of him; here the car jolted suddenly over great stones, then it
sank to the axle in soft dust; at another place the bushes whipped their
faces; and again they must descend and build a little bridge of boughs
and undergrowth over a rivulet. But so high an elation possessed him
that he was unconscious both of the peril and the bruises. He could have
sung aloud. They stopped an hour after daybreak and breakfasted by the
side of the car in a high country of wild flowers. The sun was hidden
from them by a barrier of hills.

"We shall strike an old mine-road in half an hour," said Jose Medina,
"and make good going."

They came into a district of grey, weathered rock, and, making a wide
circuit all that day, crept towards nightfall down to the road between
Aguilas and Cartagena; and once more the sea lay before them.

"We are a little early," said Medina. "We will wait here until it is
dark. The carabineros are not at all well disposed to me, and there are
a number of them patrolling the road."

They were above the road and hidden from it by a hedge of thick bushes.
Between the leaves Hillyard could see a large felucca moving westwards
some miles from the shore and a long way off on the road below two tiny
specks. The specks grew larger and became two men on horses. They became
larger still, and in the failing light Hillyard was just able to
distinguish that they wore the grey uniform of the Guardia Civil.

"Let us pray," said Medina with a note of anxiety in his voice, "that
they do not become curious about our fishing-boat out there!"

As he spoke the two horsemen halted, and did look out to sea. They
conversed each with the other.

"If I were near enough to hear them!" said Jose Medina, and he suddenly
turned in alarm upon Hillyard. "What are you doing?" he said.

Hillyard had taken a large.38 Colt automatic pistol from his pocket. His
face was drawn and white and very set.

"I am doing nothing--for the moment," he answered. "But those two men
must ride on before it is dark and too late for me to see them."

"But they are of the Guardia Civil," Jose Medina expostulated in awed
tones.

To the Spaniard, the mere name of the Guardia Civil, so great is its
prestige, and so competent its personnel, inspires respect.

"I don't care," answered Hillyard savagely. "In this war why should two
men on a road count at all? Let them go on, and nothing will happen."

Jose Medina, who had been assuming the part of protector and adviser to
his young English friend, had now the surprise of his life. He found
himself suddenly relegated to the second place and by nothing but sheer
force of character. Hillyard rested the point of his elbow on the earth
and supported the barrel of his Colt upon his left forearm. He aimed
carefully along the sights.

"Let them go on!" he said between his teeth. "I will give them until the
last moment--until the darkness begins to hide them. But not a moment
longer. I am not here, my friend, for my health. I am here because there
is a war."

"The little Marteen" was singularly unapparent at this moment. Here was
just the ordinary appalling Englishman who had not the imagination to
understand what a desperately heinous crime it would be to kill two of
the Guardia Civil, who was simply going to do it the moment it became
necessary, and would not lose one minute of his sleep until his dying
day because he had done it. Jose Medina was completely at a loss as he
looked into the grim indifferent face of his companion. The two horsemen
were covered. The Colt would kill at more than five hundred yards, and
it had no more to do than carry sixty. And still those two fools sat on
their horses, and babbled to one another, and looked out to sea.

"What am I to do with this loco Ingles?" Jose Medina speculated,
wringing his hands in an agony of apprehension. He had no share in those
memories which at this moment invaded Martin Hillyard, and touched every
fibre of his soul. Martin Hillyard, though his eye never left the sights
of his Colt nor his mind wavered from his purpose, was with a
subordinate consciousness stealing in the dark night up the footpath
between the big, leafy trees over the rustic railway bridge to the
summit of the hill. He was tramping once more through lanes, between
fields, and stood again upon a hillock of Peckham Rye, and saw the
morning break in beauty and in wonder over London. The vision gained
from the foolish and romantic days of his boyhood, steadied his finger
upon the trigger after all these years.

Then to Jose's infinite relief the two horsemen rode on. The long,
black, shining barrel of the Colt followed them as they dwindled on the
road. They turned a corner, and as Hillyard replaced his pistol in his
pocket, Jose Medina rolled over on his back, and clapped his hands to
his face.

"You might have missed," he gasped. "One of them at all events."

Hillyard turned to him with a grin. The savage was not yet exorcised.

"Why?" he asked. "Why should I have missed one of them? It was my
business not to."

Jose Medina flung up his hands.

"I will not argue with you. We are not made of the same earth."

Hillyard's face changed to gentleness.

"Pretty nearly, my friend," he said, and he laid a hand on Jose Medina's
shoulder. "For we are good friends--such good friends that I do not
scruple to drag you into the same perils as myself."

Hillyard had not wasted his time during those three years when he loafed
and worked about the quays of Southern Spain. He touched the right chord
now with an unerring skill. Hillyard might be the mad Englishman, the
loco Ingles! But to be reckoned by one of them as one of them--here was
an insidious flattery which no one of Jose Medina's upbringing could
possibly resist.

At nightfall they drove down across the road on to the beach. A
rowing-boat was waiting, and Medina's manager from Alicante beside the
boat on the sand. The cases were quickly transferred from the car to the
boat.

"We will take charge of the car," said Jose to his manager, and he
stepped into the boat, and sat down beside Hillyard. "This is my
adventure. I see it through to the end," he explained.

A mile away the felucca picked them up. Hillyard rolled himself up in a
rug in the bows of the boat. He looked up to the stars tramping the sky
above his head.

     "And gentlemen in England now a-bed."

Drowsily he muttered the immemorial line, and turning on his side slept
as only the tired men who know they have done their work can sleep. He
was roused in broad daylight. The felucca was lying motionless upon the
water; no land was anywhere in sight; but above the felucca towered the
tall side of the steam yacht _Dragonfly_.

Fairbairn was waiting at the head of the ladder. The cases were carried
into the saloon and opened. The top cases were full of documents and
letters, some private, most of them political.

"These are for the pundits," said Hillyard. He put them back again, and
turned to the last case. In them were a number of small glass tubes,
neatly packed in cardboard boxes with compartments lined with cotton
wool.

"This is our affair, Fairbairn," he said. He took one out, and a look of
perplexity crept over his face. The tube was empty. He tried another and
another, and then another; every one of the tubes was empty.

"Now what in the world do you make of that?" he asked.

The tubes had yet to be filled and there was no hint of what they were
to be filled with.

"What I am wondering about is why they troubled to send the tubes at
all?" said Fairbairn slowly. "There's some reason, of course, something
perhaps in the make of the glass."

He held one of the tubes up to the light. There was nothing to
distinguish it from any one of the tubes in which small tabloids are
sold by chemists.

Hillyard got out of his bureau the letter in which these tubes were
mentioned.

"'They have been successful in France,'" he said, quoting from the
letter. "The scientists may be able to make something of them in Paris.
This letter and the tubes together may give a clue. I think that I had
better take one of the boxes to Paris."

"Yes," said Fairbairn gloomily. "But----" and he shrugged his shoulders.

"But it's one of the ninety per cent, which go wrong, eh?" Hillyard
finished the sentence with bitterness. Disappointment was heavy upon
both men. Hillyard, too, was tired by the tension of these last
sleepless days. He had not understood how much he had counted upon
success.

"Yes, it's damnably disheartening," he cried. "I thought these tubes
might lead us pretty straight to B45."

"B45!"

The exclamation came from Jose Medina, who was leaning against the
doorpost of the saloon, half in the room, half out on the sunlit deck.
He had placed himself tactfully aloof. The examination of the cases was
none of his business. Now, however, his face lit up.

"B45." He shut the door and took a seat at the table. "I can tell you
about B45."




CHAPTER XVIII

THE USES OF SCIENCE


It was Hillyard's creed that chance will serve a man very capably, if he
is equipped to take advantage of its help; and here was an instance. The
preparation had begun on the morning when Hillyard took the _Dragonfly_
into the harbour of Palma. Chance had offered her assistance some months
later in an hotel at Madrid; as Medina was now to explain.

"The day after you left Mallorca," said Jose Medina, "it was known all
over Palma that you had come to visit me."

"Of course," answered Martin.

"I was in consequence approached almost immediately, by the other side."

"I expected that. It was only natural."

"There is a young lady in Madrid," continued Jose Medina.

"Carolina Muller?"

"No."

"Rosa Hahn, then."

"Yes," said Jose Medina.

Jose rose and unlocking a drawer in his bureau took out from it a sheaf
of photographs. He selected one and handed it with a smile to Hillyard.
It was the portrait of a good-looking girl, tall, dark, and intelligent,
but heavy about the feet, dressed in Moorish robes, and extended on a
divan in Oriental indolence against a scene cloth which outdid the
luxuries of Llalla Rookh.

"That's the lady, I think."

Medina gazed at the picture with delight. He touched his lips with his
fingers, and threw a kiss to it. His sharp, sallow face suddenly
flowered into smiles.

"Yes. What a woman! She has real intelligence," he exclaimed fervently.

Jose Medina was in the habit of losing his heart and keeping his head a
good many times in an ordinary year.

"It's an extraordinary thing," Martin Hillyard remarked, "that however
intelligent they are, not one of these young ladies can resist the
temptation to have her portrait taken in Moorish dress at the
photographer's in the Alhambra."

Jose Medina saw nothing at all grotesque or ridiculous in this
particular foible.

"They make such charming pictures," he cried.

"And it is very useful for us, too," remarked Hillyard. "The
photographer is a friend of mine."

Jose was still gazing at the photograph.

"Such a brain, my friend! She never told a story the second time
differently, however emotional the moment. She never gave away a
secret."

"She probably didn't know any," said Hillyard.

But Jose would not hear of such a reason.

"Oh, yes! She has great influence. She knows people in Berlin--great
people. She is their friend, and I cannot wonder. What an intelligence!"

Martin Hillyard laughed.

"She seems to have fairly put it over you at any rate," he said. He was
not alarmed at Jose Medina's fervour. For he knew that remarkable man's
capacity for holding his tongue even in the wildest moments of his
temporary passions. But he took the photograph away from Medina and
locked it up again. The rapturous reminiscences of Rosa Hahn's
intelligence checked the flow of that story which was to lead him to
B45.

"So you know about her?" Jose said with an envious eye upon the locked
drawer.

"A little," said Martin Hillyard.

Rosa Hahn was a clerk in the office of the Hamburg-Amerika Line before
the war, and in the Spanish Department. She was sent to Spain in the
last days of July, 1914, upon Government work, and at a considerable
salary, which she enjoyed. She seemed indeed to have done little else,
and Berlin, after a year, began to complain. Berlin had a lower opinion
of both her social position and her brains than Jose Medina had formed.
Berlin needed results, and failing to obtain them, proceeded to hint
more and more definitely that Rosa had better return to her clerk's
stool in Hamburg. Rosa, however, had been intelligent enough to make
friends with one or two powerful Germans in Spain; and they pleaded for
her with this much success. She was given another three months within
which period she must really do something to justify her salary. So much
Martin Hillyard already knew; he learnt now that Jose Medina had
provided the great opportunity. To snatch him with his two hundred motor
feluccas and his eighteen thousand men from the English--here was
something really worth doing.

"What beats me," said Hillyard, "is why they didn't try to get at you
before."

"They didn't," said Medina.

Rosa, it seemed, used the argument which is generally sound; that the
old and simple tricks are the tricks which win. She discovered the hotel
at which Jose Medina stayed in Madrid, and having discovered it she went
to stay there herself. She took pains to become friendly with the
manager and his staff, and by professing curiosity and interest in the
famous personage, she made sure not only that she would have
fore-warning of his arrival, but that Jose Medina himself would hear of
a charming young lady to whom he appealed as a hero of romance. She knew
Jose to be of a coming-on disposition--and the rest seemed easy. Only,
she had not guarded against the workings of Chance.

The hotel was the Hotel de Napoli, not one of the modern palaces of
cement and steel girders, built close to the Prado, but an old house
near the Puerto del Sol, a place of lath and plaster walls and thin
doors; so that you must not raise your voice unless you wish your
affairs to become public property. To this house Jose Medina came as he
had many times come before, and Chance willed that he should occupy the
next room to that occupied by Rosa Hahn. It was the merest accident. It
was the merest accident, too, that Jose Medina whilst he was unpacking
his bag heard his name pronounced in the next room. Jose Medina, with
all his qualities, was of the peasant class with much of the peasant
mind. He was inquisitive, and he was suspicious. Let it be said in his
defence that he had enemies enough ready to pull him down, not only, as
we have seen, amongst his rivals on the coast, but here, amongst the
Government officials of Madrid. It cost him a pretty penny annually to
keep his balance on the tight-rope, as it was. He stepped noiselessly
over to the door and listened. The voices were speaking in Spanish, one
a woman's voice with a guttural accent.

"Rosa Hahn," said Hillyard as the story was told to him in the cabin of
the yacht.

"The other a man's voice. But again it was a foreign voice, not a
Spaniard's. But I could not distinguish the accent."

"Greek, do you think?" asked Hillyard. "There is a Levantine Greek high
up in the councils of the Germans."

Jose Medina, however, did not know.

"Here were two foreigners talking about me, and fortunately in Spanish.
I was to arrive immediately; Rosa was to make my acquaintance. What my
relations were with this man, Hillyard--yes, you came into the
conversation, my friend, too--I was quickly to be persuaded to tell.
Oh--you have a saying--everything in your melon patch was lovely."

"Not for nothing has the American tourist come to Spain," Hillyard
murmured.

"Then their voices dropped a little, and your B45 was mentioned--once or
twice. And a name in connection with B45 once or twice. I did not
understand what it was all about."

"But you remember the name!" Fairbairn exclaimed eagerly.

"Yes, I do."

"Well, what was it?"

It was again Fairbairn who spoke. Hillyard had not moved, nor did he
even look up.

"It was Mario Escobar," said Jose Medina; and as he spoke he knew that
the utterance of the name awakened no surprise in Martin Hillyard.
Hillyard filled his pipe from the tobacco tin, and lighted it before he
spoke.

"Do you know anything of this Mario Escobar?" he asked, "you who know
every one?"

Jose Medina shrugged his shoulders, and threw up his hands.

"There was some years ago a Mario Escobar at Alicante," and Jose Medina
saw Hillyard's eyes open and fix themselves upon him with an unblinking
steadiness. Just so Jose Medina imagined might some savage animal in a
jungle survey the man who had stumbled upon his lair.

"That Mario Escobar, a penniless, shameless person, was in business with
a German, the German Vice-Consul. He went from Alicante to London."

"Thank you," said Hillyard. He rose from his chair and went to the
window. But he saw nothing of the deck outside, or the sea beyond. He
saw a man at a supper party in London a year before the war began,
betraying himself by foolish insistent questions uttered in fear lest
his close intimacy with Germans in Alicante should be known.

"I have no doubt that Mario Escobar came definitely to England, long
before the war, to spy," said Hillyard gravely. He returned to the
table, and took up again one of the empty glass tubes.

"I wonder what he was to do with these."

Jose Medina had opened the door of the saloon once more. A beam of
sunlight shot through the doorway, and enveloped Hillyard's arm and
hand. The tiny slim phial glittered like silver; and to all of them in
the cabin it became a sinister engine of destruction.

"That, as you say, is your affair. I must go," said Jose, and he shook
hands with Hillyard and Fairbairn, and went out on to the deck. "_Hasta
luego!_"

"_Hasta ahora!_" returned Hillyard; and Jose Medina walked down the
steps of the ladder to his felucca. The blue sea widened between the two
vessels; and in a week, Hillyard descended from a train on to the
platform of the Quai D'Orsay station in Paris. He had the tubes in his
luggage, and one box of them he took that morning to Commandant Marnier
at his office on the left bank of the river with the letter which gave
warning of their arrival.

"You see what the letter says," Hillyard explained. "These tubes have
been very successful in France."

Marnier nodded his head:

"If you will leave them with me, I will show them to our chemists, and
perhaps, in a few days, I will have news for you."

For a week Hillyard took his ease in Paris and was glad of the rest in
the midst of those strenuous days. He received one morning at his hotel,
a batch of letters, many of which had been written months before. But
two were of recent date. Henry Luttrell wrote to him:

     "_My battalion did splendidly and our debt to old Oakley is
     great. There is only a handful of us left and we are
     withdrawn, of course, from the lines. By some miracle I
     escaped without a hurt. Everybody has been very generous,
     making it up to us for our bad times. The Corps Commander
     came and threw bouquets in person, and we hear that D.H.
     himself is going out of his way to come and inspect us. I go
     home on leave in a fortnight and hope to come back in
     command of the battalion. Perhaps we may meet in London. Let
     me hear if that is possible._"

The second letter had been sent from Rackham Park, and in it Millie
Splay wrote:

     "_We have not heard from you for years. Will you be in
     England this August? We are trying to gather again our old
     Goodwood party. Both Dennis Brown and Harold Jupp will be
     home on leave. There will be no Goodwood of course, but
     there is a meeting at Gatwick which is easily reached from
     here. Do come if you can and bring your friend with you, if
     he is in London and has nothing better to do. We have all
     been reading about him in the papers, and Chichester is very
     proud of belonging to the same mess, and says what a
     wonderful thing it must be to be able to get into the papers
     like that, without trying to._"

Hillyard could see the smile upon Lady Splay's face as she wrote that
sentence. Hillyard laughed as he read it but it was less in amusement as
from pleasure at the particular information which this sentence
contained. Harry Luttrell had clearly won a special distinction in the
hard fighting at Thiepval. There was not a word in Harry's letter to
suggest it. There would not be. All his pride and joy would be engrossed
by the great fact that his battalion had increased its good name.

There was a closing sentence in Millie Splay's letter which brought
another smile to his lips.

     "_Linda Spavinsky is, alas, going as strong as ever. She was
     married last week, in violet, as you will remember, to the
     Funeral March of a Marionette and already she is in the
     throes of domestic unhappiness. Her husband, fleshy, of
     course, red in the face, and accustomed to sleep after
     dinner, simply_ WON'T _understand her._"

Here again Hillyard was able to see the smile on Millicent Splay's face,
but it was a smile rather rueful and it ended, no doubt, in a sigh of
annoyance. Hillyard himself was caught away to quite another scene. He
was once more in the small motor-car on the top of Duncton Hill, and
looked out over the Weald of Sussex to the Blackdown and Hindhead, and
the slopes of Leith Hill, imagined rather than seen, in the summer haze.
He saw Joan Whitworth's rapt face, and heard her eager cry.

"Look out over the Weald of Sussex, so that you can carry it away with
you in your breast. Isn't it worth everything--banishment,
suffering--everything? Not the people so much, but the earth itself and
the jolly homes upon it!"

A passage followed which disturbed him:

     "_There are other things too. My magnolia is still in bud. I
     dread a blight before the flower opens._"

It was a cry of distress--nothing less than that--uttered in some moment
of intense depression. Else it would never have been allowed to escape
at all.

Hillyard folded up the letter. He would be going home in any case. There
were those tubes. There was B45. He had enjoyed no leave since he had
left England. Yes, he would go down to Rackham Park, and take Harry
Luttrell with him if he could.

Two days later the Commandant Marnier came to see him at the Ritz Hotel.
They dined together in a corner of the restaurant.

"We have solved the problem of those tubes," said Marnier. "They are
nothing more nor less than time-fuses."

"Time-fuses!" Hillyard repeated. "I don't understand."

"Listen!"

Marnier looked around. There was no one near enough to overhear him, if
he did not raise his voice; and he was careful to speak in a whisper.

"Two things." He ticked them off upon his fingers. "First, hydrofluoric
acid when brought into contact with certain forms of explosive will
create a fire. Second, hydrofluoric acid will bite its way through
glass. The thicker the glass, the longer the time required to set the
acid free. Do you follow?"

"Yes," said Hillyard.

"Good! Make a glass tube of such thickness that it will take
hydrofluoric acid four hours and a half to eat its way through. Then
fill it with acid and seal it up. You have a time-fuse which will act
precisely in four hours and a half."

"If it comes into contact with the necessary explosive," Hillyard added.

"Exactly. Now attend to this! Our workmen in our munition factories work
three hours and a half. Then they go to their luncheon."

"Munition factories!" said Hillyard with a start.

"Yes, my friend. Munition factories. We are short of labour as you know.
Our men are in the firing line. We must get labour from some other
source. And there is only one source."

"The neutrals," Hillyard exclaimed.

"Yes, the neutrals, and especially the neutrals who are near to us, who
can come without difficulty and without much expense. We have a good
many Spanish workmen in our munition factories and three of these
factories have recently been burnt down. We have the proof now, thanks
to you, that those little glass tubes so carefully manufactured in
Berlin to last four hours and a half and no more, set the fires going."

"Proof, you say?" Hillyard asked earnestly. "It is not probability or
moral certainty? It is actual bed-rock proof?"

"Yes. For once our chemists had grasped how these tubes could be used,
we knew what to look for when the workmen were searched on entering the
factory. Two days ago we caught a man. He had one of these little tubes
in his mouth and in the lining of his waistcoat, just a little high
explosive, so little was necessary that it must escape notice unless you
knew what to search for. Yes, we caught him and he, the good fellow, the
good honest neutral"--it would be difficult to describe the bitterness
and scorn which rang through Marnier's words, "has been kind enough to
tell me how he earned his German pay as well as his French wages."

Hillyard leaned forward.

"Yes, tell me that!"

"On his way to the factory in the morning, he makes a call."

"Yes."

"The one on whom he calls fills the tube or has it just filled and gives
it to the workman. The time fuse is set for four hours and a half. The
workman has so arranged it that he will reach the factory half an hour
after the tube is filled. He passes the searcher. At his place he takes
off his waistcoat and hangs it up and in the pocket, just separated from
the explosive by the lining of the waistcoat, he places, secretly, the
tube. The tube has now four hours of life and the workman three and a
half hours of work. When the whistle goes to knock off for luncheon, the
workman leaves his waist coat still hanging up on the peg and goes out
in the stream. But half an hour afterwards, half-way through the hour of
luncheon, the acid reaches the explosive. There is a tiny explosion in
that empty hall, not enough to make a great noise, but quite enough to
start a big fire; and when the workmen return, the building is ablaze.
No lives are lost, but the factory is burnt down."

Hillyard sat for a little while in thought.

"Perhaps you can tell me," he said at length. "I hear nothing from
England or very little; and naturally. Are we obtaining Spanish workmen,
too, for our munition factories?"

"Yes."

It was clear now why B45 was especially suitable for this work. B45 was
Mario Escobar, a Spaniard himself.

"And filling the tubes! That is simple?"

"A child could do it," answered Marnier.

"Thank you," said Martin Hillyard.

The next evening he left Paris and travelling all night to Boulogne,
reached London in the early afternoon of the following day. Twenty
months had passed since he had set foot there.




CHAPTER XIX

UNDER GREY SKIES AGAIN


Hillyard landed in England athirst for grey skies. Could he have chosen
the season of the year which should greet him, he would have named
October. For the ceaseless bright blue of sea and heaven had set him
dreaming through many a month past, of still grey mornings sweet with
the smell of earth and thick hedgerows and the cluck of pheasants. But
there were at all events the fields wondrously green after the brown
hill-sides and rusty grass, the little rich fields in the frames of
their hedges, and the brown-roofed houses and the woods splashing their
emerald branches in the sunlight. Hillyard travelled up through Kent
rejoicing. He reached London in the afternoon, and leaving his luggage
in his flat walked down to the house in the quiet street behind the
Strand whence Commodore Graham overlooked the Thames.

But even in this backwater the changes of the war were evident. The
brass plates had all gone from the door post and girls ran up and down
the staircases in stockings which some Allied fairies had woven on
Midsummer morning out of cobwebs of dew. They were, however, as unaware
as of old of any Commodore Graham. Was he quite certain that he wanted
to see Commodore Graham. And why? And, after all, was there a Commodore
Graham? Gracious damsels looked blandly at one another, with every
apparent desire to assist this sunburnt stranger. It seemed to Hillyard
that they would get for him immediately any one else in the world whom
he chose to name. It was just bitterly disappointing and contrarious
that the one person he wished to see was a Commodore Graham. Oh,
couldn't he be reasonable and ask for somebody else?

"Very well," said Hillyard with a smile. "There was a pretty girl with
grey eyes, and I'll see her."

"The description is vague," said the young lady demurely.

"She is Miss Cheyne."

"Oh!" said one.

"Oh!" said another; and

"Will you follow me, please?" said a third, who at once became
business-like and brisk, and led him up the stairs. The door was still
unvarnished. Miss Cheyne opened it, wearing the composed expression of
attention with which she had greeted Hillyard when he had sought
admission first. But her face broke up into friendliness and smiles,
when she recognised him, and she drew him into the room.

"The Commodore's away for a week," she said. "He had come to the end: no
sleep, nerves all jangled. He is up in Scotland shooting grouse."

Hillyard nodded. His news could wait a week very well, since it had
waited already two years.

"And you?" he asked.

"Oh, I had a fortnight," replied Miss Cheyne, her eyes dancing at the
recollection. It was her pleasure to sail a boat in Bosham Creek and out
towards the Island. "Not a day of rain during the whole time."

"I think that I might have a month then, don't you?" said Hillyard, and
Miss Cheyne opined that there would be no objection.

"But you will come back in a week," she stipulated, "won't you? The
Commodore will be here on Thursday, and there are things accumulating
which he must see to. So will you come on Friday?"

"Friday morning," Hillyard suggested.

Thursday was the day on which he should have travelled down to Rackham
Park, but if he could finish his business on Friday morning, he would
only lose one day.

"Friday morning then," said Miss Cheyne, and made a note of it.

Hillyard had thus a week in which to resume his friendships, arrange to
write, at some distant time, a play, revisit his club and his tailor,
and revel, as at a pageant, in the fresh beauty, the summer clothes, the
white skin and clean-limbed boyishness of English girls. He went
through, in a word, the first experiences of most men returned from a
long sojourn in other climes; and they were ordinary enough. But the
week was made notable for him by one small incident.

It was on the Monday and about five o'clock in the afternoon. He was
walking from the Charing Cross Road towards Leicester Square, when, from
a doorway ahead of him, a couple emerged. They did not turn his way but
preceded him, so that he only saw their backs. But he had no doubt who
one of the couple was. The fair hair, the tall, slim, long-limbed
figure, the perverse sloppiness of dress which could not quite obscure
her grace of youth, betrayed the disdainful prodigy of Rackham Park. The
creator of Linda Spavinsky swam ahead of him. Had he doubted her
identity, a glance at the door from which she had emerged would have
dispelled the doubt. It was the entrance to a picture gallery, where,
cubes and curves having served their turn and gone, the rotundists were
having an innings. Everybody and everything was in rounds, palaces and
gardens and ships and Westminster Bridge, and men and women were all in
circles. The circle was the principle of life and art. Joan Whitworth
would be drawn to the exhibition as a filing to a magnet. Undoubtedly
Joan Whitworth was ahead of Hillyard and he began to hurry after her.
But he checked himself after a few paces. Or rather the aspect of her
companion checked him. His appearance was vaguely familiar, but that was
all. It was not certainly Sir Chichester Splay, for the all-sufficient
reason that the Private View had long gone by; since the very last week
of the exhibition was announced in the window. Moreover, the man in
front of him was younger than Sir Chichester.

The couple, however, crossed the road to the Square Garden, and Hillyard
saw the man in profile. He stopped so suddenly that a man walking behind
him banged heavily against his back. The man walked on and turned round
after he had passed to stare at Hillyard. For Hillyard stood stock
still, he was unaware that any one had run into him, in all his body his
lips alone moved.

"Mario," he whispered. "Mario Escobar!"

The man who had been so far the foremost in his thoughts during the last
weeks that he never thought that he could have failed to recognise him.
Mario Escobar! And with Joan Whitworth. Millicent Splay's letter flashed
back into his memory. The distress which he had seemed to hear loud
behind the written words--was this its meaning and explanation? Joan
Whitworth and Mario Escobar! Certainly Joan knew him! He was sitting
next to her on the night when "The Dark Tower" was produced, sitting
next to her, and talking to her. Sir Charles Hardiman had used some
phrase to describe that conversation. Hillyard was strangely anxious to
recapture the phrase. Escobar was talking to her with an air of intimacy
a little excessive in a public place. Yes, that was the sentence.

Hillyard walked on quickly to his club.

"Is Sir Charles Hardiman here?" he asked of the hall porter.

"He is in the card-room, sir."

Martin Hillyard went up the stairs with a sense of relief. His position
was becoming a little complicated. Mario Escobar was B45, and a friend
of Joan Whitworth, and a friend of the Splays. There was one point upon
which Martin Hillyard greatly needed information.

Hardiman, a little heavier and broader and more obese than when Hillyard
had last seen him, was sitting by a bridge table overlooking the
players. He never played himself, nor did he ever bet upon the game, but
he took a curious pleasure in looking on, and would sit in the card-room
by the hour engrossed in the fall of the cards. The sight of Hillyard,
however, plucked him out of his occupation.

"So you're back!" he cried, heaving himself heavily out of his chair and
shaking hands with Martin.

"For a month."

"I hear you have done very well," Sir Charles continued. "Have a
whisky-and-soda."

"Thanks."

Hardiman touched the bell and led the way over to a sofa.

"Lucky man! The doctor's read the Riot Act to me! I met Luttrell in the
Mall this morning, on his way back from Buckingham Palace. He had just
been given his D.S.O."

Hardiman began to sit down, but the couch was low, and though he began
the movement lazily, it went suddenly with a run, so that the springs
of the couch jumped and twanged and his feet flew from beneath him.

"Yes, he has done splendidly," said Martin. "His battalion too. That's
what he cares about."

Sir Charles needed a moment or two after he had set down to recover his
equipoise. He wiped his forehead with his handkerchief.

"Luttrell told me you were both off to Rackham Park this week for
Gatwick."

"That's right! But I shan't get down until Friday afternoon," said
Hillyard.

The waiter put the glass of whisky-and-soda at his side, and he took a
drink from it.

"Perhaps you are going too," he suggested.

Hardiman shook his head.

Hillyard was silent for a minute. Then he asked another question.

"Do you know who is going to be there beside Luttrell and myself?"

Sir Charles smiled.

"I don't know, but I fancy that you won't find him amongst the guests."

Hillyard was a little startled by the answer, but he did not betray the
least sign of surprise. He pursued his questions.

"You know whom I have in my mind?"

"I drew a bow at a venture," answered Sir Charles.

"Shall I name him?" asked Hillyard.

"I will," returned Sir Charles. "Mario Escobar."

Hillyard nodded. He took another pull at his whisky-and-soda. Then he
lit a cigarette and leaned forward, with his elbows upon his knees; and
all the while Sir Charles Hardiman, his body in a majestic repose,
contemplated him placidly. Hardiman had this great advantage in any
little matter of debate; he never wished to move. Place him in a chair,
and he remained, singularly immobile.

"Since you were so quick to guess at once the reason of my question,"
continued Hillyard, "I can draw an inference. Mario Escobar has been at
Rackham Park a good deal?"

Sir Charles Hardiman's smile broadened.

"Even now you don't express your inference," he retorted. "You mean that
Mario Escobar has been at Rackham Park too much." He paused whilst he
drew out his cigarette-case and selected a cigarette from it. "And I
agree," he added. "Mario Escobar is too picturesque a person for these
primitive days."

Hillyard was not sure what Sir Charles Hardiman precisely meant. But on
the other hand he was anxious to ask no direct questions concerning
Escobar. He sought to enter in by another gate.

"Primitive?" he said.

"Yes. We have become rather primitive, especially the women. They have
lost a deal of self-consciousness. They exact less. They give more--oh,
superbly more! It's the effect of war, of course. They have jumped down
off their little pinnacles. Let me put it coarsely. They are saved from
rape by the fighting man, and they know it. Consequently all men benefit
and not least," Sir Charles lit his cigarette, "that beast of
abomination, the professional manipulator of women, the man who lives by
them and on them, who cajoles them first and blackmails them afterwards,
who has the little attentions, the appealing voice, in fact all the
tricks of his trade ready at his fingers' ends. However, Millie Splay's
awake to the danger now."

"Danger!" Hillyard sharply exclaimed.

"Quite right. It's too strong a word. I take it back," Hardiman agreed
at once. But he was not in the habit of using words wildly. He had said
exactly what he meant to say, and having aroused the attention which he
meant to arouse, he calmly withdrew the word. "I rubbed it into
Chichester's thick head that Escobar was overmuch at Rackham Park, and
in the end--it percolated."

Much the same account of Escobar, with this instance of Rackham Park
omitted, was given to Hillyard by Commodore Graham on the Friday
morning.

"He is the kind of man whom men loathe and women like. He runs about
London, gets a foot in here and there. You know what London is, even now
in the midst of this war, with its inability to be surprised, and its
indifference to strange things. You might walk down Regent Street
dressed up as a Cherokee Indian, feathers and tomahawk and all, and how
many Cockneys would take the trouble to turn round and look at you
twice? It was pretty easy for Escobar to slip about unnoticed."

Commodore Graham bent his head over the case of tubes which Hillyard had
brought with him.

"We'll have a look-out kept for these things. There have been none of
them in England up till now."

Martin Hillyard returned to the personality of Mario Escobar.

"Did you suspect him before?" he asked.

Commodore Graham pushed the cigarettes towards Hillyard.

"Scotland Yard has kept an eye on him. That sort of adventurer is always
dangerous."

He rang the bell, and on Miss Cheyne's appearance called for what
information the office had concerning Mario Escobar. Miss Cheyne
returned with a book in which Escobar's dossier was included.

"Here he is," said Graham, and Hillyard, moving across to the bureau,
followed Graham's forefinger across the written page. He was agent for
the Compania de Navigacion del Sur d'Espana--a German firm on the black
list, headquarters at Alicante. Escobar severed his connection with the
company on the outbreak of war.

Graham raised his head to comment on the action.

"That, of course, was camouflage. But it checked suspicion for a time.
Suspicion was first aroused," and he resumed reading again, "by his
change of lodging. He lived in a small back bedroom in a boarding-house
in Clarence Street, off Westbourne Grove, and concealed his address,
having his letters addressed to his club, until February, 1915, upon
which date he moved into a furnished flat in Maddox Street. Nothing
further, however, happened to strengthen that suspicion until, in the
autumn of that year, a letter signed Mario was intercepted by the
censor. It was sent to a Diego Perez, the Director of a fruit company at
Murcia, for Emma Grutsner."

"You sent me a telegram about her," exclaimed Hillyard, "in November."

Commodore Graham's forefinger travelled along the written lines and
stopped at the number and distinguishing sign of the telegram, sent and
received.

"Yes," continued Graham. "Here's your answer. 'Emma Grutzner is the
governess in a Spanish family at Torrevieja, and she goes occasionally,
once a month or so, to the house of Diego Perez in Murcia.'"

"Yes, yes! I routed that out," said Hillyard. "But I hadn't an idea that
Mario Escobar was concerned in it."

"That wasn't mentioned?" asked the Commodore.

"No. I already knew, you see, of B45. If just a word had been added that
it was Mario who was writing to Emma Grutzner we might have identified
him months ago."

"Yes," answered Graham soothingly and with a proper compunction. He was
not unused to other fiery suggestions from his subordinates that if only
the reasons for his telegrams and the information on which his questions
were based, were sent out with the questions themselves, better results
in quicker time could be obtained. Telegrams, however, were going out
and coming in all day; a whole array of cipherers and decipherers lived
in different rookeries in London. Commodore Graham's activities embraced
the high and the narrow seas, great Capitals and little tucked-away
towns and desolate stretches of coast where the trade-winds blew. No
doubt full explanations would have led in many cases to more
satisfactory conclusions. But fuller explanations were out of all
possibility. Even with questions fined down to the last succinct
syllable the cables groaned. None of the objections were raised,
however, by Commodore Graham. It was his business to keep men like
Hillyard who were serving him well to their own considerable cost, in a
good humour. Remorse was the line, not argument.

"What a pity! I _am_ sorry," protested the Commodore. "It's my fault!
There's nothing else to be said. I am to blame about it."

Martin Hillyard began to feel some compunction that he had ever
suggested a fault in the composition of the telegram. But then, it was
his business not to betray any such tenderness.

"If we could have in the future a little more information from London,
it would save us a good deal of time," he said stonily. "Sometimes a
surname is hurled at us, and will we find him, please, and cable home
all details?"

"Yes, that is very wrong," the Commodore agreed. "We will have that
changed." Then a bright idea appeared to occur to him. His face lighted
up. "After all, in this instance the mistake hasn't done any real harm.
For we have got our friend Mario Escobar now, and without these tubes
and this letter from Berlin about the use of them and Jose Medina's
account of the conversation in the next room we shouldn't have got him.
The German governess wasn't enough. He's, after all, a neutral. Besides,
there was nothing definite in his letter. But now----"

"Now you can deal with him?" asked Hillyard eagerly.

"To be sure," replied the Commodore. "We have no proof here to put him
on his trial. But we have reasonable ground for believing him to be in
communication with our enemies for the purpose of damaging us, and
that's quite enough to lock him up until the end of the war."

He reached out his hand for the telephone and asked for a number.

"I am ringing up Scotland Yard," he said to Hillyard over the top of the
instrument; and immediately Hillyard heard a tiny voice speaking as if
summoned from another planet.

"Hallo!" cried Graham. "Is that you, A.C.? You remember Mario Escobar?
Good. I have Hillyard here from the Mediterranean with a clear case.
I'll come over and see you."

Mr. "A.C.", whose real name was Adrian Carruthers, thereupon took up the
conversation at the other end of the line. The lines deepened upon the
Commodore's forehead as he listened. Then he turned to Hillyard, and
swore softly and whole-heartedly.

"Mario Escobar has vanished."

"But I saw him myself," Hillyard exclaimed. "I saw him in London."

"When?"

"On Monday afternoon."

Graham lifted the mouthpiece to his lips again.

"Wait a bit, A.C. Hillyard saw the man in London on Monday afternoon."

Again A.C. spoke at the other end from an office in Scotland Yard.
Graham put down the instrument with a bang and hung up the receiver.

"He vanished yesterday. Could he have seen you?"

Hillyard shook his head.

"I think not."

"Oh, we'll get him, of course. He can't escape from the country. And we
will get him pretty soon," Graham declared. He looked out of the window
on to the river. "I wonder what in the world alarmed him, since it
wasn't you?" he speculated slowly.

But both Scotland Yard and Commodore Graham were out of their reckoning
for once. Mario Escobar was not alarmed at all. He had packed his bag,
taken the tube to his terminus, bought his ticket and gone off in a
train. Only no one had noticed him go; and that was all there was to
it.




CHAPTER XX

LADY SPLAY'S PREOCCUPATIONS


"It's a good race to leave alone, Miranda," said Dennis Brown. "But if
you want to back something, I should put a trifle on Kinky Jane."

"Thank you, Dennis," Miranda answered absently. She was standing upon
the lawn at Gatwick with her face towards the line of bookmakers upon
the far side of the railings. These men were shouting at the full frenzy
of their voices, in spite of the heat and the dust. The ring was
crowded, and even the enclosure more than usually full.

"But you won't get any price," Harold Jupp continued, and he waved an
indignant arm towards the bookmakers. "I never saw such a crowd of
pinchers in my life."

"Thank you, Harold," Miranda replied politely. She was aware that he was
advising her, but the nature of the advice did not reach her mind. She
was staring steadily in front of her.

Dennis Brown and Harold Jupp looked at one another in alarm. They knew
well that sibylline look on the face of Miranda Brown. She was awaiting
the moment of inspiration. She was all wrapped up in expectation of it.
At times she glanced at her race-card, whilst a thoughtful frown
puckered her pretty forehead, as though the name of the winning filly
might leap out in letters of gold.

Dennis shook his head dolefully. For the one thing sure and certain was
that the fatal moment of inspiration would come to Miranda in time to
allow her to reach the railings before the start. Suddenly a name
uttered by an apoplectic gentleman in a voice breaking with fine passion
reached her ears, with the odds attached to it of nine to one.

Miranda's face cleared of all its troubles.

"Oh, why didn't I think of that before?" she said in an extremity of
self-reproach. She walked straight to the apoplectic gentleman, followed
by the unhappy pair of scientific punters.

"Callow Girl is nine to one, isn't it?"

The apoplectic gentleman smiled winningly.

"To you, missie."

Miranda laughed.

"I'll have ten pounds on it," she said, and did not hear the gasp of her
husband behind her. She made a note of the bet in her little
pocket-book.

"That's ninety pounds, anyway," she said, turning to her companions.
"They will just buy that simple little Callot frock with the
embroidery."

Yes, racing was as easy as that to Miranda Brown. She wanted a simple
little Callot frock which would cost ninety pounds, and Callow Girl was
obviously marked out to win it for her.

"Then I shall be a Callot girl," she said gaily, and as neither of her
companions enjoyed her witticism she stamped her small foot in vexation.

"Oh, how dull you both are!" she cried.

"Well, you see," Dennis rejoined, "we've had rather a bad day."

"So have I," returned Miranda indignantly. "Yet I keep up my spirits."

A look of blank amazement overspread the face of Dennis Brown. He gazed
around as one who should say, "Did you ever see anything so amazing
outside the Ark?"

Miranda corrected her remark with a laugh.

"Well, I mean I haven't won as much as I should have if I had backed
winners." For she had really mastered the science of the race-course.
She knew how to go racing. Her husband paid her losses and she kept her
winnings.

Harold Jupp took her seriously by the arm.

"You ought to go into a home, Miranda," he advised. "You really ought.
That little head was never meant for all this weighty thought."

Miranda walked across to the little stone terrace which looks down the
course.

"Don't be foolish, Harold, but go and collect Colonel Luttrell if you
can find him, whilst I see my filly win," she said. "Dennis has already
gone to find the car and we propose to start immediately this race is
over."

Miranda ascended the grass slope and saw the fillies canter down towards
the starting post. From the chatter about her she gathered that the odds
on Callow Girl had shortened. It was understood that a sum of money had
been laid on her at the last moment. She was favourite before the flag
was dropped and won by half a length. Miranda ran joyously down the
slope.

"What did I tell you, Harold? Aren't I wonderful? And have you found
Colonel Luttrell? You know Millie told us to look out for him?" she
cried all in a breath.

Luttrell had written to Lady Splay to say that he would try to motor to
Gatwick in time for the last races; and that he would look out for Jupp
and Dennis Brown, whom he had already met earlier in the week at a
dinner party given by Martin Hillyard.

"There's no sign of him," Harold Jupp answered.

There were two more races, but the party from Rackham Park did not wait
for them. They drove over the flat country through Crawley and Horsham
and came to the wooded roads between high banks where the foliage met
overhead, and to the old stone bridges over quiet streams. Harold Jupp
was home from Egypt, Dennis Brown from Salonika, and as the great downs,
with their velvet forests, seen now over a thick hedge, now in an
opening of branches like the frame of a locket, the marvel of the
English countryside in summer paid them in full for their peril and
endurance.

"I have a fortnight, Miranda," said Dennis, dropping a hand upon his
wife's. "Think of it!"

"My dear, I have been thinking of nothing else for months," she said
softly. Terrors there had been, nights and days of them, terrors there
would be, but she had a fortnight now, perfect in its season, and in the
meeting of old friends upon familiar ground--a miniature complete in
beauty, like the glimpses of the downs seen through the openings amongst
the boughs.

"Yes, a whole fortnight," she cried and laughed, and just for a second
turned her head away, since just for a second the tears glistened in her
eyes.

The car turned and twisted through the puzzle of the Petworth streets
and mounted on to the Midhurst road. The three indefatigable race-goers
found Lady Splay sitting with Martin Hillyard in the hall of Rackham
Park.

"You had a good day, I hope," she said.

"It was wonderful," exclaimed Dennis Brown. "We didn't make any money
except Miranda. But that didn't matter."

"All our horses were down the course," Harold Jupp explained. "They
weren't running in their form at all"; and he added cheerfully: "But the
war may be over before the winter, and then we'll go chasing and get it
all back."

Millicent Splay rang for tea, just as Joan Whitworth came into the hall.

"You didn't see Colonel Luttrell then?" asked Lady Splay.

"No."

"He'll come down later then." She had an eye for Joan Whitworth as she
spoke, but Joan was so utterly indifferent as to whether Colonel
Luttrell would arrive or not that she could not stifle a sigh. She had
gathered Luttrell into the party with some effort and now it seemed her
effort was to be fruitless. Joan persisted in her mood of austere
contempt for the foibles of the world. She was dressed in a gown of an
indeterminate shade between drab and sage-green, which did its best to
annul her. She had even come to sandals. There they were now sticking
out beneath the abominable gown.

"She can't ruin her complexion," thought Millicent Splay. "That's one
thing. But if she could, she would. Oh, I would love to smack her!"

Joan, quite unaware of Millie Splay's tingling fingers and indignant
eyes, sat reading "Ferishtah's Fancies." Other girls might set their
caps at the soldiers. Joan had got to be different. She had even dallied
with the pacifists. Martin Hillyard had carried away so close a
recollection of her on that afternoon when she had driven him through
the golden sunset over Duncton Hill and of the brave words she had then
spoken that he had to force himself to realise that this was indeed
she.

Millicent Splay had three preoccupations that afternoon but none pressed
upon her with so heavy a load of anxiety as her preoccupation concerning
Joan Whitworth.

Martin crossed the room to Joan and sat upon the couch beside her.

"Didn't I see you in London, Miss Whitworth, on Monday afternoon?" he
asked.

Joan met his gaze steadily.

"Did you? It was possible. I was in London on Monday. Where did you
think you saw me?"

"Coming out of a picture gallery in Green Street."

Joan did not flinch, nor drop her eyes from his.

"Yes, you saw me," she replied. Then with a challenge in her voice she
added distinctly, so that the words reached, as they were meant to
reach, every one in that room. "I was with Mario Escobar."

The room suddenly grew still. Two years ago, Martin Hillyard reflected,
Harold Jupp or Dennis would have chaffed her roundly about her conquest,
and she would have retorted with good humour. Now, no one spoke, but a
little sigh, a little movement of uneasiness came from Millie Splay.
Joan did not take her eyes from Hillyard's face. But the blood mounted
slowly over her throat and cheeks.

"Well?" she asked, and the note of challenge was a trifle more audible
in her quiet voice. And since he was challenged, Hillyard answered:

"He is a German spy."

The words smote upon all in the room like a blow. Joan herself grew
pale. Then she replied:

"People say that nowadays of every foreigner."

The moment of embarrassment was prolonged to a full minute--during which
no one spoke. Then to the relief of every one, Sir Chichester Splay
entered the hall. He had been sitting all day upon the Bench. He had to
attend the Flower Show in Chichester during the next week. Really the
life of a country notable was a dog's life.

"You are going to make a speech at Chichester, Sir Christopher?" Jupp
inquired.

"Oh no, my boy," replied Sir Chichester. "Make a speech indeed! And in
this weather! Nothing would induce me. Me for the back benches, as our
cousins across the Atlantic would say."

He spoke pompously, yet with a certain gratification as though Harold
Jupp had asked him to dignify the occasion with a speech.

"Have the evening papers not arrived yet?" he asked, looking with
suspicious eyes on Dennis Brown.

"No, I am not sitting on them this time," said Dennis.

"And Colonel Luttrell?"

After the evening papers, Sir Chichester thought politely of his guests.
Millie Splay replied with hesitation. While the others of the company
were shaking off their embarrassment, she was sinking deeper into hers.

"Colonel Luttrell has not come yet. Nor--nor--the other guest who
completes our party."

Her voice trailed off lamentably into a plea for kind treatment and
gentleness. Here was Millie Splay's second preoccupation. As it was Sir
Chichester's passion to see his name printed in the papers, so it was
Millie's to gather in the personages of the moment under her roof. She
had promised that this party should be just a small one of old friends
with Luttrell as the only new-comer. But personages were difficult to
come by at this date, since they were either deep in work or out of the
country altogether. They had to be brought down by a snap shot, and very
often the bird brought down turned out to be a remarkably inferior
specimen of his class. Millie Splay had been tempted and had fallen; and
she was not altogether easy about the quality of her bird, now on its
descent to her feet.

"I didn't know any one else was coming," said Sir Chichester, who really
didn't care how much Lady Splay gratified her passion, so long as he got
full satisfaction for his.

"No, nor any one else," said Dennis Brown severely. "He is a stranger."

"To you," replied Millie Splay, showing fight.

Harold Jupp advanced and planted himself firmly before her.

"Do you know him yourself, Lady Splay?" he asked.

"But of course I do," the poor lady exclaimed. "How absurd of you,
Harold, to ask such a question! I met him at a party when Joan and I
were in London at the beginning of this week." She caught again at her
fleeting courage. "So I invited him, and he's coming this afternoon. I
shall send the motor to meet him in an hour from now. So there's an end
of the matter."

Harold Jupp shook his head sagely.

"We must see that the plate is all locked up safely to-night."

"There! I knew it would be like this," cried Millie Splay, wringing her
hands. She remembered, from a war correspondent's article, that to
attack is the only successful defence. She turned on Jupp.

"I won't be bullied by you, Harold! He's a most charming person, with
really nice manners," she emphasised her praise of the absent guest,
"and if only you will study him whilst he is here--all of you, you will
be greatly improved at the end of your visit."

Harold Jupp was quite unimpressed by Millie Splay's outburst. He
remained severely in front of her, judge, prosecutor and jury all in
one, and all relentlessly against her.

"And what is his name?"

Lady Splay looked down and looked up.

"Mr. Albany Todd," she said.

"I don't like it," said Harold Jupp.

"No," added Dennis Brown sadly from a corner. "We can't like it, Lady
Splay."

Lady Splay turned with her most insinuating smile towards Brown.

"Oh, Dennis, do be nice and remember this isn't your house," she cried.
"You can be so unpleasant if you find any one here you don't like. Mr.
Albany Todd's quite a famous person."

Harold Jupp, of the inquiring mind, still stood looking down on Lady
Splay without any softening of his face.

"What for?" he asked.

Lady Splay groaned in despair.

"Oh, I was sure you were going to ask that. You are so unpleasant." She
put her hand to her forehead. "But I know quite well. Yes, I do." Her
face suddenly cleared. "He is a conversationalist--that's it--a great
conversationalist. He is the sort of man," she spoke as one repeating a
lesson, "who would have been welcome at the breakfast table of Mr.
Rogers."

"Rogers?" Harold Jupp asked sternly. "I don't know him."

"And probably never will, Harold, I am sorry to say," said Lady Splay
triumphantly. "Mr. Rogers was in heaven many years ago." She suddenly
changed her note and began to implore. "Oh, do be pleasant, you and
Dennis!"

Harold Jupp's mouth began to twitch, but he composed it again, with an
effort, to the stern lines befitting the occasion.

"I'll tell you what I think, Lady Splay," said he, pronouncing judgment.
"Your new guest's a Plater."

The dreadful expected word was spoken. Lady Splay broke into appeals,
denials, threats. "Oh, he isn't, he isn't!" She turned to her husband.
"Chichester, exert your authority! He's not a Plater really. He's not
right down the course. And even if he were, they've got to be polite to
him."

Sir Chichester, however, was the last man who could be lured into the
expression of a definite opinion.

"My dear, I never interfere in the arrangements of the house. You have
your realm. I have mine. I am sure those papers are being kept in the
servants' hall," and he left the room hurriedly.

"Oh, how mean men are!" cried Millie; and they all began to laugh.

Lady Splay saw a glimpse of hope in their laughter and became much more
cheerful.

"As you are not racing, dear," she said to Joan, "he will be quite a
pleasant companion for you."

Sir Chichester returned with the evening papers. Dennis and Miranda and
Harold Jupp rose to go upstairs and change into flannels; and suddenly,
a good hour before his time, Harper, the butler, announced:

"Mr. Albany Todd."

Mr. Albany Todd was a stout, consequential personage, and ovoid in
appearance. Thin legs broadened out to very wide hips, and from the hips
he curved in again to a bald and shiny head, which in its turn curved
inwards to a high, narrow crown. Lady Splay casting a look of appeal
towards her refractory young guests hurried forward to meet him.

"This is my husband." She presented him to the others. "I was going to
send the motor-car to meet the seven o'clock train."

"Oh, thank you, Lady Splay," Mr. Albany Todd returned in a booming
voice. "I have been staying not more than twenty miles from here, with a
dear old friend, a rare and inestimable being, Lord Bilberry, and he was
kind enough to send me in."

"What, old man Bilberry," cried Harold Jupp. "Isn't he balmy?"

"Balmy, sir?" Mr. Todd asked in surprise. "He takes the air every
morning, if that is what you mean." He turned again to Lady Splay. "He
keeps the most admirable table. You must know him, Lady Splay. I will
see to it."

"Thank you," said Millie Splay humbly.

"Ah, muffins!" said Mr. Albany Todd with glistening eyes. He ate one and
took another. "These are really as good as the muffins I ate at a
wonderful week-end party a fortnight ago."

The chatter of the others ceased. The great conversationalist, it
seemed, was off. Miranda, Dennis, Harold Jupp, Sir Chichester, even Joan
looked up with expectation.

"Yes," said Lady Splay, encouraging him. She looked around at her
guests. "Now you shall see," she seemed to say.

"How we laughed! What sprightly talk! The fine flavour of that party is
quite incommunicable. Just dear old friends, you see, intimate,
congenial friends."

Mr. Albany Todd stopped. It appeared that he needed a question to be put
to him. Lady Splay dutifully put it.

"And where did this party take place, Mr. Albany Todd?"

Mr. Albany Todd smiled and dusted the crumbs from his knees.

"At the Earl of Wimborough's little place in the north. Do you know the
Earl of Wimborough? No? You must, dear lady! I will see to it."

"Thank you," said Millie Splay.

Harold Jupp looked eagerly at the personage, and said, "I hope
Wimborough won't go jumping this winter."

"Jumping!" cried Mr. Albany Todd turning indignantly. "I should think
not indeed! Jumping! Why, he is seventy-three!"

He was utterly scandalised that any one should attribute the possibility
of such wayward behaviour to the venerable Earl. In his agitation he ate
another muffin. After all, if the nobleman did go jumping in the winter
why should this young and horsey man presume to criticise him.

"Harold Jupp was drawing a distinction between flat racing and
steeple-chasing, Mr. Albany Todd," Sir Chichester suavely explained.

"Oh, I see." Mr. Albany Todd was appeased. He turned a condescending
face upon Joan Whitworth.

"And what are you reading, Miss Whitworth?"

"What ho!" interposed Harold Jupp.

Joan shot at him a withering glance.

"It wouldn't interest you." She smiled on Mr. Albany Todd. "It's
Browning."

"Well, that's just where you are wrong," returned Jupp. "Browning's the
only poet I can stick. There's a ripping thing of his I learnt at
school."

     "'I sprang to the saddle and Joris and he,
       I galloped, Dirck galloped, we galloped all three.'"

"Oh," exclaimed Miranda eagerly, "a horse race!"

"Nothing of the sort, Miranda. I am thoroughly ashamed of you," said
Harold in reproof. "It's 'How they Brought the Good News from Ghent to
Aix.'"

Here Joan intervened disdainfully.

"But that's not Browning!"

Lady Splay looked perplexed.

"Are you sure, Joan?"

Joan tossed her head.

"Of course, it's Browning all right," she explained, "but it's not
Browning if you understand me."

The explanation left that company mystified. Harold Jupp shook his head
mournfully at Joan, and tapped his forehead.

"Excessive study, Joan, has turned that little head. The moment I saw
you in sandals I said to myself, 'Joan couldn't take the hill.'"

Joan wrinkled her nose, and made a grimace at him. What rejoinder she
would have made no one was to know. For Mr. Albany Todd finding himself
unduly neglected burst into the conversation with a complete
irrelevance.

"I am so happy. I shot a stag last autumn."

Both Dennis Brown and Harold Jupp turned to the great conversationalist
with real interest.

"How many stone?" asked Dennis.

"I used a rifle," replied Mr. Albany Todd coldly. He did not like to be
made fun of; and suddenly a ripple of clear laughter broke deliciously
from Joan.

Lady Splay looked agitatedly around for succour. Oh, what a mistake she
had made in bringing Mr. Albany Todd into the midst of these ribald
young people. And after all--she had to admit it ruefully, he was a bit
of a Plater. Dennis Brown, however, hurried to the rescue. He came
across the room to Joan, and sat down at her side.

"I haven't had a word with you, Joan."

"No," she answered.

"And how's the little book going on? Do tell me! I won't laugh, upon my
word."

Joan herself tried not to. "Oh, pig, pig!" she exclaimed, but she got no
further in her anathema for Miranda drew up a stool, and sat in
admiration before her.

"Yes, do tell us," she pleaded. "It's all so wonderful."

Miranda, however, was never to hear. Mr. Albany Todd leaned forward with
an upraised forefinger, and a smile of keen discernment.

"You are writing a book, Miss Whitworth," he said, as if he had
discovered the truth by his own intuition, and expected her to deny the
impeachment. "Ah, but you are! And I see that you _can_ write one."

"Now, how?" asked Harold Jupp.

Mr. Albany Todd waved the question aside. "The moment I entered the
hall, and saw Miss Whitworth, I said to myself, 'There's a book there!'
Yes, I said that. I knew it! I know women."

Mr. Albany Todd closed his eyelids, and peeped out through the narrowest
possible slits in the cunningest fashion. "Some experience you know. I
am the last man to boast of it. A certain almost feminine
sensibility--and there you have my secret. I read the character of women
in their eyebrows. A woman's eyebrows. Oh, how loud they speak! I looked
at Miss Whitworth's eyebrows, and I exclaimed, 'There is a book
there--and I will read it!'"

Joan flamed into life. She clasped her hands together.

"Oh, will you?" The question was half wonder, half prayer.

No man could have shown a more charming condescension than did Mr.
Albany Todd at this moment.

"Indeed, I will. I read one book a year--never more. A few sentences in
bed in the morning, and a few sentences in bed at night. Yours shall be
my book for 1923." He took a little notebook and a pencil from his
pocket. "Now what title will it have?"

"'A Woman's Heart, and Who Broke It,'" replied Joan, blushing from her
temples to her throat.

Miranda repeated the title in an ecstasy of admiration, and asked the
world at large: "Isn't it all wonderful?"

"'And Who Broke It,'" quoted Mr. Albany Todd as he wrote the title down.
He put his pocket-book away.

"The volume I am reading now----"

"Yes?" said Joan eagerly. With what master was she to find herself in
company? She was not to know.

"----was given to me exquisitely bound by a very dear friend of mine,
now alas! in precarious health!--the Marquis of Bridlington," said Mr.
Albany Todd--an audible groan from Harold Jupp; an imploring glance from
Millie Splay, and to her immense relief the butler ushered in Harry
Luttrell. He was welcomed by Millie Splay, presented to Sir Chichester,
and surrounded by his friends. He was a trifle leaner than of old, and
there were lines now where before there had been none. His eyes, too,
had the queer, worn and sunken look which was becoming familiar in the
eyes of the young men on leave. Joan Whitworth watched him as he
entered, carelessly--for perhaps a second. Then her book dropped from
her hand upon the carpet--that book which she had so jealously read a
few minutes back. Now it lay where it had fallen. She leaned forward, as
though above all she wished to hear the sound of his voice. And when she
heard it, she drew in a little breath. He was speaking and laughing with
Sir Chichester, and the theme was nothing more important than Sir
Chichester's Honorary Membership of the Senga Mess.

"Lucky fellow!" cried Sir Chichester. "No trouble for you to get into
the papers, eh! Publicity waits on you like a valet."

"But that's just the kind of valet I can't afford in my profession,"
said Harry.

The conversation was all trivial and customary. But Joan Whitworth
leaned forward with a light upon her face that had never yet burnt
there. Colonel Luttrell was presented to Mr. Albany Todd, who was most
kind and condescending. Joan looked suddenly down at her bilious frock,
and the horror of her sandals was something she could hardly bear. They
would turn to her next. Yes, they would turn to her! She looked
desperately towards the great staircase with its broad, shallow steps
which ran up round two sides of the hall. Millie Splay was actually
beginning to turn to her, when Dennis Brown came unconsciously to her
rescue.

"We looked out for you at Gatwick," he said.

"I only just reached the race course in time for the last race," said
Harry Luttrell. "Luckily for me."

"Why luckily?" asked Harold Jupp in surprise.

"Because I backed the winner," replied Luttrell.

The indefatigable race-goers gathered about him a little closer; and
Joan Whitworth rose noiselessly from her chair.

"Which horse won?" asked Harold Jupp.

"Loman!" Harold Jupp stared at Dennis Brown. Incredulity held them as in
bonds.

"But he couldn't win!" they both cried in a breath.

"He did, you know, and at a long price."

"What on earth made you back him?" asked Dennis Brown.

"Well," Luttrell answered, "he was the only white horse in the race."

Miranda uttered a cry of pleasure. She recognised a brother. "That's an
awfully good reason," she cried. But science fell with a crash. Dennis
Brown took his "Form at a Glance" from his pocket, and sadly began to
tear the pages across. Harold Jupp looked on at that act of sacrilege.

"It doesn't matter," he said, and offered his invariable consolation.
"Flat racing's no use. We'll go jumping in the winter."

But Harold Jupp was never again to go jumping in the winter. Long before
steeple chasing began that year, he was lying out on the flat land
beyond the Somme, with a bullet through his heart.

Dennis Brown returned "Form at a Glance" to his pocket; and Millie Splay
drew Harry Luttrell away from the group.

"I want to introduce you to Joan Whitworth," she said, and she turned to
the chair in which Joan had been sitting a few moments ago.

It was empty.

"Why, where in the world has Joan gone to?" she exclaimed.

"She has fled," explained Jupp. "Joan saw his 'Form at a Glance,'
without any book. She saw that he was incapable of the higher Life, and
she has gone."

"Nonsense, Harold," cried Millicent Splay in vexation. She turned
towards the stairs, and she gave a little gasp. A woman was standing on
the second step from the floor. But it was not Joan, it was Stella
Croyle.

"I thought you had such a bad headache," said Lady Splay, after a
perceptible pause.

"It's better now, thank you," said Stella, and coming down the remaining
steps, she advanced towards Harry.

"How do you do, Colonel Luttrell?" she asked.

For a moment he was taken aback. Then with the blood mounting in his
face, he took a step forwards and shook hands with her easily.

"So you know one another!" said Lady Splay.

"We have known each other for a long while," returned Stella Croyle.

So that was why Stella Croyle had proposed herself for the week! Lady
Splay had been a little surprised; so persistently had Stella avoided
anything in the shape of a party. But this time Stella had definitely
wished to come, and Millie Splay in her loyalty had not hesitated to
welcome her. But she had been a little curious. Stella's visit, indeed,
was the third, though the least, of her preoccupations. The Ball on the
Thursday of next week at the Willoughby's! Well, Stella was never
lacking in tact. That would arrange itself. But as Millie Splay looked
at her, recognised her beauty, her eager advance to Harry Luttrell, and
Harry Luttrell's embarrassment, she said to herself, for quite other
reasons:

"If I had guessed why she wanted to come, nothing would have persuaded
me to have her."

Millie Splay had more reason to repeat the words before the week was
out.




CHAPTER XXI

THE MAGNOLIA FLOWERS


"I hadn't an idea that we should find her here," said Hillyard. "Lady
Splay told me so very clearly that Mrs. Croyle always timed her visits
to avoid a party."

Hillyard was a little troubled lest he should be thought by his friend
to have concurred in a plot to bring about this meeting.

"I suppose that Hardiman told her you were coming to Rackham Park. I
haven't seen her until this moment, since I returned."

"That's all right, Martin," Luttrell answered.

The two men were alone in the hall. The tennis players had changed, and
were out upon the court. Millie Splay had dragged Stella Croyle away
with her to play croquet. Luttrell moved to a writing-table.

"You are going to join the tennis players," he said. Hillyard was
already dressed for the game, and carried a racket in his hand. "I must
write a letter, then I will come out and watch you."

"Right," said Martin, and he left his friend to his letter.

The hall was very still. A bee came buzzing in at the open window, made
a tour of the flower-vases, and flew out again into the sunshine. From
the lawn the cries of the tennis players, the calls of thrush and
blackbird and dishwasher, were wafted in on waves of perfume from the
roses. It was very pleasant and restful to Harry Luttrell after the
sweat and labour of France. He sighed as he folded his letter and
addressed it to a friend in the War Office.

A letter-box stood upon a table close to the staircase. He was carrying
his letter over to it, when a girl came running lightly down the stairs
and halted suddenly a step or two from the bottom. She stood very still
where Stella Croyle had stood a few minutes ago, and like Stella, she
looked over the balustrade at Harry Luttrell. Harry Luttrell had reached
the letter-box when he caught sight of her, but he quite forgot to drop
his letter through the slit. He stood transfixed with wonder and
perplexity; wonder at her beauty; perplexity as to who she was.

Martin Hillyard had spoken to him of Joan Whitworth. By the delicious
oval of her face, the deep blue of her eyes, the wealth of rippling
bright hair, the soft bloom of colour on her cheeks, and her slim,
boyish figure--the girl should rightly be she. But it couldn't be! No,
it couldn't! This girl's lips were parted in a whimsical friendly smile;
her eyes danced; she was buoyant with joy singing at her heart.
Besides--besides----! Luttrell looked at her clothes. She wore a little
white frock of chiffon and lace, as simple as could be, but even to a
man's eyes it was that simplicity which is the last word of a good
dressmaker. A huge rose of blue and silver at her waist was its only
touch of colour. With it she wore a white, broad-brimmed hat of straw
with a great blue bow and a few narrow streamers of blue ribbon floating
jauntily, white stockings and shoes, cross-gartered round her slender
ankles with shining ribbons. Was it she? Was it not? Was Martin Hillyard
crazy or the whole world upside down?

"You must be Colonel Luttrell," his gracious vision exclaimed, with
every appearance of surprise.

"I am," replied Luttrell. He was playing with his letter, half slipping
it in, and then drawing it back from the box, and quite unaware of what
he was doing.

"We had better introduce ourselves, I think. I am Joan Whitworth."

She held out her hand to him over the balustrade. He had but to reach up
and take it. It was a cool hand, and a cordial one.

"Martin Hillyard has talked to me about you," he said.

"I like him," she replied. "He's a dear."

"He told me enough to make me frightened at the prospect of meeting
you."

Joan leaned over the banister.

"But now that we have met, you aren't really frightened, are you?" she
asked in so wistful a voice, and with a look so deeply pleading in her
big blue eyes that no young man could have withstood her.

Harry Luttrell laughed.

"I am not. I am not a bit frightened. In fact I am almost bold enough to
ask you a question."

"Yes, Colonel Luttrell?"

The invitation was clear enough. But the Colonel was suddenly aware of
his audacity and faltered.

"Oh, do ask me, Colonel Luttrell!" she pleaded. The old-fashioned would
have condemned Joan Whitworth as a minx at this moment, but would have
softened the condemnation with a smile forced from them by her winning
grace.

"Well, I will," replied Luttrell, and with great solemnity he asked,
"How is Linda Spavinsky?"

Joan ran down the remaining steps, and dropped into a chair. A peal of
laughter, silvery and clear, and joyous rang out from her mouth.

"Oh, she's not at all well to-day. I believe she's going. Her health was
never very stable."

Then her mood changed altogether. The laughter died away, the very look
of it faded from her face. She stood up and faced Harry Luttrell. In the
depths of her eyes there appeared a sudden gravity, a certain
wistfulness, almost a regret.

She spoke simply:

     "Iram indeed is gone with all his rose,
      And Jamshyd's seven-ringed cup--where, no one knows!
      But still a ruby kindles in the vine,
      And many a garden by the water blows."

She had the air of one saying good-bye to many pleasant follies which
for long had borne her company--and saying good-bye with a sort of doubt
whether that which was in store for her would bring a greater happiness.

Harry Luttrell had no answer, and no very distinct comprehension of her
mood. But he was stirred by it. For a little while they looked at one
another without any words. The air about them in that still hall
vibrated with the emotions of violins. Joan Whitworth was the first to
break the dangerous silence.

"I am afraid that up till now, what I have liked, I have liked
tremendously, but I have not always liked it for very long. You will
remember that in pity, won't you?" she said lightly.

Harry Luttrell was quick to catch her tone.

"I shall remember it with considerable apprehension if I am fortunate
enough ever to get into your good books." His little speech ended with a
gasp. The letter which he was holding carelessly in his fingers had
almost slipped from them into the locked letter box.

Joan crossed to where he stood.

"That's all right," she said. "You can post your letter there. The box
is cleared regularly."

"No doubt," Harry Luttrell returned. "But I am no longer sure that I am
going to post it."

The letter to his friend at the War Office contained an earnest prayer
that a peremptory telegram should be sent to him at Rackham Park, at an
early hour on the next morning, commanding his return to London.

He looked up at Joan.

"You despise racing, don't you?"

"I am going to Gatwick to-morrow."

"You are!" he cried eagerly.

"Of course."

He stood poising the letter in the palm of his open hand. The thought of
Stella Croyle bade him post it. The presence of Joan Whitworth, and he
was so conscious of her, paralysed his arm. Some vague sense of the
tumult within him passed out from him to her. An intuition seized upon
her that that letter was in some way vital to her, in some way a menace
to her. Any moment he might post it! Once posted he might let it go. She
drew a little sharp breath. He was standing there, so still, so quiet
and slow in his decision. It became necessary to her that words should
be spoken. She spoke the first which rose to her lips.

"You are going to stay for the Willoughbys' ball, aren't you?"

Harry Luttrell smiled.

"But you despise dancing."

"I? I adore it!"

She smiled as she spoke, but she spoke with a queer shyness which took
him off his feet. He slowly tore the letter across and again across and
then into little pieces and carried them to the waste-paper basket.

The action brought home to her with a shock that there was a letter
which she, in her turn, must write, must write and post in that glass
letter-box, oh, without any hesitation or error, this very evening. She
thought upon it with repugnance, but it had to be written and done with.
It was the consequence of her own folly, her own vanity. Harry Luttrell
returned to her but he did not remark the trouble in her face.

"When I left England," he said slowly, "people were dancing the tango.
That is--one couple which knew the dance, was dancing it in the
ball-room, and all the others were practising in the passage. That's
done with, I suppose?"

"Quite," said Joan.

Harry Luttrell heaved a sigh.

"I should have liked to have practised with you in the passage," he said
ruefully.

"Still, there are other dances," Joan Whitworth suggested. "The
one-step?"

"That's going for a walk," said Harry Luttrell.

"In an unusual attitude," Joan added demurely. "Do you know the
fox-trot?"

"A little."

"The twinkle step?"

"Not at all."

"I might teach you that," Joan suggested.

"Oh, do! Teach it me now! Then we'll dance it in the passage."

"But every one will be dancing it in the ball-room," Joan objected.

"That's why," said Harry Luttrell, and they both laughed.

Joan looked towards the gramophone in the corner of the room. She was
tempted, but she must have that letter written first. She would dance
with Harry Luttrell with an uneasy mind unless that letter were written
and posted first.

"Will you put a record ready on the gramophone, whilst I write a note,"
she suggested. "Then I'll teach you. It's quite a short note."

Joan sat in her turn at the writing table. She wrote the first lines
easily and quickly enough. But she came to explanations, and of
explanations she had none to offer. She sat and framed a sentence and it
would not do. Meanwhile the gramophone was open and ready, the record
fitted on to the disc of green baize and her cavalier in impatient
attendance. She must be quick. But the quicker she wanted to be, the
more slowly her thoughts moved amongst awkward sentences which she must
write. She dashed off in the end the standard phrase for such
emergencies. "I will write to you to-morrow," addressed and stamped her
letter and dropped it into the letter box. The letter fell in the glass
box with the address uppermost. But Joan did not trouble about that, did
not even notice it; a weight was off her mind.

"I am ready," she said, and a few seconds later the music of "The Long
Trail" was wafted to the astonished ears of the tennis players in the
garden. They paused in their game and then Dennis Brown crept to the
window of the hall and looked cautiously in. He stood transfixed; then
turned and beckoned furiously. The lawn-tennis players forsook their
rackets, Lady Splay and Stella Croyle their croquet mallets. Dennis
Brown led them by a back way up to the head of the broad stairs. Here a
gallery ran along one side of the hall. Voices rose up to them from the
floor above the music of the gramophone.

Joan's: "That's the twinkle."

Luttrell's: "It's pretty difficult."

"Try it again," said Joan. "Oh, that's ever so much better."

"I shall never dare to dance it with any one else," said Luttrell.

"I really don't mind very much about that," Joan responded dryly.

Millie Splay could hardly believe her ears. Cautiously she and her party
advanced on tiptoe to the balustrade and looked down. Yes, there the
pair of them were, now laughing, now in desperate earnest, practising
the fox-trot to the music of the gramophone.

"Do I hold you right?" asked Harry.

"Well--I shan't break, you know," Joan answered demurely, and then with
a little sigh, "That's better."

Under her breath Stella Croyle murmured passionately, "Oh, you minx!"

As the record ran out a storm of applause burst from the gallery.

"Oh, Joan, Joan," cried Harold Jupp, shaking his head reproachfully.
"There's the poet kicked right across the room."

"Where?" asked Harry Luttrell, looking round for the book.

"Oh, it doesn't matter," said Joan impatiently. "It's only an old volume
of Browning."

Cries of "Shame" broke indignantly from the race-goers, and Joan
received them with imperturbable indifference. Harry Luttrell, however,
went on his knees and discovering the book beneath a distant sofa,
carefully dusted it.

"Did you ever read 'How they Brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix'?"
he asked.

The audience in the gallery waited in dead silence for Joan Whitworth's
answer. It came unhesitatingly clear and in a voice of high enthusiasm.

"Isn't it the most wonderful poem he ever wrote?"

The gallery broke into screams, catcalls, hisses and protests against
Joan's shameless recantation.

"It's Browning, of course, but it's not Browning at all, if you
understand me," Dennis Brown exclaimed with every show of indignation;
and the whole party trooped away again to their tennis and their
croquet.

Harry Luttrell placed the book upon a table and turned to Joan.

"Now what would you like to do?" he asked.

Joan shrugged her shoulders.

"We might cut into the next tennis set," she said doubtfully.

"You could hardly play in those shoes," said Harry Luttrell.

Joan contemplated a heel of formidable height. Oh, where were the
sandals of the higher Life?

"No, I suppose not. Of course, there's a--but it wouldn't probably
interest you."

"Wouldn't it?" cried Harry Luttrell.

"Well, it's a maze. Millie Splay is rather proud of it. The hedges are
centuries old." She turned innocent eyes on Harry Luttrell. "I don't
know whether you are interested in old hedges."

It is to be feared that "minx" was the only right word for Joan
Whitworth on this afternoon. Harry Luttrell expressed an intense
enthusiasm for great box hedges.

"But they aren't box, they are yew," said Joan, stopping at once.

Harry Luttrell's enthusiasm for yew hedges, however, was even greater
and more engrossing than his enthusiasm for box ones. A pagoda perched
upon a bank overlooked the maze and a narrow steep path led down into it
between the hedges. Joan left it to her soldier to find the way. There
was a stone pedestal with a small lead figure perched upon the top of it
in the small clear space in the middle. But Harry Luttrell took a deal
of time in reaching it. If, however, their progress was slow, with many
false turnings and sudden stops against solid walls of hedge, it was not
so with their acquaintanceship; each turn in the path brought them on by
a new stage. They wandered in the dawn of the world.

"Suppose that I had never come to Rackham Park!" said Harry Luttrell,
suddenly turning at the end of a blind alley. "I almost didn't come. I
might have altogether missed knowing you."

The terrible thought smote them both. What risks people ran to be sure.
They might never have met. They might have never known what it was to
meet. They might have lived benighted, not knowing what lovely spirit
had passed them by. They looked at one another with despairing eyes.
Then a happy thought occurred to Joan.

"But, after all, you did come," she exclaimed.

Harry Luttrell drew a breath. He was relieved of a great oppression.

"Why, yes," he answered in wonderment. "So I did!"

They retraced their steps. As the sun drew towards its late setting, by
an innocent suggestion from Joan here, a little question there, Harry
Luttrell was manoeuvred towards the centre of the maze. Suddenly he
stopped with a finger on the lips. A voice reached to them from the
innermost recess--a voice which intoned, a voice which was oracular.

"What's that?" he asked in a whisper.

Joan shook her head.

"I haven't an idea."

As yet they could hear no words. Words were flung from wall to wall of
the centre space and kept imprisoned there. It seemed that the presiding
genius of the maze was uttering his invocation as the sun went down.
Joan and Harry Luttrell crept stealthily nearer, Harry now openly guided
by a light touch upon his arm as the paths twisted. Words--amazing
words--became distinctly audible; and a familiar voice. They came to the
last screen of hedge and peered through at a spot where the twigs were
thin. In the very middle of the clear space stood Sir Chichester Splay,
one hand leaning upon the pedestal, the other hidden in his bosom, in
the very attitude of the orator; and to the silent spaces of the maze
thus he made his address:

"Ladies and gentlemen! When I entered the tent this afternoon and took
my seat upon the platform, nothing was further from my thoughts than
that I should hear myself proposing a vote of thanks to our
indefatigable chairman!"

Sir Chichester was getting ready for the Chichester Flower Show, at
which, certainly, he was not going to make a speech. Oh dear, no! He
knew better than that.

"In this marvellous collection of flowers, ladies and gentlemen, we can
read, if so we will, a singular instance of co-ordination and
organisation--the Empire's great needs to-day----"

Harry Luttrell and Joan stifled their laughter and stole away out of
hearing.

"We won't breathe a word of it," said Joan.

"No," said Harry.

They had a little secret now between them--that wonderful link--a little
secret; and to be sure they made the most of it. They could look across
the dinner-table at one another with a smile in which no one else could
have a share. If Sir Chichester spoke, it would be just to kindle that
swift glance in lovers' eyes from which the heart takes fire.
Love-making went at a gallop in nineteen hundred and sixteen; it jumped
the barriers; it danced to a lively and violent tune. Maidens, as Sir
Charles Hardiman had pronounced, had become more primeval. Insecurity
had dropped them down upon the bed-rock elemental truths. Men were for
women, women for men, especially for those men who went out with a
cheery song in their mouths to save them from the hideous destiny of
women in ravaged lands. The soldier was here to-day on leave, and God
alone knew where he would be to-morrow, and whether alive, or perhaps a
crippled thing like a child!

Joan Whitworth and Harry Luttrell had been touched by the swift magic of
those days; he, when he had first seen her in the shining armour of her
youth upon the steps of the stairs; she, when Harry had first entered
the hall and spoken his few commonplace words of greeting. This was the
hour for them, the hour at the well with the desert behind them and the
desert in front, the hour within the measure of which was to be forced
the essence of many days. When they returned to the hall they found most
of the small party gathered there before going up to dress for dinner;
and there was that in the faces of the pair which betrayed them.
Hillyard looked quickly round the hall, as a qualm of pity for Stella
Croyle seized him. But he could not see her. "Thank Heaven she has
already gone up to dress," he said to himself. A marriage between Joan
Whitworth and the Harry Luttrell of to-day, the man freed now from the
great obsession of his life and trained now to the traditional paths,
was a fitting thing, a thing to be welcomed. Hillyard readily
acknowledged it. But he had more insight into the troubled soul of
Stella Croyle than any one else in that company.

"No one's bothering about her," he reflected. "She came here to set up
her last fight to win back Harry. She is now putting on her armour for
it. And she hasn't a chance--no, not one!"

For Harry's sake he was glad. But he was a creator of plays; and his
training led him to seek to understand, and to understand with the
sympathy of his emotions, the points of view of others who might stand
in a contrast or a relation. He walked up the stairs with a heart full
of pity when Millicent Splay caught him up.

"What did I tell you?" she said, brimful with delight. "Just look at
Joan! Is there a girl anywhere who can match her?"

Martin looked down over the balustrade at Joan in the hall below.

"No," he said slowly. "Not one whom I have ever seen."

The little note of melancholy in his voice moved Millie Splay. She was
all kindness in that moment of her triumph. She turned to Martin
Hillyard in commiseration. "Oh, don't tell me that you are in love with
her too! I should be so sorry."

"No, I am not," Martin Hillyard hastened to reassure her, "not one bit."

The commiseration died on the instant in Millicent Splay.

"Well, really I don't see why you shouldn't be," she said coldly. "You
will go a long way before you find any one to equal her."

Her whole attitude demanded of him an explanation of how he dared not to
be in love with her darling.

"A very long way," Martin Hillyard agreed humbly. "All the way
probably."

Lady Splay was mollified, and went on to her room. Down in the hall,
Harry Luttrell turned to Joan.

"This is going to be a wonderful week for me."

"I am very glad," answered Joan, and they went up the stairs side by
side.




CHAPTER XXII

JENNY PRASK


"I have put out the blue dress with the silver underskirt, madam," said
Jenny Prask, knowing well that nothing in Stella Croyle's wardrobe set
off so well her dark and fragile beauty.

"Very well, Jenny."

Stella Croyle answered listlessly. She was discouraged by her experience
of that afternoon. She had come to Rackham Park, certain of one factor
upon her side, but very certain of that. She would find no competitor,
and lo! the invincible competitor, youth, had put on armour against her!
Stella looked in the mirror. She was thirty, and in the circle within
which she moved, thirty meant climbing reluctantly on to the shelf.

"Don't you think, Jenny, the blue frock makes me look old?"

Jenny Prask laughed scornfully.

"Old, madam! You! Just fancy!"

Stella Croyle, living much alone, had made a companion of her maid.
There was nothing of Mrs. Croyle's history which Jenny Prask did not
know, and very few of her hopes and sorrows were hidden from her.

"My gracious me, madam! There will be nobody to hold a candle to you
here!" she said, with a sniff, as she helped Stella to undress.

Stella looked in the glass. Certainly there was not a line upon the
smoothness of her cheeks; her dark hair had lost none of its gloss. She
took her features one by one, and found no trace of change. Nor, indeed,
scrutinised in that way did Stella show any change. It was when you saw
her across a room that you recognised that girlhood had gone, and that
there was a woman in the full ripeness of her beauty.

"Yes," she said, and her listlessness began to disappear. She turned
away from the mirror. "Come, Jenny!" she cried, with a hopeful smile.
She was saying to herself, "I have still a chance."

Jenny rattled on while she assisted her mistress. Stella's face changed
with her mood, more than most faces. Disappointment and fatigue aged her
beyond due measure. Jenny Prask was determined that she could go down to
dinner to-night looking her youngest and best.

"I went for a walk this evening with Mr. Marvin. He's Colonel Luttrell's
soldier-servant, and quite enthusiastic, he was, madam."

"Was he, Jenny?"

"Quite! The men in his company loved him--a captain he was then. He
always looked after their dinner. A bit strict, too, but they don't mind
that."

Jenny was busy with Stella Croyle's hair; and the result satisfied her.

"There won't be anybody else to-night, madam," she said.

"Won't there, Jenny?" said Mrs. Croyle, incredulously. "There'll be Miss
Whitworth."

Jenny Prask sniffed disdainfully.

"Miss Whitworth! A fair sight I call her, madam, if I may say so. I
never did see such clothes! And how she keeps a maid for more than a
week beats me altogether. What I say, madam, is those who button in
front when they should hook behind are a fair washout."

Stella laughed.

"I'm afraid that you'll find, Jenny, that Miss Whitworth will hook
behind to-night."

Jenny went on unaffected by the rejoinder. She had her little item of
news to contribute to the contentment of her mistress.

"Besides, Miss Whitworth is in love with the foreign gentleman. Oh,
madam, if you turn as sharp as that, I can't but pull your hair."

"Which foreigner?"

"That Mario Escobar." Jenny looked over Stella's head and into the
reflection of her eyes upon the mirror. "I don't hold with foreigners
myself, madam. A little ridiculous they always seem to me, with their
chatter and what not."

"And you believe Miss Whitworth's in love with him."

"Outrageous, Mr. Harper says. Quite the talk of the servants' hall, it
is. Why, even this afternoon she wrote him a letter. Mr. Harper showed
it me after he took it out of the letter-box to post it. 'That's her
'and,' says he--and there it was, Mario Escobar, Esquire, the Golden Sun
Hotel, Midhurst----"

"Midhurst?" cried Stella with a start. She looked eagerly at the
reflection of Jenny Prask. "Mr. Escobar is staying in an hotel at
Midhurst?"

"Yes, madam."

"And Miss Whitworth wrote to him there this afternoon?"

"It's gospel truth, madam. May it be my last dying word, if it isn't!"
said Jenny Prask.

The blood mounted into Stella Croyle's face. Since that was true--and
she did not doubt Jenny Prask for a moment--Jenny would have given
anything she had to save her mistress trouble, and Stella knew it. Since
it was true, then, that Mario Escobar was staying hidden away in a
country hotel five miles off, and that Joan was writing to him, why,
after all, she had no rival.

Her spirits rose with a bound. She had a week, a whole week, in the
company of Harry Luttrell; and what might she not do in a week if she
used her wits and used her beauty! Stella Croyle ran down the stairs
like a girl.

Jenny Prask shut the door, and, opening a wardrobe, took from a high
shelf Mrs. Croyle's dressing-bag. She opened it, and from one of the
fittings she lifted out a bottle. The bottle was quite full of a white,
colourless liquid. Jenny Prask nodded to herself and carefully put the
bottle back. There was very little she did not know about the
proceedings of her mistress. Then she went out of the room into the
gallery, and peeped down to watch the other guests assemble. She saw
Miranda Brown, Stella, Sir Chichester Splay, Dennis and Harry Luttrell
come from their different rooms and gather in the hall below. From a
passage behind her, a girl, butterfly-bright, flashed out and danced
joyously down the stairs. A new-comer, thought Jenny, with a pang of
alarm for her mistress! But she heard the new-comer speak, and heard her
spoken to. It was Joan Whitworth.

"Oh!" Jenny Prask gasped.

Undoubtedly Joan "hooked behind" to-night. What had come over her? Jenny
asked. Her quick mind realised that Mario Escobar was not answerable for
the change since Mario Escobar was miles away at Midhurst. Besides,
according to Mr. Harper, this flirtation with Escobar had been going on
a year and more.

Jenny Prask looked from Joan to Harry Luttrell. She saw them drawn to
one another across the hall and move into the dining-room side by side.
She turned back with a little moan of disappointment into Stella
Croyle's bedroom; and whilst she tidied it, more than once she stopped
to wring her hands.

Stella Croyle, however, kept her good spirits through the evening. For
after dinner Harry Luttrell, of his own will, came straight to her in
the drawing-room.

"Oh, Wub," she said in a whisper as she drew her skirt aside to make
room for him upon the couch. "Oh, Wub, what years it is since I have
seen you."

When the old nickname fell upon Harry's ears, he looked quickly about
him to see where Joan Whitworth sat. But she was at the other end of the
room.

"Yes, it is a long time."

"Stockholm!" said Stella, dwelling upon the name. She lowered her voice.
"Wub, I suffered terribly after you went away. Oh, it wasn't a good
time. No, it wasn't!"

"Stella, I am very sorry," he said gently. He knew himself this day the
glories and the pangs of love. He was sunk ocean-deep one moment in the
sense of his unworthiness, the next he knocked his head against the
stars on the soaring billow of his pride. He could not but feel for
Stella, who had passed through the same furnace. He could not but grieve
that the wondrous book of which he was racing through the first pages
had been closed for her by him. Might she not open it again, some time,
with another at her side?

"Wub, tell me what you have been doing all these years," she said.

He began the tale of them in the short, reluctant, colloquial phrases
which the English use to strip their achievements of any romantic
semblance until Millicent Splay sailed across the room and claimed him
for a table of bridge.

"He will be safer there," she said to herself.

"Yes, but she had to take him away," Stella's thoughts responded. She
was dangerous then in Millie Splay's judgment. The sweet flattery set
Stella smiling. She went up to her room rejoicing that she had chosen
that week to visit Rackham Park. She was playing a losing game, but she
did not know it.

Thus the very spirit of summer seemed to inform the gathering. Saturday
brought up no clouds to darken the clear sky. Harold Jupp and Dennis
Brown actually scored four nice wins at Gatwick on horses which, to
celebrate the week, miraculously ran to form. Miranda under these
conditions would have inevitably lost, but by another stroke of fortune
no horse running had any special blemish, name, colour or trick
calculated to inspire her. Sir Chichester was happy too, for he saw a
lady reporter write down his name in her notebook. So was Mr. Albany
Todd. For he met the Earl of Eltringham, with whom he had a passing
acquaintance; and his lordship, being complimented upon his gardens, of
which _Country Life_ had published an account, was moved to say in the
friendliest manner: "You must propose yourself for a week-end, Mr. Todd,
and see them."

As for Joan and Harry Luttrell, it mattered little where they were, so
that they were together. They walked in their own magical garden.

It fell to Martin Hillyard to look after Stella Croyle, and the task was
not difficult. She kept her eyes blindfold to what she did not wish to
see. She had a chance, she said to herself, recollecting her talk with
Harry last night, and the news of Joan which Jenny Prask had given to
her. She had a chance, if she walked delicately.

"Old associations--give them opportunity, and they renew their
strength," she thought. "Harry is afraid of them--that's all."

On the Monday evening Jenny Prask brought a fresh piece of gossip which
strengthened her hopes.

"Miss Whitworth had a letter from him this morning," said Jenny. "She
wouldn't open it at the breakfast-table, Mr. Harper says. Quite upset
she was, he says. She took it upstairs to her room just as it was."

"It might have been from some one else," answered Stella.

"Oh, no, madam," replied Jenny. "It had the Midhurst postmark, and Mr.
Harper knows his handwriting besides. Mr. Harper's very observant."

"He seems to be," said Stella.

"Miss Whitworth answered the letter at once, and took it out to the
village and posted it with her own hands," Jenny continued.

"Are you sure?" cried Mrs. Croyle.

"I saw her go with my own eyes, I did. She went in her own little
runabout, and was back in a jiffy, with a sort of 'There-I've-done-it!'
look about her. Oh, there's something going on there, madam--take my
word for it! She's a deep one, Miss Whitworth is, and no mistake. Will
you wear the smoke-grey to-night, madam? I am keeping the pink for the
ball on Thursday."

Stella allowed a moment or two to pass before she answered.

"I shan't go to the Willoughbys' ball, Jenny."

Jenny Prask stared in dismay.

"You won't, madam!"

"No, Jenny. But I want you to be careful not to mention it to any one. I
shall dress as if I was going, but at the last moment I shall plead a
headache and stay behind."

"Very well, madam," said Jenny. But it seemed to her that Stella was
throwing down her arms. Stella, however, had understood, upon hearing of
the invitation for Lady Splay's party, that she could do nothing else.
The Willoughbys were strict folk. Mrs. Croyle could hardly hope to go
without some rumour of her history coming afterwards to the ears of that
family; and the family would hold her presence as a reproach against
Millie Splay. Stella had herself proposed her plan to Millie, and she
noted the relief with which it was received.

"You will be careful not to mention it to a soul, Jenny," Stella
insisted.

"My goodness me, madam, I never talk," replied Jenny. "I keep my ears
open and let the others do that."

"I know, Jenny," said Stella, with a smile. "I can't imagine what I
should do without you."

"And you never will, madam, unless it's your own wish and doin'," said
Jenny heartily. "I have talked it over with Brown"--Brown was Mrs.
Croyle's chauffeur--"and he's quite willin' that I should go on with you
after we are married."

"Then, that's all right," said Stella.

Many a one looking backwards upon some terrible and unexpected tragedy
will have noticed with what care the great dramaturgist so wove his play
that every little unheeded event in the days before helped directly to
create the final catastrophe. It happened on this evening that Stella
went downstairs earlier than the other guests, and in going into the
library in search of an evening paper, found Sir Chichester standing by
the telephone instrument.

"Am I in your way?" she asked.

"Not a bit, Stella," he answered. "In fact, you might help me by looking
up the number I want." He raised the instrument, and playing with the
receiver as he stood erect, remarked, "Although I am happy to think that
I shall not be called upon to deliver any observations on the occasion
of the Chichester flower show next Thursday, I may as well ask one of
the newspapers if their local correspondent would give the ceremony some
little attention."

Stella Croyle took up the telephone book.

"Which newspaper is it to be, Sir Chichester?"

"The _Harpoon_, I think. Yes, I am sure. The _Harpoon_."

Stella Croyle looked up the number and read out:

"Gerrard, one, six, two, double three."

Sir Chichester accordingly called upon the trunk line and gave the
number.

"You will ring me up? Thank you," he said, and replacing the receiver,
stood in anxious expectancy.

"I thought that your favourite paper was the _Daily Flashlight_?" Stella
observed.

"That's quite true, Stella. It was," Sir Chichester explained naively.
"But I have noticed lately a regrettable tendency to indifference on the
part of the _Flashlight_. The management is usually too occupied to
converse with me when I ring it up. On the other hand, I am new to the
_Harpoon_. Hallo! Hallo! This is Sir Christopher Splay speaking," and he
delivered his message. "Thank you very much," said Sir Chichester as he
hung up the receiver. "Really most courteous people. Yes, most
courteous. What is their number, Stella? I must remember it."

Stella read it out again.

"Gerrard, one, six, two, double three," and thus she, too, committed the
number to memory.




CHAPTER XXIII

PLANS FOR THE EVENING


The library at Rackham Park was a small, oblong room, with a big window
upon the garden. It opened into the hall on the one side and into the
dining-room on the other, and in one corner the telephone was installed.
At half-past eight on the night of the dance at Harrel, this room was
empty and in darkness. But a second afterwards the door from the hall
was opened, and Joan stood in the doorway, the light shimmering upon her
satin cloak and the silver embroidery of her frock. She cast an anxious
look behind her and up the staircase. It seemed as if some movement at
the angle made by the stairs and the gallery caught her eye, for she
stepped back for a clearer view, and listened with a peculiar
intentness. She saw nothing, however, and heard nothing. She entered the
library swiftly and closed the door behind her, so that the room fell
once more upon darkness save for a thread of gold at the bottom of the
other door behind which the men of the party were still sitting over
their wine. She crossed the room towards the window, stepping cautiously
to avoid the furniture. She was quite invisible. But for a tiny rustle
of the lace flounces on her dress one would have sworn the room was
empty. But when she was half-way across a sudden burst of laughter from
the dining-room brought her to a stop with her hand upon her heart and a
little sob not altogether stifled in her throat. It meant so much to her
that the desperate adventure of this night should be carried through! If
all went well, as it must--oh, as it surely must!--by midnight she would
be free of her terrors and distress.

The laughter in the dining room died down. Joan stole forward again. She
drew away the heavy curtains from the long window, and the moonlight,
clear and bright like silver, poured into the room and clothed her in
its soft radiance. She drew back the bolts at the top and bottom of the
glass door and turned the key in the lock. She touched the glass and the
door swung open upon the garden, easily, noiselessly. She drew it close
again and leaving it so, raised her hands to the curtains at the side.
As she began carefully to draw them together, so that the rings should
not rattle on the pole, the door from the hall was softly and quickly
opened, and the switch of the electric lights by the side of the door
pressed down. The room leapt into light.

Joan swung round, her face grown white, her eyes burning with fire. She
saw only Jenny Prask.

"I hope I don't intrude, miss," said Jenny respectfully. "I came to find
a book."

The blood flowed back into Joan's cheeks.

"Certainly, Jenny, take what you like," said Joan, and she draped the
curtains across the window.

"Thank you, miss."

Jenny chose a book from the case upon the table and without a glance at
Joan or at the window, went out of the room again. Joan watched her go.
After all, what had Jenny seen? A girl whose home was there, drawing the
curtains close. That was all. Joan shook her anxiety off. Jenny had left
the door of the library open and some one came running down the stairs
whistling as she ran. Miranda Brown dashed into the room struggling with
a pair of gloves.

"Oh, how I hate gloves in this weather!" she cried. "Well, here I am,
Joan. You wanted to speak to me before the others had finished powdering
their noses. What is it?"

"I want you to help me."

"Of course I will," Miranda answered cheerily. "How?"

Joan closed the door and returned to Miranda, who, having drawn the
gloves over her arm, was now struggling with the buttons.

"I want you, when we reach Harrel----"

"Yes."

"To lend me your motor-car for an hour."

Miranda turned in amazement towards her friend. But one glance at her
face showed that the prayer was made in desperate earnest. Miranda Brown
caught her friend by the arm.

"Joan!"

"Yes," Joan Whitworth answered, nodding her head miserably. "That's the
help I want and I want it dreadfully. Just for an hour--no more."

"Joan, my dear--what's the matter?" asked Miranda gazing into Joan
Whitworth's troubled face.

"I don't want you to ask me," the girl answered. "I want you to help me
straight off without any questions. Otherwise----" and Joan's voice
shook and broke, "otherwise--oh, I don't know what will happen to me!"

Miranda put her arm round Joan Whitworth's waist. "Joan! You are in real
trouble!"

"For the first time!" said Joan.

"Can't I----?"

"No," Joan interrupted. "There's only the one way, Miranda."

She sat down upon a couch at Miranda's side and feverishly caught her
hand. "Do help me! You can't tell what it means to me!... And I should
hate telling you! Oh, I have been such a fool!"

Joan's face was quivering, and so deep a compunction was audible in her
voice, so earnest a prayer was to be read in her troubled eyes, that
Miranda's doubt and anxiety were doubled.

"I don't know what I shall do, if you don't help me," Joan said
miserably as she let go of Miranda. Her hands fluttered helplessly in
the air. "No, I don't know!"

Miranda was thoroughly disturbed. The contrast between the Joan she had
known until this week, good-humoured, a little aloof, contented with
herself and her ambitions, placid, self-contained, and this lovely girl,
troubled to the heart's core, with her beseeching eyes and trembling
lips touched her poignantly, meltingly.

"Oh, Joan, I don't like it!" she whispered. "What mad thing have you
done?"

"Nothing that can't be put right! Nothing! Nothing!" Joan caught eagerly
at the argument. "Oh, I was a fool! But if you'll only help me
to-night, I am sure everything will be arranged."

The words were bold enough, but the girl's voice trailed off into a low,
unsteady whisper, as terror at the rash plan which she had made and must
now carry through caught at her heart. "Oh, Miranda, do be kind!"

"When do you want the car?" asked Miranda.

"Immediately after we get to Harrel."

"Joan!"

Miranda herself was growing frightened. She stood torn with indecision.
Joan's distress pleaded on the one side, dread of some tragic mystery
upon the other. For the first time in her life Joan was in some
desperate crisis of destiny. Her feet and hands twitched as though she
were bound fast in the coils of a net she could not break. What wisdom
of experience could she bring to help her to escape? On what wild and
hopeless venture might she not be set?

"Yes, yes," Joan urged eagerly. "I have thought it all out. I want you
to tell your chauffeur privately to return along the avenue after he has
set you down. There's a road on the right a few yards down. If he will
turn into that and wait behind the big clump of rhododendrons I will
join him immediately."

"But it will be noticed that you have gone. People will ask for you,"
Miranda objected.

"No, I shall be back again within the hour. There will be a crowd of
people. And lots won't imagine that I should ever come to the dance at
all." Even at that moment a little smile played about the lips. "And if
the ball had been a week ago, I shouldn't have gone, should I? I should
still be wearing sandals," she explained, as she looked down at the
buckles of her trim satin slippers, "and haughtily wishing you all good
night in the hall here. No, it will be easy enough. I shall just shake
hands with Mrs. Willoughby, pass on with the rest of our party into the
ball-room and then slip out by the corridor at the side of the park."

"It's dangerous, Joan!" said Miranda.

"Oh, I know, but----" Joan rose suddenly with her eyes upon the door.
"The others are coming. Miranda, will you help me? I would have driven
over to Harrel in my own little car. But it's open and I should have got
blown about until everybody would have begun asking why in the world I
used it. Oh, Miranda, quick!"

Her ears had heard the voices already in the hall. Miranda heard them
too. In a moment the door would be thrown open. She must make up her
mind now.

"Very well. The first turning to the right down the avenue and behind
the rhododendrons. I'll tell the chauffeur."

"And no one else! Not even Dennis!"

"Joan!"

"No, not even Dennis! Promise me!"

Millie Splay was heard to be inquiring for them both.

"Very well. I promise!"

"Oh, thank you! Thank you."

The door from the hall was opened upon that cry of gratitude and Millie
Splay looked in.

"Oh, there you are." A movement of chairs became audible in the
dining-room. "And those men are still sitting over their miserable
cigars."

"They are coming," said Joan, and the next moment the dining-room door
was thrown open and Sir Chichester with his guests trooped out from it.

"Now then, you girls, we ought to be off," he cried as if he had been
waiting with his coat on for half an hour. "This is none of your London
dances. We are in the country. You won't any of you get any partners if
you don't hurry."

"Well, I like that!" returned Millie Splay. "Here we all are, absolutely
waiting for you!"

Mr. Albany Todd approached Joan.

"You will keep a dance for me?"

"Of course. The third before supper," answered Joan.

Already Sir Chichester was putting on his coat in the hall.

"Come on! Come on!" he cried impatiently, and then in quite another
tone, "Oh!"

The evening papers had arrived late that evening. They now lay neatly
folded on the hall table. Sir Chichester pounced upon them. The
throbbing motor-cars at the door, the gay figures of his guests were
all forgotten. He plumped down upon a couch.

"There!" cried Millie Splay in despair. "Now we can all sit down for
half an hour."

"Nonsense, my dear, nonsense! I just want to see whether there is any
report of my little speech at the Flower Show yesterday." He turned over
the leaves. "Not a word apparently, here! And yet it was an occasion of
some importance. I can't understand these fellows."

He tossed the paper aside and took up another. "Just a second, dear!"

Millie Splay looked around at her guests with much the same expression
of helpless wonderment which was so often to be seen on the face of
Dennis Brown, when Miranda went racing.

"It's the limit!" she declared.

There were two, however, of the party, who were not at all distressed by
Sir Chichester's procrastination. When the others streamed into the
hall, Joan lingered behind, sedulously buttoning her gloves which were
buttoned before; and Harry Luttrell returned to assist her. The door was
three-quarters closed. From the hall no one could see them.

"You are going to dance with me in the passage," he said.

Joan smiled at him and nodded. Now that Miranda had given way, Joan's
spirits had revived. The colour was bright in her cheeks, her eyes were
tender.

"Yes, but not at once."

"Why?"

"I'll finish my duty dances first," said Joan in a low voice. She did
not take her eyes from his face. She let him read, she meant him to
read, in her eyes what lay so close at her heart. Harry Luttrell read
without an error, the print was so large, the type so clear. He took a
step nearer to her.

"Joan!" he whispered; and at this, his first use of her Christian name,
her face flowered like a rose.

"Thank you!" she said softly. "Oh, thank you!"

Harry Luttrell looked over his shoulder. They had the room to
themselves, so long as they did not raise their voices.

"Joan," he began with a little falter in his voice. Could he have
pleaded better in a thousand fine speeches, he who had seen his men
wither about him on the Somme, than by that little timorous quaver in
his voice? "Joan, I have something to ask of you to-night. I meant to
ask it during a dance, when you couldn't run away. But I am going to ask
it now."

Joan drew back sharply.

"No! Please wait!" and as she saw his face cloud, she hurried on. "Oh,
don't be hurt! You misunderstand. How you misunderstand! Take me in to
supper to-night, will you? And then you shall talk to me, and I'll
listen." Her voice rose like clear sweet music in a lilt of joy. "I'll
listen with all my heart, my hands openly in yours if you will, so that
all may see and know my pride!"

"Joan!" he whispered.

"But not now! Not till then!"

Harry Luttrell did not consider what scruple in the girl's conscience
held him off. The delay did not trouble him at all. She stood before
him, radiant in her beauty, her happiness like an aura about her.

"Joan," he whispered again, and--how it happened who shall say?--in a
second she was within his arms, her heart throbbing against his; her
hands stole about his shoulders; their lips were pressed together.

"Harry! Oh, Harry!" she murmured. Then very gently she pushed him from
her. She shook her head with a wistful little smile.

"I didn't mean you to do that," she said in self-reproach, "until after
supper."

In the hall Sir Chichester threw down the last of the newspapers in a
rage. "Not a word! Not one single miserable little word! I don't ask
much, goodness knows, but----" and his voice went up in an angry
incredulity. "Not one word! And I thought the _Harpoon_ was such a good
paper too!"

Sir Chichester sprang to his feet. He glanced at his guests. He turned
upon his wife.

"God bless my soul, Millie, what _are_ we waiting for? I'll tell you
girls what it is. Unless we get off at once, we had better not go at
all. Where's Joan? Where's Luttrell?"

"Here we are!" cried Luttrell from the library, and in a lower tone to
Joan, he observed, "What a bore people are to be sure, aren't they?"

The guilty couple emerged into the hall. Sir Chichester surveyed them
with severity.

"I don't know whether you have heard about it, Luttrell, but there's a
ball to-night at Harrel, and we all rather thought of going to it," he
remarked with crushing sarcasm.

"I am quite ready, sir," replied Harry humbly. Sir Chichester was
mollified.

"Very well then. We'll go."

"But Mrs. Croyle isn't down yet," said Miranda.

"Stella isn't going, dear," answered Millie Splay; and a cry of dismay
burst from Joan.

"Not going!"

The consternation in the girl's voice was so pronounced that every eye
in that hall turned to her in astonishment. There was consternation,
too, most legible in her widely-opened eyes. Her cheeks had lost their
colour. She stood for a fleeting moment before them all, an image of
terror. Then she caught at an excuse.

"Stella's ill then--since she's not going."

"It's not as bad as all that, dear," Lady Splay hastened to reassure
her. "She complained of a racking headache at dinner. She has gone to
bed."

The blood flowed back into Joan's cheeks.

"Oh, I see!" she observed slowly. "That is why her maid came to the
library for a book!"

But she was very silent throughout the quarter of an hour, which it took
them to drive to Harrel. There was somebody left behind at Rackham Park
that night. Joan had overlooked one possibility in contriving her plan,
and that possibility, now developed into fact, threatened to ruin all.
One guest remained behind in the house, and that one Joan's rival.




CHAPTER XXIV

JENNY PRASK IS INTERESTED


Rackham was a red Georgian mansion with great windows in flat rows, and
lofty rooms made beautiful by the delicate tracery of the ceilings. It
has neither wings nor embellishments but stood squarely in its gardens,
looking southwards to the Downs. The dining-room was upon the east side,
between that room and the hall was the library, of which the window
faced the north. Mrs. Croyle's bedroom, however, was in the south-west
corner and from its windows one could see the smoke of the train as it
climbed from Midhurst to the Cocking tunnel, and the gap where the road
runs through to Singleton.

"You won't be going to bed yet, madam, I suppose," said Jenny.

She had not troubled to bring upstairs into the room the book which she
had picked out at random from the stand that was lying on the hall
table.

"No, Jenny. I will ring for you when I want you," said Stella.

Stella was dispirited. Her week was nearly at an end. To-morrow would be
the last day and she had gained nothing, it seemed, by all her care.
Harry was kind--oh, ever so much kinder than in the old days when they
had been together--more considerate, more thoughtful. But the skies of
passion are stormily red, and so effulgent that one walks in gold.
Consideration, thoughtfulness--what were these pale things worth against
one spurt of fire? Besides, there was the ball to-night. He would dance
with _her_, would seek the dim open spaces of the lawns, the dark
shadows of the great elms, with her--with Joan.

"I'll ring for you, Jenny," she repeated, as her maid stood doubtfully
by the door. "I am quite right."

"Very well, madam."

Stella Croyle's eyes were drawn when she was left alone to that cupboard
in which her dressing-bag was stowed away. But she arrested them and
covered them with her hands.

"This is my last chance," she said to herself aloud in the anguish of
her spirit. If it failed, there was nothing in front of her but a
loneliness which each year must augment. Youth and high spirits or the
assumption of high spirits--these she must have if she were to keep her
place in her poor little circle--and both were slipping from her fast.
"This is my last chance." She stood in front of her mirror in her
dancing frock, her dark hair exquisitely dressed, her face hauntingly
wistful. After all, she was beautiful. Why shouldn't she win? Jenny
thought that she could.

At that moment Jenny was slipping noiselessly along a corridor to the
northern side of the house. The lights were all off; a pencil of
moonlight here and there from an interstice in the curtains alone
touched her as she passed. At one window she stopped, and softly lifted
the blind. She looked out and was satisfied.

"Thought so!" she murmured, with a little vindictive smile. Just beneath
her was that long window of the library which Joan had been at such
pains to arrange.

Jenny stationed herself by the window. The night was very still. She
could hear the voices of the servants in the dining-room round the angle
of the house, and see the light from its windows lying in frames upon
the grass. Then the light went out, and silence fell.

From time to time the hum of a motor-car swelled and diminished to its
last faint vibrations on the distant road; and as each car passed Jenny
stiffened at her post. She looked at her watch, turning the dial to the
moonlight. It was ten minutes past nine now. The cars had left Rackham
Park well before nine. She would not have long to wait now! As she
slipped her watch again into her waistband she drew back with an
instinctive movement, although the window at which she stood had been
this last half-hour in shadow. For under a great copper beech on the
grass in front of her a man was standing. The sight of him was a shock
to her.

She wondered how he had come, how long he had been there--and why? Some
explanation flashed upon her.

"My goodness me!" she whispered. "You could knock me down with a
hairpin. So you could!"

Whilst she watched that solitary figure beneath the tree, another motor
whizzed along the road. The noise of its engine grew louder--surely
louder than any which, standing at this window, she had heard before.
Had it turned into the park? off the main road. Was it coming to the
house? Before Jenny could answer these questions in her mind, the noise
ceased altogether. Jenny held her breath; and round the angle of the
house a girl came running swiftly, her skirt sparkling like silver in
the moonlight, and a white cloak drawn about her shoulders. She drew
open the window of the library and passed in. A few seconds passed.
Jenny imagined her stealthily opening the door into the hall, and
listening to make sure that the servants were in their own quarters and
this part of the house deserted. Then the girl reappeared at the window
and made a sign. From beneath the tree the man ran across the grass. His
face was turned towards Jenny, and the moonlight revealed it. The man
was Mario Escobar.

Jenny drew a little sharp breath. She heard the window ever so gently
latched. Suddenly the light blazed out from the room and then, strip by
strip, vanished, as if the curtains had been cautiously drawn. The
garden, the house resumed its aspect of quiet; all was as it had been
when Jenny Prask first lifted the window of the corridor. Jenny Prask
crept cautiously away.

"Fancy that!" she said to herself, with a little chuckle of triumph.

In the room below Mario Escobar and Joan Whitworth were talking.




CHAPTER XXV

IN A LIBRARY


"You insisted that I should see you. You have something to say to me,"
said Joan. She was breathing more quickly than usual and the blood
fluttered in her cheeks, but she faced Mario Escobar with level eyes,
and spoke without a tremor in her voice. So far everything had happened
just as she had planned. There were these few difficult minutes now to
be grappled with, and afterwards the ordeal would be ended, that foolish
chapter in her life altogether closed. "Will you please be quick?" she
pleaded.

But Mario Escobar was in no hurry to answer. He had never imagined that
Joan Whitworth could look so beautiful. He had never dreamed that she
would take so much trouble. Mario Escobar understood women's clothes,
and his eyes ran with a sensation of pleasure over her delicate frock
with its shining bands, its embroidery of silver and flounces of fine
lace, down to her slim brocaded shoes. He had not, indeed, thought very
much of her in the days when Linda Spavinsky was queen. She had been a
sort of challenge to him, because of her aloofness, her indifference.
Women were his profession, and here was a queer outlandish one whom it
would be amusing to parade as his. So he had set to work; he had a sense
of art, he could talk with ingenuity on artistic matters, and he had
flattered Joan by doing so; but always with a certain definite laughter
and contempt for her. Now her beauty rather swept him off his feet. He
looked at her in amazement. Why this change? And--the second question
for ever in his mind--how could he profit by it?

"I don't understand," he said slowly, feeling his way. "We were good
friends--very good friends." Joan neither denied nor agreed. "We had
certain things in common, a love of art, of the finer things of life. I
made enemies, of course, in consequence. Your racing friends----" He
paused. "Milly Splay, who would have matched you with some dull,
tiresome squire accustomed to sleep over his port after dinner, the sort
of man you are drawing so brilliantly in your wonderful book." A
movement of impatience on Joan's part perplexed him. Authors! You can
generally lay your praise on with a trowel. What in the world was the
matter with Joan? He hurried on. "I understood that I was making
enemies. I understood, too, why I was no longer invited to Rackham Park.
I was a foreigner. I would as soon visit a picture gallery as shoot a
pheasant. I would as soon appreciate your old gates and houses in the
country as gallop after a poor little fox on the downs. Oh, yes, I
wasn't popular. That I understand. But you!" and his voice softened to a
gentle reproach. "You were different! And you had the courage of your
difference! Since I was not invited to Rackham Park, I was to come down
to the inn at Midhurst. I was to drive over--publicly, most
publicly--and ask for you. We would show them that there were finer
things in the world than horse-racing and lawn tennis. Oh, yes. We
arranged it all at that wonderful exhibition of the New School in Green
Street."

Joan writhed a little at her recollection of the pictures of the
rotundists and of the fatuous aphorisms to which she had given
utterance.

"I come to Midhurst accordingly, and what happens? You scribble me out a
curt little letter. I am not to come to Rackham Park. I am not to try to
see you. And you are writing to-morrow. But to-morrow comes, and you
don't write--no, not one line!"

"It was so difficult," Joan answered. She spoke diffidently. Some of her
courage had gone from her; she was confronted with so direct, so
unanswerable an accusation. "I thought that you would understand that I
did not wish to see you again. I thought that you would accept my wish."

Mario Escobar laughed unpleasantly.

"Why should I?"

"Because most men have that chivalry," said Joan.

Mario Escobar only smiled this time. He smiled with narrowed eves and a
gleam of white teeth behind his black moustache. He was amused, like a
man who receives ridiculous answers from a child.

"It is easy to see that you have read the poets--Joan," he replied
deliberately.

Joan's face flamed. Never had she been addressed with so much insolence.
Chaff she was accustomed to, but it was always chaff mitigated by a
tenderness of real affection. Insolence and disdain were quite new to
her, and they hurt intolerably. Joan, however, was learning her lessons
fairly quickly. She had to get this meeting over as swiftly and quietly
as she could, and high words would not help.

"It's true," she admitted meekly. "I know very little."

Joan looked very lovely as she stood nervously drumming with her gloved
fingers on a little table which stood between them, all her assurance
gone.

Mario Escobar lived always on the whirling edge of passion. The least
extra leap of the water caught him and drew him in. He gazed at Joan,
and the computing look which cast up her charms made her suddenly hot
from head to foot. The good-looking, pretentious fool whom it had been
amusing to exhibit amidst the black frowns of her circle had suddenly
become exquisitely desirable for herself as a prize, with her beauty,
her dainty care to tend it, and her delicious clothes. She would now be
a real credit! Escobar took a step towards her.

"After all," he said, "we were such good friends. We had little private
interests which we did not share with other people. Surely it was
natural that I should wish to see you again."

Mario was speaking smoothly enough now. His voice, his eyes actually
caressed her. She was at pains to repress a shiver of physical
repulsion. But she remembered his letter very clearly. It had expressed
no mere wish to see her. It had claimed a right with a vague threat of
making trouble if the right were not conceded. She had recognised the
right, not out of the fear of the threat so much--although that weighed
with her, as out of a longing to have done with him for good and all.
Instinct had told her that this was the last type of man to find favour
in Harry Luttrell's eyes, that she herself would be lowered from her
high pedestal in his heart, if he knew of the false friendship.

"Well, I agreed to see you," she replied. "But I have to go back to the
ball. Will you please to be quick?"

"The time and the place were of your own choice."

"My choice!" Joan answered. "I had no choice. A girl amongst visitors in
a country house--when is she free? When is she alone? She can keep to
her room--yes! But that's all her liberty. Let her go out, there will be
some one at her side."

"If she is like you--no doubt," said Escobar, and again he smiled at her
covetously. Joan shook the compliment off her with a hitch of her
shoulders.

"We could have met in a hundred places," Mario continued.

"I could have come to call on you as we arranged."

"No!" cried Joan with more vigour than wisdom in her voice. She had a
picture of him, of the embarrassment of the Splays and her friends, of
the disapproval of Harry Luttrell.

Escobar was quick when he dealt with women, quick and sensitive. The
passionate denial did not escape him. He began to divine the true cause
of this swift upheaval and revolution in her.

"You could have sent me a card for the Willoughbys' dance. It would have
been easy enough for us to meet there."

Again she replied, "No!" A note of obstinacy was audible.

"Why?"

Joan did not answer at all.

"I'll tell you," Escobar flashed out at her angrily. "You wouldn't be
seen with me any more! Suddenly, you would not be seen with me--no, not
for the world! That's the truth, isn't it? That's why you come secretly
back and bid me meet you in an empty house."

"Hush!" pleaded Joan.

Mario Escobar's voice had risen as his own words flogged him to a keener
indignation.

"Why should I care if all the world hears me?" he replied roughly. "Why
should I consider you, who turn me down the moment it suits you,
without a reason? It's fairly galling to me, I assure you."

Joan nodded her head. Mario Escobar had some right upon his side, she
was ready to acknowledge.

"I beg your pardon," she said simply. "Won't you please be content with
that and leave things as they are?"

"When you are a little older you will know that you can never leave
things as they are," answered Mario. "I was looking forward to a week of
happiness. I have had a week of torment. For lesser insults than yours,
men kill in my country."

There were other differences, too, between her country and his. Joan did
not cry out, or burst into tears or flinch in any way. She was alone in
this room; there was no one, as far as she knew, within the reach of her
voice. She had chosen this meeting-place, not altogether because the
house would be empty, but because in this first serious difficulty of
her life she would be amongst familiar things and draw from them
confidence and strength, and a sense of security. With Mario Escobar in
front of her, his face ablaze with passion, the security vanished
altogether. Yet all the more she was raised to the top of her courage.

"Then I shall tell you the truth," she answered gently. "You speak to me
of our friendship. It was never anything serious to me. It was a
taunt--a foolish taunt to other people."

Mario Escobar flinched, as if she had struck him in the face.

"Yes, I hurt you," she went on in the same gentle voice, which was not
the least element in Escobar's humiliation. "I am very sorry. I tried
not to hurt you. I am very ignorant, as you have told me, but I wouldn't
believe it till a week ago. I made it my pride to be different from
anybody else. I believed that I was different. I was a fool. I wouldn't
listen. Even during the war. I have shut myself up away from it, trying
not to share in the effort, not to feel the pride and the sorrow,
pretending that it was just a horrible, sordid business altogether
beneath lofty minds! That's one of the reasons why I chose you for my
friend! I was flinging my glove in the face of the little world I knew.
I had _got_ to be different. It's all very shameful to tell, and I am
sorry. Oh, how I am sorry!"

Her sorrow was most evident. She had sunk down upon a couch, her fair
head drooping and the tears now running down her cheeks in the
bitterness of her shame. But Mario Escobar was untouched by any pity. If
any thought occurred to him outside his burning humiliation, it was
prompted by the economy of the Spaniard.

"She'll spoil that frock if she goes on crying," he said to himself,
"and it was very expensive."

"I have nothing but remorse to offer in atonement," she went on. "But
that remorse is very sincere----"

Mario Escobar swept her plea aside with a furious gesture.

"So that's it!" he cried. "You were just making a fool of me!" That she,
this pretty pink and white girl, should have been making a show of him,
parading him before her friends, exhibiting him, using him as a
challenge--just as in fact he had been using her, and with more success!
Only to think of it hurt him like a knife. "Your remorse!" he cried
scornfully. "There's some one else, of course!"

Joan sat up straight and stiff. Escobar might have laid a lash across
her delicate shoulders.

"Yes," she said defiantly.

"Some one who was not here a week ago?"

"Yes."

To Escobar's humiliation was now added a sudden fire of jealousy. For
the first time to-night, as woman, as flesh and blood, she was adorable,
and she owed this transformation, not to him, no, not in the tiniest
fraction of a degree to him, but to some one else, some dull boor
without niceties or deftness, who had stormed into her life within the
week. Who was it? He had got to know. But Joan was hardly thinking of
Escobar. Her eyes were turned from him.

"He has set me free from many vanities and follies. If I am grieved and
ashamed now, I owe it thankfully to him. If my remorse is bitter, it is
because through him I have a gleam of light which helps me to
understand."

"And you have told him what you have told me?"

"No, but I shall to-night when all this is over, when I go back to
Harrel."

Mario Escobar moved closer to her.

"Are you so sure that you are going back to Harrel to-night?" he asked
in a low voice.

"Yes," she replied, and only after she had spoken did the menace of his
voice force itself into her mind as something which she must take into
account. She looked up at him startled, and as she looked her wonderment
turned into stark fear. The cry that in his country men killed had left
her unmoved. But she was afraid now, desperately afraid, all the more
afraid because she thought of the man searching for her through the
reception-rooms at Harrel.

"We are alone here in an empty quarter of the house. So you arranged
it," he continued. "Good! Women do not amuse themselves at my expense
without being paid for it."

Joan started up in a panic, but Escobar seized her shoulders and forced
her down again.

"Sit still," he cried savagely. Then his face changed. For the first
time for many minutes his lips parted in a smile of pleasure.

"You are very lovely, Joan. I love to see you like
that--afraid--trembling. It is the beginning of recompense."

Joan had tumbled into a deeper pit than any she had dreamed of. In
desperation she cast about for means to climb out of it. The secrecy of
this meeting--that must go. But, even so, was there escape? The bell?
Before she could be half-way across the room, he would be holding her in
his arms. A cry? Before it was half uttered, he would have stifled her
mouth. No, she must sit very still and provoke no movement by him.

Mario Escobar was a creature of unhealthy refinements. He wanted to
know, first, who was the man who had touched this indifferent maiden
into warm life. The knowledge would be an extra spice to his pleasure.

"Who are staying in the house?" he asked. It would be amusing to make
his selection, and discover if he were right.

"Dennis Brown, Harold Jupp"--Joan began, puzzled by his question, yet
welcoming it as so much delay.

"I don't want to hear about them," Mario Escobar replied. "Tell me of
the new-comers!"

"Martin Hillyard----" Joan began again, and was aware that Mario Escobar
made a quick startled movement and gasped. Martin Hillyard's name was a
pail of cold water for Escobar.

"Does Hillyard know that I am at Midhurst?" he asked sharply.

"No," Joan answered.

There was something which Hillyard had told her about Mario Escobar,
something which she had rejected and dismissed altogether from her
thoughts. Then she remembered. Escobar was an enemy working in England
against England. She had given the statement no weight whatever. It was
the sort of thing people said of unconventional people they disliked in
order to send them to Coventry. But Escobar's start and Escobar's
question put a different value upon it. Joan caught at it. Of what use
could it be to her? Of some use, surely, if only she had the wit to
divine it. But she was in such a disorder of fear and doubt that every
idea went whirling about and about in her mind. She raised her hand to
her forehead, keeping her eyes upon Escobar. She felt as helpless as a
child. Almost she regretted the love which had so violently mastered
her. It had made clear to her her ignorance and so stripped her of all
assurance and left her defenceless.

But even in the tumult of her thoughts, she began to recognise a change.
The air was less charged with terror. There was less of passion and
anger in Mario Escobar, and more of speculation. He watched her in a
gloomy silence, and each moment she took fresh heart. With a swift
movement he seated himself on the couch beside her.

Joan sprang up with a little cry, and her heart thumping in her breast.

"Hush!" said Escobar. Yes, it was now he who pleaded for secrecy and a
quiet voice.

There was a stronger passion in Mario than the love of women, and that
was the love of money. Women were to him mainly the means to money. They
were easier to get, too, if you were not over particular. Money was a
rare, shy thing, except to an amazing few who accumulated it by some
obscure, magnetic attraction; and opportunities of acquisition were not
to be missed.

"Hush!" he said. "You treated me badly, Joan. It was right that I should
teach you a lesson--frighten you a little, eh?"

He smiled at her with eyes half closed and eyelids cunningly blinking.
Now that her fears were weakening Joan found his impertinence almost
insufferable. But she held her tongue and waited.

"But you owe me a return, don't you?"

Joan did not move.

"A little return--which will cost you nothing at all. You know that I
represent a line of ships. You can help me. We have rivals, with active
agents. You shall find out for me exactly what Martin Hillyard is doing
in the Mediterranean, and why he visits in a yacht the ports of Spain.
You will find this out for me, so that I may know whether he is acting
for my rivals. Yes."

"He is not," answered Joan.

"You will find this out for me, so that I may know," Escobar repeated
smoothly. "Exactly what he is doing in the Mediterranean, what special
plans, and why he visits in a yacht the ports of Spain. You promise me
that knowledge, and you can go straight back to your dancing."

"I have no knowledge," said Joan quietly.

"But you can obtain it," Escobar insisted. "He is a friend of yours.
Exactly what he is doing--is it not so?"

So Martin's accusation was true. Joan nodded her head, and Escobar, with
a smile of relief, took the gesture as a consent to his proposal.

"Good!" he said, rising from the couch. "Then all is forgiven! You will
make some notes----"

"I will do nothing of the kind," said Joan quietly, but she was white to
the edge of her lips, and she trembled from head to foot. But there was
no room any more for fear in her. She was in a heat of anger which she
had never known. "Oh, that you should dare!" and her words choked her.

Mario Escobar stared at her.

"You refuse?"

"With all my soul."

Escobar took a step towards her, but she did not move.

"You are alone with me, when you should be dancing at the ball. You made
the appointment, chose the hour, the place ... even if you scream, there
will be a scandal, a disgrace."

"I don't care."

"And the man you are in love with, eh? That makes a difference," he
said, as he saw the girl falter. "Do we think of him?"

"No," said Joan. "We incur the disgrace."

She saw his eyes open wide with terror. He drew a step away from her.
"Oh!" he exclaimed, in a long-drawn whisper; and he looked at Joan with
incredulity and hatred. "You----" he used some Spanish word which Joan
did not catch. It would have told her little if she had caught it. It
was "Cabron," a harmless, inoffensive word which has become in Spain the
ultimate low word of abuse. "You have laid a trap for me."

Joan answered him in a bewilderment. "I have laid no trap for you," and
there was so much scorn and contempt in her voice that Escobar could
hardly disbelieve her.

But he was shaken. He was in a panic. He was in a haste to go.
Money--yes. But you must live in order to enjoy it.

"I will give you a day to think over my proposal," he said, stammering
the words in his haste. And then, "Don't write to me! I will find a
means," and, almost before she was aware of his movements, he had
snatched up his cap, and the room was empty. The curtain was torn aside;
the glass door stood open; beyond it the garden lay white in the light
of the moon.

"A trap?" Joan repeated his accusation in a perplexity. She turned and
she saw the door, the door behind her, which Escobar had faced, the door
into the hall, slowly open. There had been no turning of the handle, it
was unlatched before. Yet Joan had seen to it that it was shut before
ever she beckoned Mario Escobar into the room. Some one, then, had been
listening. Mario Escobar had seen the handle move, the door drawn ajar.
Joan saw it open now to its full width, and in the entrance Stella
Croyle.




CHAPTER XXVI

A FATAL KINDNESS


Joan picked up her cloak and arranged it upon her shoulders. She did not
give one thought to Stella, or even hear the words which Stella began
nervously to speak. Her secret appointment would come to light now in
any case. It would very likely cost her--oh, all the gold and glamour of
the world. It would be bandied about in gossip over the tea-tables, in
the street, at the Clubs, in the Press. Sir Chichester ought to be
happy, at all events. The thought struck her with a wry humour, and
brought a smile to her lips. He would accomplish his dream. Without
effort, without a letter or a telephone call, or a rebuff, he would have
such publicity as he could hardly have hoped for. "Who is that?" Joan
made up a little scene. "That? Oh, don't you know? That's Sir Chichester
Splay. You must have heard of Sir Chichester! Why, it was in his house
that the Whitworth girl, rather pretty but an awful fool, carried on
with the spy-man."

Joan was a little overstrung. All the while she was powdering her nose
in front of a mirror and removing as best she could the traces of tears,
and all the while Mrs. Croyle was stammering words and words and words
behind her. Joan regretted that Stella was not going to the Willoughbys'
ball. If she had been, she would probably be carrying some rouge in her
little hand-bag, and Joan might have borrowed some.

"Well, since you haven't got any with you, I must go," said Joan,
bursting suddenly into Stella's monologue. But she had caught a name
spoken just before Stella stopped in her perplexity at Joan's outbreak.

"Harry Luttrell!" Joan repeated. What in the world had Stella Croyle got
to say to her about Harry Luttrell? But Stella resumed her faltering
discourse and the sense of her words penetrated at last to Joan's brain
and amazed her.

Joan was to leave Harry Luttrell alone.

"You are quite young," said Stella, "only twenty. What does he matter to
you? You have everything in front of you. With your looks and your
twenty years you can choose where you will. You have lovers already----"

"I?" Joan interrupted.

"Mario Escobar."

Joan repeated the name with such a violence of scorn that for a moment
Stella Croyle was silenced.

"Mario Escobar!"

"He was here with you a moment ago."

Joan answered quietly and quite distinctly:

"I wish he were dead!"

Stella Croyle fell back upon her first declaration.

"You must leave my Wub alone."

Joan laughed aloud, harshly and without any merriment. She checked
herself with an effort lest she should go on laughing, and her laughter
turn uncontrollably into hysteria and tears. Here was Mrs. Croyle, a
grown woman, standing in front of her like a mutinous obstinate child,
looking like one too, talking like one and bidding Joan leave her Wub
alone. Whence did she get that ridiculous name? It was all degrading and
grotesque.

"Your Wub! Your Wub!" she cried in a heat. "Yes, I am only twenty, and
probably I am quite wrong and stupid. But it seems to me horrible that
we two women should be wrangling over a man neither of us had met a week
ago. I'll have no more of it."

She flung towards the window, but Stella Croyle cried out, "A week ago!"
and the cry brought her to a stop. Joan turned and looked doubtfully at
Mrs. Croyle. After all, that ridiculous label had not been pasted on to
Harry Luttrell as a result of a week's acquaintance. Harry Luttrell had
certainly talked to Stella through the greater part of an evening, his
first evening in the house, but they had hardly been together at all
since then. Joan came back slowly into the room.

"So you knew Colonel Luttrell before this week?"

"We were great friends a few years ago."

It was disturbing to Joan that Harry Luttrell had never spoken to her of
this friendship. Was it possible that Stella had a claim upon him of
which she herself knew nothing? She sat down at a table in front of Mrs.
Croyle.

"Tell me," she said.

Once, long ago, upon the deck of the _Dragonfly_ at Stockholm, Stella
had cried out to Harry Luttrell, "Oh, what a cruel mistake you made when
you went out of your way to be kind!" Joan was now to hear how that cry
had come to be uttered by a woman in the nethermost distress. She knew,
of course, that Stella was married at the age of seventeen and had been
divorced, but little more than that.

"There was a little girl," said Stella, "my baby. I lost her."

She spoke very simply. She had come to the end of efforts and schemes,
and was very tired. Joan's anger died away altogether in her heart.

"Oh, I am very sorry," she replied. "I didn't know that you had a little
girl."

"Yes. Look, here is her portrait." Stella Croyle drew out from her bosom
a locket which hung night and day against her heart, and showed it to
Joan across the table. "But I don't know whether she is little any more.
She is thirteen now."

Joan gazed at the painted miniature of a lovely child with the eyes and
the hair of Stella Croyle.

"And you lost her altogether?" she asked with a rising pity.

"Not at first," answered Stella. "I was allowed by the Court to have her
with me for one month in every year. And I lived the other eleven months
for the one, the wonderful one."

Stella's face softened indescribably. The memory of her child did for
her what all her passion for Harry Luttrell could not do. It restored
her youth. Her eyes grew tender, her mouth quivered, the look of
conflict vanished altogether.

"We had good times together, my baby and I. I took her to the sea. It
sounds foolish, but we were more like a couple of children together than
mother and daughter"; and Joan, looking at the delicate, porcelain-like
figure in front of her, smiled in response.

"Yes, I can understand that."

"She was with me every minute," Stella Croyle resumed. "I watched her
so, I gave her so much of me that when I had seen her off at the station
with her nurse at the end of the month, I was left behind, as weak and
limp as an invalid. I lived for her, Joan, believe that at all events in
my favour! There was no one else."

"I do believe it."

"Then one year in the winter she did not come to me."

"They kept her back!" cried Joan. "But you had the right to her."

"Yes. And I went down to Exeter to her father's house, to fetch her
away."

It was curious that Stella Croyle, who was speaking of her own
distressful life, told her story with a quiet simplicity of tone, as if
she had bent her neck in submission to the hammer strokes of her
destiny; whereas Joan, who was but listening to griefs of another, was
stirred to a compassion which kindled her face and made her voice shake.

"Oh, they hadn't sent her away! She was waiting for you," she cried
eagerly.

"She was waiting for me. Yes! But it was no longer my baby who was
waiting. They had worked on her, Robert, my husband--and his sisters.
They had told her--oh, more than they need! That I was bad."

"Oh!" breathed Joan.

"Yes, they were a little cruel. They had changed baby altogether. She
was just eight at that time." Stella stopped for a moment or two. Her
voice did not falter but her eyes suddenly swam with tears. "She used to
adore me--she really and truly did. Now her little face and her eyes
were like flint. And what do you think she said to me? Just this!
'Mummy, I don't want to go with you. If you take me with you, you'll
spoil my holidays!'"

Joan shot back in her chair.

"But they had taught her to say that?"

Stella Croyle shook her head.

"They had taught her to dislike me. My little girl has character. She
wouldn't have repeated the words, because she had been taught them. No,
she meant them."

"But a day or two with you and she would have forgotten them. Oh, she
_did_ forget them!"

In her great longing to comfort the woman, whose deep anguish she
divined beneath the quiet desolation of her voice, Joan overleapt her
own knowledge. She was still young enough to will that past events had
not occurred, and that things true were false.

"I didn't take her," replied Stella Croyle. "I wouldn't take her. I knew
baby--besides she had struck me too hard."

"You came away alone!" whispered Joan.

"In the cab which I had kept waiting at the door to take us both away."

"That's terrible!" said Joan. The child with her lovely face set like
flint in the room, the mother creeping out of the house and stumbling
alone into the fly at the door--the picture was vivid before her eyes.
Joan wrung her hands with a little helpless gesture, and a moan upon her
lips. Almost it seemed that these sad things were actually happening to
_her_; so poignantly she felt them.

"Oh, and you had all that long journey back to London, the journey you
had dreamt of for eleven months with your baby at your side--you had now
to take it alone."

Stella Croyle shook her head.

"No! There was just one and only one of my friends--and not at all a
great friend--who had the imagination to understand, as you understand
too, Joan, just what that journey would have meant to me, if anything
had gone wrong, and the kindness to put himself out to make its
endurance a little easier."

Joan drew back quickly.

"Harry Luttrell," she whispered.

"Yes. He had once been stationed at Exeter. He knew Robert Croyle and
the sisters. He guessed what might happen to me. Perhaps he knew that it
was going to happen."

So, when Stella, having pulled down her veil that none might see her
face, was stumbling along the platform in search of an empty carriage,
a hand was very gently laid upon her and Harry Luttrell was at her side.
He had come all the way from London to befriend her, should she need it.
If he had seen her with her little girl, he would have kept out of sight
and himself have returned to London by a later train.

"That was fine," cried Joan.

"Fine, yes!" answered Stella. "You realise that, Joan, and you have
never been in real trouble, or known what men are when kindness
interferes with their comfort. I am not blaming people, but women do get
the worst of it, if they are fools enough--wicked enough if you like, to
do as I did. I knew men--lots of them. I was bound to. I was fair game,
you see."

Joan's forehead wrinkled. The doors of knowledge had been opening very
rapidly for her during the last few minutes. But she was still often at
a loss.

"Fair game. Why? I don't understand."

"I had been divorced. Therefore I wasn't dangerous. Complications
couldn't follow from a little affair with me." Stella explained
bitterly. "I had men on my doorstep always. But not one of these men who
protested and made love to me, would have put themselves out to do what
Harry Luttrell did. It was fine--yes. But for three years I have been
wondering whether Harry Luttrell would not really have been kinder if he
had thought of his own comfort too, and had never travelled to Exeter to
befriend me."

"Why?" asked Joan.

"I should have thrown myself out of the carriage and saved myself--oh,
so much sorrow afterwards," Stella Croyle answered in so simple and
natural a voice that Joan could not disbelieve her.

Joan clasped her hands before her eyes and then gazed again at Stella
sitting in front of her, with pity and wonder. It was so hard for her to
understand that this pretty woman, who made it her business to be gay,
whom she had met from time to time in this house and had chatted with
and forgotten, had passed through so dreadful an ordeal of suffering and
humiliation. She was to look closer still into the mysteries which were
being revealed to her.

Harry Luttrell had held Stella in his arms just as if she had been a
child herself whilst the train rushed through the bleak winter country.
Stella had behaved like a child, now sobbing in a passion of grief, now
mutinous in a passion of rage, now silent and despairing under the
weights that nothing, neither sympathy, nor grief, nor revolt, can lift.

"He took me home. He stayed with me. Oh, it wasn't love," cried Stella.
"He was afraid."

"Afraid!" asked Joan. She wished to know every least detail of the story
now.

"Afraid lest I should take--something ... as I wished to do ... as
during the trouble of the divorce I learned to do."

She related little ridiculous incidents which Joan listened to with a
breaking heart. Stella could not sleep at all after her return. She
lived in a little house with a big garden on the northern edge of
London, and all night she lay awake, listening to the patter of rain on
melancholy trees, and thinking and thinking. Harry Luttrell kept her
from the drugs in her dressing-case. She had no anodyne for her
sorrows--but one.

"You will laugh," said Stella with a little wry smile of her own, "when
I tell you what it was. It was a gramophone. I got Harry to set it
going, whilst I lay in bed--to set it playing rag-time. While it was
playing, I stopped thinking. For I had to keep time in my brain with the
beat of the tune. And so, at last, since I couldn't think, or remember,
I fell asleep. The gramophone saved me"; and again Joan was smitten by
the incongruity of Stella with her life. She had eaten of all that
nature allots to women--love, marriage, the birth of children, the loss
of them--and there she was, to this day half-child, and quite
incompatible with what she had suffered and endured.

"After a fortnight I got quieter of course," said Stella. "And suddenly
a change sadder than anything I have told you took place in me. I
suppose that I had gone through too much on baby's account for me. I
lost something more than my baby, I lost my want to have her with me."

She remained silent for a little while reviewing the story which she had
told.

"There, that's all," she said, rising suddenly. "It's no claim at all,
of course. I know that very well. Harry left me at Stockholm four years
ago;" and suddenly Joan's face flushed scarlet. She had been absorbed in
Stella's sorrows, she had admired that kind action of Harry Luttrell's
which had brought so much trouble in its train. It needed that reminder
that Harry had only left Stella Croyle at Stockholm to bring home the
whole part which Harry had taken in the affair. Now she understood; a
flame of sudden jealousy confused her; and with it came a young girl's
distaste as though some ugly reptile had raised its head amongst
flowers.

"I never saw Harry again until this week, except for a minute outside a
shop one morning in Piccadilly. But he hasn't married during those four
years, so I always kept a hope that we should be somewhere together
again for a few days, and that afterwards he would come back to me."

"That's why you chose this week to come to Rackham Park?"

"Yes," answered Stella Croyle; and she laughed harshly. "But I hadn't
considered you."

Joan looked helplessly at her companion. Stella had not one small chance
of the fulfilment of her hope--no, not one--even if she herself stood a
million miles away. Of that Joan was sure. But how was she to say so to
one who was blind and deaf to all but her hope, who would not listen,
who would not see? Mario Escobar had left his gloves behind him on a
couch. Joan saw them, and remembered to whom they belonged, and her
thoughts took another complexion. Harry Luttrell! What share had she now
in his life? She rose abruptly and pushed back her chair.

"Oh, I'll stand aside," she said, "never fear! We are to talk things
over to-night. I shall say 'No.'"

She had turned again to the window, but a startled question from Stella
Croyle stayed her feet.

"Harry has asked you to marry him?"

"He was going to," Joan faltered. The sense of her own loss returned
upon her, she felt utterly alone, all the more alone because of the
wondrous week which had come to so desolate an end to-night. "Here in
this little room, not two hours ago. But I asked him to wait until
supper time to-night. Here--it was here we stood!"

Joan looked down. Yes, she had been standing in this very spot, the
table here upon her left, that chair upon her right, that trifolium in
the pattern of the carpet under her feet, when Harry Luttrell had taken
her in his arms. What foolish thing was Stella Croyle saying now?

"I take back all that I have said to you. If Harry has spoken to you
already I have lost--that's all. I didn't know," she said. Her cheeks
were white, her eyes suddenly grown large with a horror in them which
Joan could not understand.

"Yes, it's all over. I have lost," she kept repeating in a dreadful
whisper, moistening her dry lips with her tongue between her sentences.

"Oh, don't think that I am standing aside out of pity," Joan answered
her. "To-morrow I shall be impossible as a wife for Harry Luttrell." The
words fell upon ears which did not hear. It would not have mattered if
Stella had heard. Since Harry Luttrell was that night asking Joan to
marry him, the hopes upon which she had so long been building, which
Jenny Prask had done so much to nurse and encourage, withered and
crumbled in an instant.

"I must go back and dance," said Joan with a shiver.

She left Stella Croyle standing in the room like one possessed with
visions of terrible things. Her tragic face and moving lips were to
haunt Joan for many a month afterwards. She went out by the window and
ran down the drive to the spot where she had left Miranda's car half-way
between the lodge and the house. The gates had been set open that night
against the return of the party from Harrel. Joan drove back again under
the great over-arching trees of the road. It was just ten o'clock when
she slipped into the ball-room and was claimed by a neighbour for a
dance.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE RANK AND FILE


Martin Hillyard crammed a year's enjoyment into the early hours of that
night. He danced a great deal and had supper a good many times; and even
the girl who had passed the season of 1914 in London and said languidly,
"Tell me more," before he had opened his mouth, failed to ruffle his
enjoyment.

"If I did, you would scream for your mother," he replied, "and I should
be turned out of the house and Sir Chichester would lose his position in
the county. No, I'll tell you less. That means we'll go and have some
supper."

He led a subdued maiden into the supper-room and from that moment his
enjoyment began to wane. For, at a little table near to hand, sat Joan
Whitworth and Harry Luttrell, and it was clear to him from the distress
upon their faces that their smooth courtship had encountered its
obstacles. A spot of anger, indeed, seemed to burn in Joan's cheeks.
They hardly spoke at all.

Half an hour later, he came face to face with Joan in a corridor.

"I have been looking for you for a long while," she cried in a quick,
agitated voice. "Are you free for this dance?"

"Yes."

Martin Hillyard lied without compunction.

"Then will you take me into the garden?"

He found a couple of chairs in a corner of the terrace out of the
hearing of the rest.

"We shall be quiet here," he said. He hoped that she would disclose the
difficulty which had risen between herself and Harry, and seek his
counsel as Harry's friend. It might be one of the little trifling
discords which love magnifies until they blot out the skies and drape
the earth in temporary mourning. But Joan began at once nervously upon
a different topic.

"You made a charge against Mario Escobar the other day. I did not
believe it. But you spoke the truth. I know that now."

She stopped and gazed woefully in front of her. Then she hurried on.

"I can prove it. He demands news of your movements in the Mediterranean.
If it is necessary I must come forward publicly and prove it. It will be
horrible, but of course I will."

Martin looked at her quickly. She kept her eyes averted from him. Her
fingers plucked nervously at her dress. There was an aspect of shame in
her attitude.

"It will not be necessary, Joan," he answered. "I have quite enough
evidence already to put him away until the end of the war."

Joan turned to him with quivering lips.

"You are sure. It means so much to me to escape--what I have no right to
escape, I can hardly believe it."

"I am quite sure," replied Martin Hillyard.

Joan breathed a long, fluttering sigh of relief. She sat up as though a
weight had been loosed from her shoulders. The trouble lifted from her
face.

"You need not call upon me at all?"

"No."

"I don't want to shirk--any more," she insisted. "I should not
hesitate."

"I know that, Joan," he said with a smile. She looked out over the
gardens to the great line of hills, dim and pleasant as fairyland in the
silver haze of the moonlight. Her eyes travelled eastwards along the
ridge and stopped at the clump of Bishop's Ring which marks the crest of
Duncton Hill, and the dark fold below where the trees flow down to
Graffham.

"You ask me no questions," she said in a low, warm voice. "I am very
grateful."

"I ask you one. Where is Mario Escobar to-night?"

"At Midhurst," and she gave him the name of the hotel.

Martin Hillyard laughed. Whilst the police were inquiring here and
searching there and watching the ports for him, he was lying almost
within reach of his hand, snugly and peacefully at Midhurst.

"But I expect that he will go from Midhurst now," Joan added,
remembering his snarl of fear when the door had opened behind her, and
the haste with which he had fled.

Hillyard looked at his watch. It was one o'clock in the morning.

"You are in a hurry?" she asked.

"I ought to send a message." He turned to Joan. "You know this house, of
course. Is there a telephone in a quiet room, where I shall not be
interrupted or be drowned out, voice and ears by the music?"

"Yes, Mrs. Willoughby's sitting-room upstairs. Shall I ask her if you
may use it?"

"If you please."

Joan left Martin standing in one of the corridors and rejoined him after
a few minutes. "Come," she said, and led the way upstairs to the room.
Martin called up the trunk line and gave a number.

"I shall have to wait a few minutes," he said.

"You want me to go," answered Joan, and she moved towards the door
reluctantly.

"No. But you will be missing your dances."

Joan shook her head. She did not turn back to him, but stood facing the
door as she replied; so that he could not see her face.

"I had kept all the dances after supper free. If I am not in the way I
would rather wait with you."

"Of course."

He was careful to use the most commonplace tone with the thought that it
would steady her. The trouble which this telephone message would finally
dispel was clearly not all which distressed her. She needed
companionship; her voice broke, as though her heart were breaking too.
He saw her raise a wisp of handkerchief to her eyes; and then the
telephone bell rang at his side. He was calling at a venture upon the
number which Commodore Graham had rung up in the office above the old
waterway of the Thames.

"Is that Scotland Yard?" he asked, and he gave the address at which
Mario Escobar was to be found. "But he may be gone to-morrow," he added,
and hearing a short "That's all right," he rang off.

"Now, if you will get your cloak, we might go back into the garden."

They found their corner of the terrace unoccupied and sat for a while in
silence. Hillyard recognised that neither questions nor any conversation
at all were required from him, but simply the sympathy of his
companionship. He smoked a cigarette while Joan sat by his side.

She stretched out her hand towards the Bishop's Ring, small as a button
upon the great shoulder of the Down.

"Do you remember the afternoon when I drove you back from Goodwood?"

"Yes."

"You said to me, 'If the great trial is coming, I want to fall back into
the rank and file.' And I cried out, 'Oh, I understand that!'"

"I remember."

"What a fool I was!" said Joan. "I didn't understand at all. I thought
that it sounded fine, and that was why I applauded. I am only beginning
to understand now. Even after I had agreed with you, my one ambition was
to be different."

Her voice died remorsefully away. From the window further down the
terrace the yellow light poured from the windows and fought with the
moonlight. The music of a waltz floated out upon the yearning of many
violins. There was a ripple of distant voices.

"All this week," Joan began again, "I have found myself standing
unexpectedly in a strong light before a mirror and utterly scared by the
revelation of what I was ... by the memory of the foolish things which I
had done. From one of the worst of them, you have saved me to-night. You
are very kind to me, Martin."

It was the first time he had ever heard her use his Christian name.

"I should like to be kinder, if you'll let me," he said. "I am not
blind. I was in the supper-room when you and Harry were there. It was
for him that you had kept all the last dances free. And you are here,
breaking your heart. Why?"

Joan shook her head. A little sob broke from her against her will. But
this matter was between her and Harry Luttrell. She sought no counsel
from any other.

"Then I am very grieved for both of you," said Hillyard. Joan made a
movement as if she were about to rise. "Will you wait just a moment?"
Martin asked.

He guessed that some hint of Stella Croyle's story had reached the
girl's ears. He understood that she would be hurt, and affronted; that
she would feel herself suddenly steeped in vulgarities; and that she
would visit her resentment sharply upon her lover, and upon herself at
the same time. And all this was true. But Martin was not sure of it. He
meant to tread warily, lest if he stumbled, the harm should be the more
complete.

"I have known Harry Luttrell a long while," he said. "No woman ever
reached his heart until he came home from France this summer. No woman I
believe, could have reached it--not even you, Joan, I believe, if you
had met him a year ago. He was possessed by one great shame and one
great longing--shame that the regiment with which he and his father were
bound up, had once disgraced itself--longing for the day to come when it
would recover its prestige. Those two emotions burnt in him like white
flames. I believe no other could have lived beside them."

Joan would not speak, but she concentrated all her senses to listen. A
phrase which Stella Croyle had used--Harry had feared to become "the
slovenly soldier"--began to take on its meaning.

"On the Somme the shame was wiped out. Led by such men as Harry--well,
you know what happened. Harry Luttrell came home freed at last from an
overwhelming obsession. He looked about him with different eyes, and
there you were! It seems to me a thing perfectly ordained, as so few
things are. I brought him down here just for a pleasant week in the
country--without another thought beyond that. All this week I have been
coming to think of myself as an unconscious agent, who just at the right
time is made to do the right thing. Here was the first possible moment
for Harry Luttrell--and there you were in the path--just as if you
without knowing it, had been set there to wait until he came over the
fields to you."

He turned to her and took her hand in his. He had his sympathies for
Stella Croyle, but her hopes held no positive promise of happiness for
either her or Harry Luttrell--a mere flash and splutter of passion at
the best, with all sorts of sordid disadvantages to follow, quarrels,
the scorn of his equals, the loss of position, the check to advancement
in his profession. Here, on the other hand, was the fitting match.

"It would be a great pity," he said gently, "if anything were now to
interfere."

He stood up and after a moment Joan rose to her feet. There was a tender
smile upon her lips and her eyes were shining. She laid a hand upon his
arm.

"I shall have to get you a wife, Martin," she said, midway between
laughter and tears. "It wouldn't be fair on us if you were to escape."

This was her way of thanking him.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE LONG SLEEP


The amazing incident which cut so sharply into these tangled lives
occurred the next morning at Rackham Park. Some of the house party
straggled down to a late breakfast, others did not descend at all. Harry
Luttrell joined Millie Splay upon the stairs and stopped her before she
entered the breakfast-room.

"I should like to slip away this morning, Lady Splay," he said. "My
servant is packing now."

Millie Splay looked at him in dismay.

"Oh, I am so sorry," she said. "I was hoping that this morning you and
Joan would have something to say to me."

"I did too," replied Harry with a wry smile. "But Joan turned me down
with a bang last night."

Lady Splay plumped herself down on a chair in the hall.

"Oh, she is the most exasperating girl!" she cried. "Are you sure that
you didn't misunderstand her?"

"Quite."

Lady Splay sat for a little while with her cheek propped upon her hand
and her brows drawn together in a perplexity.

"It's very strange," she said at length. "For Joan meant you to ask her
to marry you. She has been deliberately showing you that you weren't
indifferent to her. Joan would never have done that if she hadn't meant
you to ask her; or if she hadn't meant to accept you." She rose with a
gesture of despair.

"I give it up. But oh, how I'd love to smack her!" and with that
unrealisable desire burning furiously in her breast, Lady Splay marched
into the breakfast-room. Dennis Brown and Jupp were already in their
white flannels at the table. Miranda ran down into the room a moment
afterwards.

"Joan's the lazy one," she said, looking round the table. She had got
to bed at half-past four and looked as fresh as if she had slept the
clock round. "What are you going to eat, Colonel Luttrell?"

Luttrell was standing by her at the side table, and as they inspected
the dishes they were joined by Mr. Albany Todd.

"You were going it last night," Jupp called to him, with a note of
respect in his voice. "For a top-weight you're the hottest thing I have
seen in years. Stay another week in our academic company, and we shall
discover so many excellent qualities in you that we shall be calling you
Toddles."

"And then in the winter, I suppose, we'll go jumping together," said Mr.
Albany Todd.

Like many another round and heavy man, Mr. Albany Todd was an
exceptionally smooth dancer. His first dance on the night before he had
owed to the consideration of his hostess. Sheer merit had filled the
rest of his programme; and he sat down to breakfast now in a high good
humour. Sir Chichester stumped into the room when the serious part of
the meal was over, and all the newspapers already taken. He sat down in
front of his kidney and bacon and grunted.

"Any news in _The Times_, Mr. Albany Todd?"

"No! No!" replied Mr. Albany Todd in an abstracted voice, with his head
buried between the pages. "Would you like it, Sir Chichester?"

He showed no intention of handing it over; and Sir Chichester replied
with as much indifference as he could assume,

"Oh, there's no hurry."

"No, we have all the morning, haven't we?" said Mr. Albany Todd
pleasantly.

Sir Chichester ate some breakfast and drank some tea. "No news in your
paper is there, Dennis, my boy?" he asked carelessly.

"Oh, isn't there just?" cried Dennis Brown. "Oppifex and Hampstead
Darling are both running in the two-thirty at Windsor."

Sir Chichester grunted again.

"Racing! It's wonderful, Mr. Albany Todd, that you haven't got the
disease during the week. There's a racing microbe at Rackham."

"But I am not so sure that I have escaped," returned Mr. Albany Todd. "I
am tempted to go jumping in the winter."

"You must keep your old Lords out if you do," Harold Jupp urged
earnestly. "Bring in your Dukes and your Marquises, and we poor men are
all up the spout."

Thus they rattled on about the breakfast table; cigarettes were lighted,
Miranda pushed back her chair; in a minute the room would be deserted.
But Millie Splay uttered a little cry of horror, so sharp and startling
that it froze each person into a sudden immobility. She dropped the
newspaper upon her knees. Her hands flew to her face and covered it.

"What's the matter, Millie?" cried Sir Chichester, starting up in alarm.
He hurried round the table. Some stab of physical pain had caused
Millie's cry--he shared that conviction with every one else in the room.
But Millie lifted her head quickly.

"Oh, it's intolerable!" she exclaimed. "Chichester, look at this!" She
thrust the paper feverishly into his hands. Sir Chichester smoothed its
crumpled leaves as he stood beside her.

"Ah, the _Harpoon_," he said, his fear quite allayed. He knew his wife
to have a somewhat thinner skin than himself. "You are exaggerating no
doubt, my dear. The _Harpoon_ is a good paper and quite friendly."

But Millie Splay broke in upon his protestations in a voice as shrill as
a scream.

"Oh, stop, Chichester, and look! There, in the third column! Just under
your eyes!"

And Sir Chichester Splay read. As he read his face changed.

"Yes, that won't do," he said, very quietly. He carried the newspaper
back with him to his chair and sat down again. He had the air of a man
struck clean out of his wits. "That won't do," he repeated, and again,
with a rush of angry blood into his face, "No, that won't do." It seemed
that Sir Chichester's harmless little foible had suddenly received more
than its due punishment.

The newspaper slipped from his fingers on to the floor, whilst he sat
staring at the white tablecloth in front of him. But no sooner did
Harold Jupp at his side make a movement to pick the paper up than Sir
Chichester swooped down upon it in a flash.

"No!" he said. "No!" and he began to fold it up very carefully. "It's as
Millie says, a rather intolerable invention which has crept into the
social news. I must consider what steps we should take."

There was another at that table who was as disturbed as Sir Chichester
and Lady Splay. Martin Hillyard knew nothing of the paragraph which had
caused this consternation in his hosts; and he had asked no questions
last night. But he remembered every word that Joan had said. She had
seen Mario Escobar somewhere since leaving Rackham Park--that was
certain; and Mario Escobar had demanded information. "Demanded" was the
word which Joan had used. Mario Escobar was of the blackmailing type.
Martin's heart was in his mouth.

"An invention about us here?" he asked.

"About one of us," answered Sir Chichester; and Martin dared ask no
more.

Harry Luttrell, however, had none of Martin's knowledge to restrain him.

"In that case, sir, wouldn't it be wiser to read it now, aloud?" he
suggested. "It can't be suppressed now. Sooner or later every one will
hear of it."

Every one agreed except Hillyard. To him Harry Luttrell seemed wilfully
to be rushing towards catastrophe.

"Yes ... yes," said Sir Chichester slowly. He unfolded his newspaper
again and read; and of all those who listened no one was more amazed
than Hillyard himself. Mario Escobar had no hand in this abominable
work. For this is what Sir Chichester read:

"'A mysterious and tragic event has occurred at Rackham Park, where Sir
Chichester Splay, the well-known Baronet----'" He broke off to observe,
"Really, it's put quite civilly, Millie. It's a dreadful mistake, but so
far as the wording of the Editor is concerned it's put really more
considerately than I noticed at first."

"Oh, please go on," cried Millie.

"Very well, my dear," and he resumed--"where Sir Chichester Splay, the
well-known Baronet is entertaining a small party. At an early hour this
morning Mrs. Croyle, one of Sir Chichester's guests, died under strange
circumstances."

Miranda uttered a little scream.

"Died!" she exclaimed.

"Yes, listen to this," said Sir Chichester. "Mrs. Croyle was discovered
lying upon her side with her face bent above a glass of chloroform. The
glass was supported between her pillows and Mrs. Croyle's fingers were
still grasping it when she was discovered."

A gasp of indignation and horror ran round that breakfast table when Sir
Chichester had finished.

"It's so atrociously circumstantial," said Mr. Albany Todd.

"Yes." Sir Chichester seized upon the point. "That's the really damnable
point about it. That's real malice. This report will linger and live
long after the denial and apology are published."

Lady Splay raised her head.

"I can't imagine who can have sent in such a cowardly lie. Enemies of
us? Or enemies of Stella?"

"We can think that out afterwards, Lady Splay," said Harold Jupp. He was
of a practical matter-of-fact mind and every one turned to listen to his
suggestion. "The first thing to do is to get the report contradicted in
the evening papers."

"Of course."

There was something to be done. All grasped at the doing of it in sheer
relief--except one. For as the men rose, saying; one "I'll look after
it"; and another "No, you'd better leave it to me," Luttrell's voice
broke in upon them all, with a sort of dreadful fatality in the quiet
sound of it.

"Where is Mrs. Croyle now?" he asked, and he was as white as the
tablecloth in front of him.

There was no further movement towards the door. Slowly the men resumed
their seats. A silence followed in which person after person looked at
Stella's empty place as though an intensity of gaze would materialise
her there. Miranda was the first bravely to break through it.

"She hasn't come down yet," she said, and Millie Splay seized upon the
words.

"No, she never comes down for breakfast--never has all this week."

"Yes, that's true," returned Dennis Brown with an attempt at
cheerfulness.

"Besides--what makes--the idea--impossible," said Sir Chichester, "is
the publication this morning. There wouldn't have been time.... It's
clearly an atrocious piece of malice." He was speaking with an obvious
effort to convince himself that the monstrous thing was false. But he
collapsed suddenly and once more discomfort and silence reigned in the
room.

"Stella's not well," Millie Splay took up the tale. "That's why she is
seldom seen before twelve. Those headaches of hers----" and suddenly she
in her turn broke off. She leaned forward and pressed the electric bell
upon the tablecloth beside her. That small trivial action brought its
relief, lightened the vague cloud of misgiving which since Luttrell had
spoken, had settled upon all.

"You rang, my lady," said Harper in the doorway.

"Yes, Harper. We were making some plans for a picnic to-day and we
should like to know if Mrs. Croyle will join us. Can you find out from
her maid whether she is awake?"

It was superbly done. There was not a quaver in Lady Splay's voice, not
a sign of agitation in her manner.

"I'll inquire, my lady," replied Harper, and he left the room upon his
errand.

"One thing is certain," Mr. Albany Todd broke in. "I was watching Harper
over your shoulder, Lady Splay. He hasn't seen the paragraph. There's
nothing known of it in the servants' hall."

Sir Chichester nodded, and Millie Splay observed:

"Harper's so imperturbable that he always inspires me with confidence. I
feel that nothing out of the way could really happen whilst he was in
the house." And her attitude of tension did greatly relax as she
thought, illogically enough, of that stolid butler. A suggestion made by
Martin Hillyard set them to work whilst they waited.

"Let us see if the report is in any of the other papers," and all
immediately were busy with that examination--except one again. And that
one again, Harry Luttrell. He sat in his place motionless, his eyes
transfixed upon some vision of horror--as if he _knew_, Martin said to
himself, yes, as if all these questions were futile, as if he _knew_.

But no other newspaper had printed the paragraph. They had hardly
assured themselves of this fact, when Harper once more stood in the
doorway.

"Mrs. Croyle gave orders last night to her maid that she was not to be
disturbed until she rang, my lady," he said.

"And she has not rung?" Millie asked.

"No, my lady."

Miranda suddenly laughed in an odd fashion and swayed in her chair.

"Miranda!" Millie Splay brought her back to her self-control with a
sharp cry of rebuke. Then she resumed to Harper.

"I will take the responsibility of waking Mrs. Croyle. Will you please,
ask her maid to rouse Mrs. Croyle, and inquire whether she will join us
this morning. We shall start at twelve."

"Very well, my lady."

There was no longer any pretence of ease amongst the people seated round
the table. A queer panic passed from one to the other. They were awed by
the imminence of dreadful uncomprehended things. They waited in silence,
like people under a spell, and from somewhere in the house above their
heads, there sounded a loud rapping upon a door. They held their breath,
straining to hear the grate of a key in a lock, and the opening of that
door. They heard only the knocking repeated and repeated again. It was
followed by a sound of hurrying feet.

Jenny Prask ran down the great main staircase, and burst into the
breakfast room, her face mottled with terror, her hand spread above her
heart to still its wild beating.

"My lady! My lady! The door's locked. I can get no answer. I am afraid."

Sir Chichester rose abruptly from his chair. But Jenny Prask had more to
say.

"The key had been removed. My lady, I looked through the keyhole. The
lights are still burning in the room."

"Oh!"

Martin Hillyard had started to his feet. He remembered another time when
the lights had been burning in Stella Croyle's room in the full blaze of
a summer morning. She was sitting at the writing-table then. She had
been sitting there all through the night making meaningless signs and
figures upon the paper and the blotting-pad in front of her. The full
significance of that flight of the unhappy Stella to the little hotel
below the Hog's Back was now revealed to him. But between that morning
and this, there was an enormous difference. She had opened her door then
in answer to the knocking.

"We must get through that door, Lady Splay," he said. Sir Chichester was
already up and about in a busy agitation.

"Yes, to be sure. It's just an ordinary lock. We shall easily find a key
to fit it. I'll take Harper with me, and perhaps, Millie, you will
come."

"Yes, I'll come," said Millie quietly. After her first shock of horror
and surprise when she had first chanced upon the paragraph in the
_Harpoon_, she had been completely, wonderfully, mistress of herself.

"The rest of you will please stay downstairs," said Sir Chichester, as
he removed the key from the door of the room. Jenny Prask was not thus
to be disposed of.

"Oh, my lady, I must go up too!" she cried, twisting her hands together.
"Mrs. Croyle was always very kind to me, poor lady. I must come!"

"She won't keep her head," Sir Chichester objected, who was fast losing
his. But Milly Splay laid her hand upon the girl's arm.

"Yes, you shall come with us, Jenny," she said gently, and the four of
them moved out of the room.

The others followed them as far as the hall, and stood grouped at the
foot of the staircase.

"Miranda, would you like to go out into the air?" Dennis Brown asked
with solicitude of his wife.

"No, dear, I am all right. I--oh, poor woman!" and with a sob she
dropped her face in her hands.

"Hush!" Luttrell called sharply for silence, and a moment afterwards, a
loud shrill scream rent the air like lightning.

Miranda cowered from it.

"Jenny Prask!" said Hillyard.

"Then--then--the news is true," faltered Miranda, and she would have
fallen but for the arm of her husband about her waist.

They waited until Sir Chichester came down the stairs to them. He was
shaken and trembling. He, the spectator of dramas, was now a character
in one most tragically enacted under his own roof.

"The report is true to the letter," he said in a low voice. "Dennis,
will you go for McKerrel, the doctor. You know his house in Midhurst.
Will you take your car, and bring him back. There is nothing more that
we can do until he comes." He stood for a little while by the table in
the hall, staring down at it, and taking particular note of its grain.

"A curious thing," he said. "The key of her room is missing altogether."

To no one did it come at this moment that the disappearance of the key
was to prove a point of vast importance. No one made any comment, and
Sir Chichester fell to silence again. "She looked like a child
sleeping," he said at length, "a child without a care."

Then he sat down and took the newspaper from his pocket. Mr. Albany Todd
suddenly advanced to Harry Luttrell. He had been no less observant than
Martin Hillyard.

"You alone, Colonel Luttrell," he said, "were not surprised."

"I was not," answered Harry frankly. "I was shocked, but not surprised.
For I knew Mrs. Croyle at a time when she was so tormented that she
could not sleep at all. During that time she learnt to take drugs, and
especially that drug in precisely that way that the newspaper
described."

The men drifted out of the hall on to the lawn, leaving Sir Chichester
brooding above the outspread sheets of the _Harpoon_. Here was the
insoluble sinister question to which somehow he had to find an answer.
Stella Croyle died late last night, in the country, at Rackham Park; and
yet in this very morning's issue of the newspaper, her death with every
circumstance and detail was truthfully recorded, hours before it was
even known by anybody in the house itself.

"How can that be?" Sir Chichester exclaimed in despair. "How can it
be?"




CHAPTER XXIX

JENNY PUTS UP HER FIGHT


Stella, the undisciplined! She had flung out of the rank and file, as
long ago Sir Charles Hardiman had put it, and to this end she had come,
waywardness exacting its inexorable price. Harry Luttrell, however, was
not able to lull his conscience with any such easy reflections. He
walked with Martin Hillyard apart in the garden.

"I am to blame," he cried. "I took on a responsibility for Stella when I
went out of my way to do one kind, foolish thing.... Yet, she would have
killed herself if I hadn't--as she has done five years afterwards!... I
couldn't leave her when I had brought her home ... she was in such
misery!... and it couldn't have gone on.... Old Hardiman was right about
that.... It would have ended in a quarrel when unforgivable words would
have been used.... Yet, perhaps, if that had happened she wouldn't have
killed herself.... Oh, I don't know!"

Martin Hillyard had never seen Harry Luttrell so moved or sunk in such
remorse. He did not argue, lest he should but add fuel to this high
flame of self-reproach. Life had become so much easier as a problem with
him, so much inner probing and speculation and worry about small
vanities had been smoothed away since he had been engaged day after day
in a definite service which was building up by a law deduced here, an
inspired formula there, a tradition for its servants. The service, the
tradition, would dissolve and blow to nothing, when peace came again.
Meanwhile there was the worth of traditional service made clear to him,
in an indifference to the little enmities which before would have hurt
and rankled, in a freedom from doubt when decision was needed, above all
in a sort of underlying calm which strengthened as his life became more
turbulently active.

"It's a clear principle of life which make the difference," he said,
hesitating, because to say even so much made him feel a prig. "Stella
just drifted from unhappiness to unhappiness----"

But Harry Luttrell had no attention to give to him.

"I simply couldn't have gone on," he cried. "It wasn't a question of my
ruin or not.... It was simply beyond me to go on.... There were other
things more powerful.... You know! I once told you on the river above
Kennington Island.... Oh, my God, I am in such a tangle of argument--and
there she is up there--only thirty, and beautiful--such a queer, wayward
kid--'like a child sleeping.'"

He quoted Sir Chichester's phrase, and hurried away from his friend.

"I shall be back in a little while," he muttered. His bad hour was upon
him, and he must wrestle with it alone.

Martin Hillyard returned to the hall, and found Sir Chichester with the
doctor, a short, rugged Scotsman. Dr. McKerrel was saying:

"There's nothing whatever for me to do, Sir Chichester," he said. "The
poor creature must have died somewhere about one o'clock of the
morning." He saw Sir Chichester with a start fall once more to reading
the paragraph in the _Harpoon_, and continued with a warmth of
admiration, "Eh, but those newspaper fellows are quick! I saw the
_Harpoon_ this morning, and it was lucky I did. For I'd ha' been on my
rounds otherwise when that young fellow called for me."

"It was good of you to come so quickly," said Sir Chichester.

"I shall charge for it," replied Dr. McKerrel. "I'll just step round to
the Peace Officer at once, and I'll be obliged if you'll not have that
glass with the chloroform touched again. I have put it aside."

Martin Hillyard was disturbed.

"There will have to be an inquest then?" he asked.

"Aye, but there wull."

"In a case of this kind," Sir Chichester suggested, "it would be better
if it could be avoided."

"But it can't," answered Dr. McKerrel bluntly. "And for my part, I tell
you frankly, Sir Chichester, I have no great pity for poor neurotic
bodies like the young lady upstairs. If she had had a little of my work
to do, she would have been too tired in the evening to think about her
worries." He looked at the disconsolate Baronet with a sudden twinkle in
his eye. "Eh, man, but you'll get all the publicity you want over this
case."

Sir Chichester had no rejoinder to the quip; and his unwonted meekness
caused McKerrel to relent. He stopped at the door, and said:

"I'll give you a hint. The coroner can cut the inquest down to the
barest necessary limits, if he has got all the facts clear beforehand.
If he has got to explore in the dark, he'll ask questions here and
questions there, and you never know, nor does he, what he's going to
drag out to light in the end. But let him have it all clear and straight
first! There's only one character I know of, more free from regulations
and limitations and red-tape than a coroner, and that's the
police-sergeant who runs the coroner. Goodday to you."

A telegram was brought to Martin Hillyard whilst McKerrel was yet
speaking; and Hillyard read it with relief. Mario Escobar had been taken
that morning as he was leaving the hotel for the morning train to
London. He was now on his way to an internment camp. So that
complication was smoothed out at all events. He agreed with Sir
Chichester Splay that it would be prudent to carry out McKerrel's
suggestion at once.

"I will make the document out," said Sir Chichester importantly. Give
him a little work which set him in the limelight as the leader of the
Chorus, and nothing could keep down his spirits. He took a sheet of
foolscap, a blotting pad, a heavy inkstand, and a quill pen--Sir
Chichester never used anything but a quill pen--to the big table in the
middle of the hall, and wrote in a fair, round hand:

"The case of Mrs. Croyle."

and looked at his work and thought it good.

"It looks quite like a _cause celebre_, doesn't it?" he said buoyantly.
But he caught Martin Hillyard's eye, and recovered his more becoming
despondency. Harry Luttrell came in as the baronet settled once more to
his task. He laid a shining key upon the table and said:

"I found this upon the lawn. It looked as if it might be the key of Mrs.
Croyle's room."

It was undoubtedly the key of a door. "We'll find out," said the
baronet. Harper was sent for and commissioned to inquire. He returned in
a few minutes.

"Yes, sir, it is the key of Mrs. Croyle's room." He laid it upon the
table and went out of the room.

"I suppose it is then," said Harry Luttrell. "But I am a little
puzzled."

"Oh?"

"It wasn't lying beneath Mrs. Croyle's window as one might have
expected. But at the east side of the house, below the corridor, and
almost in front of the glass door of the library."

Both of his hearers were disturbed. Sir Chichester took up the key, and
twisted it this way and that, till it flashed like a point of fire in
the sunlight; as though under such giddy work it would yield up its
secret for the sake of peace. He flung it on the table again, where it
rattled and lay still.

"I can't make head or tail of it," Sir Chichester cried. Martin Hillyard
opened his mouth to speak and thought better of it. He could not falter
in his belief that Stella had destroyed herself. The picture of her that
morning in Surrey, with the lamps burning in her room and the bed
untouched, was too vivid in his memory. What she had tried to do two
years ago, she had found the courage to do to-day.

That was sure. But it was not all. There was some one in the shadows who
meant harm, more harm than was already accomplished. There was
malevolence at work. The discovery of the key in that position far from
Stella's window assured him of it. The aspect of the key itself as it
lay upon the table made the assurance still more sure. But whom was this
malevolence to hurt? And how? At what moment would the hand behind the
curtain strike? And whose hand would it be? These were questions which
locked his lips tight. It was for him to watch and discover, for he
alone overlooked the battle-field, and if he failed, God help his
friends at Rackham Park. Mario Escobar? Mario Escobar could at all
events do no harm now.

Sir Chichester explained to Harry Luttrell Dr. McKerrel's suggestion.

"Just a clear, succinct statement of the facts. The witnesses, and what
each one knows and is ready to depose. I shall put the statement before
the coroner, who is a very good fellow, and we shall escape with as
little scandal as possible. Now, let me see----" Sir Chichester put on
his glasses. "The most important witness, of course, will be Stella's
maid."

Sir Chichester rang the bell, and in answer to his summons Jenny came
down the stairs. Her eyes were red with weeping and she was very pale.
But she bore herself steadily.

"You wanted me, sir?" she asked. Her eyes travelled from one to the
other of the three men in the hall. They rested for a little moment
longer upon Harry Luttrell than upon the rest; and it seemed to Hillyard
that as they rested there they glittered strangely, and that the ghost
of a smile flickered about her mouth.

"Yes," said Sir Chichester, pompously. "You understand that there will
have to be an inquiry into the cause of Mrs. Croyle's death; and one
wants for the sake of everybody, your dead mistress more than any one,
that there should be as little talk as possible."

Jenny's voice cut in like ice.

"Mrs. Croyle had no reason that I know of to fear the fullest inquiry."

"Quite so! Quite so!" returned Sir Chichester, shifting his ground. "But
it will save time if we get the facts concisely together."

Jenny stepped forward, and stood at the end of the table opposite to the
baronet.

"I am quite willing, sir," she said respectfully, "to answer any
question now or at any time"; and throughout the little interrogatory
which followed she never once changed from her attitude of respect.

"Your name first."

"Jenny Prask," and Sir Chichester wrote it down.

"You have been Mrs. Croyle's maid for some time."

"For three and a half years, sir."

"Good!" said Sir Chichester, with the air of one who by an artful
question has elicited a most important piece of evidence.

"Now!" But now he fumbled. He had come to the real examination, and was
at a loss how to begin. "Yes, now then, Jenny!" and again he came to a
halt.

Whilst Jenny waited, her eyes once glittered strangely under their
half-dropped lids; and Martin Hillyard followed the direction of their
gaze to the door-key lying upon the table beside Sir Chichester's hand.

"Jenny," said Sir Chichester, who had at last formulated a question.
"You informed us that Mrs. Croyle instructed you last night not to call
her until she rang. That, no doubt, was an unusual order for her to
give."

"No, sir."

Sir Chichester leaned back in his chair.

"Oh, it wasn't?"

"No, sir."

Sir Chichester looked a little blank. He cast about for another line of
examination.

"You are aware, of course, Jenny, that your mistress was in the habit of
taking drugs--chloroform especially."

"Never, sir," answered Jenny.

"You weren't aware of it?" exclaimed Sir Chichester.

"She never took them."

Harry Luttrell made a little movement. He stared in perplexity at Jenny
Prask, who did not once remove her calm and respectful eyes from Sir
Chichester Splay. She waited in absolute composure for the next
question. But the question took a long time to formulate. Sir Chichester
had framed no interrogatory in a sequence; whereas Jenny's answers were
pat, as though, sitting by the bed whereon her dead mistress lay, she
had thought out the questions which might be asked of her and got her
answers ready. Sir Chichester began to get flurried. At every conjecture
which he expressed, Jenny Prask slammed a door in his face.

"But you told me----" he cried, turning to Harry Luttrell and so broke
off. "Are you speaking the truth, Jenny?"

Suddenly Jenny's composure broke up. The blood rushed into her face. She
shouted violently:

"I swear it! If it was my last dying word, I do! Chloroform indeed!" She
became sarcastic. "What an idea! Just fancy!"

Sir Chichester threw down his pen. He was aghast before the conclusion
to which his examination was leading him.

"But, if Stella didn't put that glass of chloroform between her
pillows--herself--of her own accord--why then, whilst she was
asleep----" He would not utter the inevitable induction. But it was
clear enough, hideous enough to all of them. Why then, whilst she was
asleep, some one entered the room, placed the chloroform where its
deadly fumes would do their work, locked her door upon her and tossed
the key out on to the lawn. A charge of murder--nothing less.

"Don't you see what you are suggesting, Jenny," Sir Chichester
spluttered helplessly.

"I am suggesting nothing, sir," the maid answered stolidly. "I am
answering questions."

She was lying, of course! Hillyard had not a doubt of it. Jenny Prask
was the malevolent force of which he was in search. So much had, at all
events, sprung clear from Sir Chichester's blunderings. And some hint,
too, of the plan which malevolence had formed--not more than a hint!
That Jenny Prask intended to sustain a charge of murder Martin did not
believe. She was of too strong a brain for that folly. But she had some
clear purpose to harm somebody; and Martin's heart sank as he
conjectured who that some one might, nay must, be. Meanwhile, he
thought, let Sir Chichester pursue his questioning. He got glimpses
through that clouded medium into Jenny Prask's mind.

"You must realise, Jenny, the unfortunate position into which your
answers are leading you," said Sir Chichester with a trace of bluster.

Hillyard could have laughed. As if she didn't realise exactly the drift
and meaning of every word which she uttered. Jenny was not at all
perturbed by Sir Chichester's manner. Her face took on a puzzled look.

"I don't understand, sir."

"No? Let me make it clear! If your mistress never took drugs, if she did
not place the glass of chloroform in the particular position which would
ensure her death, then, since you, her maid, were alone in this part of
the house with her and were the last person to see her alive----"

"No, sir," Jenny Prask interrupted.

Sir Chichester stared. He was more and more out of his depth, and these
were waters in which expert swimming was required.

"I don't understand. Do you say that somebody saw Mrs. Croyle after she
had dismissed you for the night?"

"Yes, sir."

"Will you please explain?"

The explanation was as simple as possible. Jenny had first fetched a
book for her mistress from the library, before the house-party left for
the ball. She then had supper and went to Mrs. Croyle's room. It was
then about half-past nine, so far as she could conjecture. Her mistress,
however, was not ready for bed, and dismissed Jenny, saying that she
would look after herself. Jenny thereupon retired to her own bedroom and
wrote a letter. After writing it, she remembered that she had not put
out the distilled water which Mrs. Croyle was in the habit of using for
her toilet. She accordingly returned to Mrs. Croyle's bedroom, and to
her surprise found it empty. She waited for a quarter of an hour, and
then becoming uneasy, went downstairs into the hall. She heard her
mistress and some one else talking in the library. Their voices were
raised a little as though they were quarrelling.

"Quarrelling!" Sir Chichester Splay cried out the word in dismay. His
hand flapped feebly on the table. "I am afraid to go on.... What do you
think, Hillyard? I am afraid to go on...."

"We must go on," said Luttrell quietly. He was very white. Did he guess
what was coming, Hillyard wondered? At all events he did not falter. He
took the business of putting questions altogether out of his host's
hands.

"Was the somebody a man or a woman?"

"A woman, sir."

"Did you recognise her voice?"

"Yes, sir."

"Who was it?"

"Miss Whitworth."

Harry Luttrell nodded his head as if he had, during these last minutes,
come to expect that answer and no other. But Sir Chichester rose up in
wrath and, leaning forward over the table, shook his finger
threateningly at the girl.

"Now you know you are not speaking the truth. Miss Whitworth was at
Harrel last night with the rest of us."

"Yes, sir, but she came back to Rackham Park almost at once," said
Jenny; and Harry Luttrell's face showed a sign of anxiety. After all, he
hadn't seen Joan himself in the ball-room until well after ten o'clock.
"I should have known that it was Miss Whitworth even if I had not heard
her voice," and Jenny described how, on fetching Mrs. Croyle's book, she
had seen Joan unlatch the glass door of the library.

Sir Chichester was shaken, but he pushed his blotting-paper here and his
pen there, and pished and tushed like a refractory child.

"And how did she get back? I suppose she ran all the way in her satin
shoes and back again, eh?"

"No, sir, she came back in Mrs. Brown's motor-car. I saw it from my
bedroom window waiting in the drive."

"Ah! Now that we can put to the test, Jenny," cried Sir Chichester
triumphantly. "And we will----" He caught Hillyard's eye as he moved
towards the door in order to summon Miranda from the garden. Hillyard
warned him with an almost imperceptible shake of the head. "Yes, we
will, in our own time," he concluded lamely. His anger burst out again.
"Joan, indeed! We won't have her mixed up in this sordid business, it's
bad enough as it is. But Joan, no! To suggest that Joan came straight
back from the Willoughbys' dance in order to quarrel with a woman whom
she was seeing every day here, and, having quarrelled with her,
afterwards----No, I won't speak the word. It's preposterous!"

"But I don't suggest, sir, that Miss Whitworth came back in order to
quarrel with my mistress," Jenny Prask returned, as soon as Sir
Chichester's spate of words ran down. "I only give you the facts I know.
I am quite sure that Miss Whitworth can quite easily explain why she
came back to Rackham Park last night. There can't be any difficulty
about that!"

Jenny Prask had kept every intonation of her voice under her control.
There was no hint of irony or triumph. She was a respectful lady's maid,
frankly answering questions about her dead mistress. But she did not so
successfully keep sentinel over her looks. She could not but glance from
time to time at Harry Luttrell savouring his trouble and anxiety; and
when she expressed her conviction that Joan could so easily clear up
these mysteries, such a flame of hatred burnt suddenly in her eyes that
it lit Martin Hillyard straight to the heart of her purpose.

"So that's it," he thought, and was terrified as he grasped its reach.
An accusation of murder! Oh, nothing so crude. But just enough
suggestion of the possibility of murder to make it absolutely necessary
that Joan Whitworth should go into the witness box at the coroner's
inquest and acknowledge before the world that she had hurried secretly
back from Harrel to meet Mario Escobar in an empty house. Mario Escobar
too! Of all people, Mario Escobar! Jenny Prask had builded better than
she knew. That telegram which Martin had welcomed with so much relief
but an hour ago taunted him now. The scandal would have been bad enough
if Mario Escobar were nothing more than the shady hunter of women he was
supposed to be. It would be ten times louder now that Mario Escobar had
been interned as a traitor within twelve hours of the secret meeting!

Some escape must be discovered from the peril. Else the mud of it would
cling to Joan all her life. She would be spoilt. Harry Luttrell, too! If
he married her, if he did not. But Martin could not think of a way out.
The whole plan was an artful, devilish piece of hard-headed cunning.
Martin fell to wondering where was Jenny Prask's weak joint. She
certainly looked, with her quiet strength, as if she had not one at all.

To make matters worse, Miranda Brown chose this moment to re-enter the
hall. Sir Chichester, warned already by Martin, threw the warning to the
winds.

"Miranda, you are the very person to help us," he cried. "Now listen to
me, my dear, and don't get flurried. Think carefully, for your answer
may have illimitable consequences! After your arrival at Harrel last
night, did Joan return here immediately in your car?"

Sir Chichester had never been so impressive. Miranda was frightened and
changed colour. But she had given her promise and she kept it pluckily.

"No," she answered.

Jenny Prask permitted herself to smile her disbelief. Sir Chichester was
triumphant.

"Well, there's an end of your pretty story, my girl," he said. "You
wanted to do a little mischief, did you? Well, you haven't! And here, by
a stroke of luck, is Joan herself to settle the matter."

He sat down and once more he drew his sheet of foolscap in front of him.
He could write his clear succinct statement now, write it in "nervous
prose." He was not quite sure what nervous prose actually was, but he
knew it to be the correct medium to use on these occasions.

Meanwhile Joan ran down the stairs.

"I am afraid I have been very lazy this morning," she cried. She saw
Harry Luttrell, she coloured to the eyes, she smiled doubtfully and said
in a little whimsical voice, "We didn't after all, practise in the
passage."

Then, and only then, did she realise that something was amiss. Millie
Splay in her desire to spare her darling the sudden shock of learning
what calamity had befallen the house that night had bidden Joan's maid
keep silence. She herself would break the news. But Millie Splay was
busy with telegrams to Robert Croyle and Stella's own friends, and all
the sad little duties which wait on death; and Joan ran down into the
midst of the debate without a warning.

Martin Hillyard would have given it to her, but Sir Chichester was hot
upon his report.

"Joan, my dear," he said confidently. "There's a little point--not in
dispute really--but--well there's a little point. It has been said that
you came straight back here last night from Harrel?"

Joan's face turned slowly white. She stood with her great eyes fixed
upon Sir Chichester, still as an image, and she did not answer a word.
Harry Luttrell drew in a quick breath like a man in pain. Sir Chichester
was selecting a new pen and noticed nothing.

"It's ridiculous, of course, my dear, but I must put to you the formal
question. Did you?"

"Yes," answered Joan, and the pen fell from Sir Chichester's hand.

"But--but--how did you come back?"

"I borrowed Miranda's car."

Miranda's legs gave under her and she sank down with a moan in a chair.

"But Miranda denies that she lent it," said Sir Chichester in
exasperation.

"I asked her to deny it."

"Why?"

Joan's eyes for one swift instant swept round to Harry Luttrell. She
swayed. Then she answered:

"I can't tell you."

Sir Chichester rose to his feet and tore his sheet of foolscap across.

"God bless my soul!" he said to himself rather than to any of that
company. "God bless my soul!" He moved away from the table. "I think
I'll go and see Millie. Yes! I'll consult with Millie," and he ascended
the stairs heavily, a very downcast and bewildered man. It seemed as
though old age had suddenly found him out, and bowed his shoulders and
taken the spring from his limbs. Something of this he felt himself, for
he was heard to mutter as he passed along the landing to his wife's
sitting-room:

"I am not the man I was. I feel difficulties more"; and so he passed
from sight.

Harry Luttrell turned then to Joan.

"Miss Whitworth," he began and got no further. For the blood rushed up
into the girl's face and she exclaimed in a trembling voice:

"Colonel Luttrell, I trust that you are not going to ask me any
questions."

"Why?" he asked, taken aback by the little touch of violence in her
manner.

"Because, at twelve o'clock last night, I refused you the right to ask
them."

The words were not very generous. They were meant to hurt and they did.
They were meant to put a sharp, quick end to any questioning; and in
that, too, they succeeded. Harry Luttrell bowed his head in assent and
went out into the garden. For a moment afterwards Martin Hillyard, Joan
and Jenny Prask stood in silence; and in that silence once more Martin's
eyes fell upon the key of Stella's room. The earth had moved since the
interrogatory had begun and the sunlight now played upon the key and
transmuted it into a bright jewel. Martin Hillyard stepped forward and
lifted it up. A faint, a very faint light, as from the far end of a long
tunnel began to glimmer in his mind.

"I must think it out," he whispered to himself; and at once the key
filled all his thoughts. He turned to Joan:

"Will you watch, please?" He opened the drawer in the table and laid the
key inside it. Then he closed the drawer and locked it and took the key
of the drawer out of the lock.

"You see, Joan, what I have done? That key is locked in this drawer, and
I hold the key of the drawer. It may be important."

Joan nodded.

"I see what you have done. And now, will you please leave me with Jenny
Prask?"

The smile was very easy to read now in Jenny's face. She could ask
nothing better than to be left alone with Joan.

Martin hesitated.

"I think, Joan, that you ought to see Lady Splay before you talk to any
one," he counselled gently.

"Is everybody going to give me orders in this house?" Joan retorted with
a quiet, dangerous calm.

Martin Hillyard turned and ran swiftly up the stairs. There was but one
thing to do. Lady Splay must be fetched down. But hurry as he might, he
was not in time. For a few seconds Joan and Jenny Prask were alone in
the hall, and all Jenny's composure left her on the instant. She stepped
quickly over to Joan, and in a voice vibrating with hatred and passion,
she hissed:

"But you'll have to say why you came back. You'll have to say who you
came back to see. You'll have to say it publicly too--right there in
court. It'll be in all the papers. Won't you like it, Miss Whitworth?
Just fancy!"

Joan was staggered by the attack. The sheer hatred of Jenny bewildered
her.

"In court?" she faltered. "What do you mean?"

"That Mrs. Croyle died of poison last night in her room," answered
Jenny.

Joan stared at her. "Last night, after we had talked--she killed
herself--oh!" The truth reached her brain and laid a chill hand upon her
heart. She rocked backwards and forwards as she stood, and with a
gasping moan fell headlong to the ground. She had fainted. For a little
while Jenny surveyed her handiwork with triumph. She bent down with a
laugh.

"Yes, it's your turn, you pretty doll. You've got to go through it! You
won't look so young and pretty when they have done with you in the
witness-box. Bah!"

Jenny Prask was a strenuous hater. She drew back her foot to kick the
unconscious girl as she lay at her feet upon the floor. But that insult
Millie Splay was in time to prevent.

"Jenny," she cried sharply from the balustrade of the landing.

Jenny was once more the quiet, respectful maid.

"Yes, my lady. You want me? I am afraid that Miss Whitworth has
fainted."




CHAPTER XXX

A REVOLUTION IN SIR CHICHESTER


Upon that house which had yesterday rung with joyous life now fell gloom
and sorrow and grave disquiet. Millie Splay drew Miranda, Dennis Brown
and Harold Jupp aside.

"You three had better go," she said. "You have such a little time for
holidays now; and I can always telegraph for you if you should be
wanted."

Miranda bubbled into little sympathetic explosions.

"Oh, Millie, I'll stay, of course. These boys can go. But Joan will want
some one."

Millie, however, would not hear of it.

"You're a brick, Miranda. But I have ordered the car for you all
immediately after luncheon. Joan's in bed, and wants to see no one. She
seems heartbroken. She will say nothing. I can't understand her."

There was only one at Rackham Park who did, and to him Millie Splay
turned instinctively.

"I should like you to stay, if you will put up with us. I think
Chichester feels at a loss, and he likes you very much."

"Of course I'll stay," replied Hillyard.

Mr. Albany Todd drifted away to the more congenial atmosphere of a
dowager duchess's dower-house in the Highlands, where it is to be hoped
that his conversational qualities were more brilliantly displayed than
in the irreverent gaiety of Rackham. Millie Splay meant to keep Harry
Luttrell too. She hoped against hope. This was the man for her Joan, and
whether he was wasting his leave miserably in that melancholy house
troubled her not one jot.

"It would be so welcome to me if you would put off your departure," she
said. "I am sure there is some dreadful misunderstanding."

Luttrell consented willingly to stay, and they went into the library,
where Sir Chichester was brooding over the catastrophe with his head in
his hands and the copy of the _Harpoon_ on the floor beside him.

"No, I can't make head or tail of it," he said, and Harper the butler
came softly into the room, closing the door from the hall.

"There's a reporter from the _West Sussex Advertiser_, sir, asking to
see you," he said, and Sir Chichester raised his head, like an old
hunter which hears a pack of hounds giving tongue in the distance.

"Where is he?"

"In the hall, sir."

The baronet's head sank again between his shoulders.

"Tell him that I can't see him," he said in a dull voice.

The butler was the only man in the room who could hear that
pronouncement with an unmoved face, and he owed his imperturbability
merely to professional pride. Indeed, it was almost unthinkable that a
couple of hours could produce so vast a revolution in a man. Here was a
reporter who had come, without being asked, to interview Sir Chichester
Splay, and the baronet would not see him! The incongruity struck Sir
Chichester himself.

"Perhaps it will seem rather impolite, eh, Luttrell? Rather hard
treatment on a man who has come so far? What do you think, Hillyard? I
suppose I ought to see him for a moment--yes." Sir Chichester raised his
voice in a sharp cry which contrasted vividly with the deliberative
sentences preceding it. "Harper! Harper!" and Harper reappeared. "I have
been thinking about it, Harper. The unfortunate man may lose his whole
morning if I don't see him. We all agree that to send him away would be
unkind."

"He has gone, sir."

"Gone?" exclaimed Sir Chichester testily. "God bless my soul! Did he
seem disappointed, Harper?"

"Not so much disappointed, sir, as, if I may utilise a vulgarism, struck
of all a heap, sir."

"That will do, Harper," said Millie Splay, and Harper again retired.

"Struck all of a heap!" said Sir Chichester sadly. "Well he might be!"
He looked up and caught Harry's eye. "They say, Luttrell, that breaking
a habit is only distressing during the first few days. With each refusal
of the mind to yield, the temptation diminishes in strength. I believe
that to be so, Luttrell."

"It is very likely, sir," Harry replied.

Harper seemed to be perpetually in and out of the library that morning.
For he appeared with a little oblong parcel in his hand. Sir Chichester
did not notice the parcel. He sprang up, and with a distinct note of
eager pleasure in his voice, he cried:

"He has come back! Then I really think----"

"No, sir," Harper interrupted. "These are cigarettes."

"Oh, yes," Hillyard stepped forward and took the parcel from the table.
"I had run out, so I sent to Midhurst for a box."

"Oh, cigarettes!" Sir Chichester's voice sagged again. He contemplated
the little parcel swinging by a loop of string from Martin's finger. His
face became a little stern. "That's a bad habit, Hillyard," he observed,
shaking his head. "It will grow on you--nicotine poisoning may supervene
at any moment. You had better begin to break yourself of it at once. I
think so."

"Chichester!" cried Millie Splay. "What in the world are you doing?"

Sir Chichester was gently but firmly removing the parcel from Martin's
hands, whilst Martin himself looked on, paralysed by the aggression.

"A little strength of character, Hillyard.... You saw me a minute
ago.... The first few days, I believe, are trying."

Martin sought to retrieve his cigarettes, but Sir Chichester laid them
aside upon a high mantelpiece, as if Hillyard were a child and could not
reach them.

"No, don't disappoint me, Hillyard! I am sure that you, too, can rise
above a temptation. Why should I be the only one?"

But Hillyard did not answer. Sir Chichester's desire that he should have
a companion in sacrifice set a train of thought working in his mind. In
the hurry and horror of that morning something had been
forgotten--something of importance, something which perhaps, together
with the key locked away in the hall table, might set free Joan's feet
from the net in which they were entangled. He looked at his watch.

"Will you lend me your car, Harry, for a few hours?" he asked suddenly.

"Yes."

"Then I'll go," said Martin. "I will be back this afternoon or evening,
Lady Splay." He went to the door, but was delayed by a box of Corona
cigars upon a small table. "I'll take one of your cigars, Sir
Chichester," he said drily.

"Anything in the house, of course, my boy," began the baronet
hospitably, and pulled himself up. "A very bad habit, Hillyard. You
disappoint me."

A trick of secrecy grows quickly upon men doing the work to which Martin
Hillyard had been assigned during the last two years. Nothing is easier
than to reach a frame of mind which drives you about with your finger to
your lips, whispering "Hush! hush!" over the veriest trifles. Hillyard
had not reached that point, but, like many other persons of his service,
he was on the way to it. He gave no information now to any one of his
purpose or destination, not even to Millie Splay, who came out with him
alone into the hall, yearning for some crumb of hope. All that he said
to her was:

"It is possible that I may be later than I think; but I shall certainly
be back to-night." And he drove off in Luttrell's powerful small car.

It was, in fact, ten o'clock when Hillyard returned to Rackham Park.
There was that in his manner which encouraged the inmates to hope some
way out had been discovered. Questions were poured upon him, and some
information given. The date of the inquest had been fixed for the next
Monday, and meanwhile no statement of any kind had been put before the
coroner. Jenny had not yielded by an inch. She would certainly tell her
story with all the convincing force behind it of her respectful quiet
manner and her love for her mistress.

"I have something to tell you," said Martin. "But I have had no dinner,
and am starving. I will tell you whilst I eat."

"Shall I fetch Joan down?" Millie Splay asked eagerly.

"Better to wait," said Martin. He imagined in what a fever of anxiety
Joan would be. It would be time enough to lift her to hope when it was
certain that the hope would not crumble away to dust.

Joan was at that moment lying on her bed in the darkness of her room,
her face towards the moonlit garden, and such a terror of the ordeal to
be faced the next Monday in her thoughts as turned her cold and sent her
heart fluttering into her throat. Mario Escobar had been taken away that
morning. The news had reached Rackham, as it had reached every other
house in the country-side. Joan knew of it, and she felt soiled and
humiliated beyond endurance as she thought upon her association with the
spy.

The picture of the room crowded with witnesses, and people whom she
knew, and strangers, whilst she gave the evidence which would turn their
liking for her into contempt and suspicion would fade away from before
her eyes, and the summer afternoon on Duncton Hill glow in its place.
She had bidden Hillyard look at the Weald of Sussex, that he might carry
the smell of its soil, the aspect of its blooms and dark woodlands and
brown cottages away with him as a treasure to which he could secretly
turn like a miser to his gold; and she herself, with them ever before
her eyes, had forgotten them altogether. To sink back into the rank and
file--how fine she had thought it, and how little she had heeded it! Now
she had got to pay for her heedlessness, and she buried her face in her
pillows and lay shivering.

Meanwhile, in the dining-room downstairs, Millie Splay, Sir Chichester
and Harry Luttrell gathered about Martin at the table whilst he ate cold
beef and drank a pint of champagne.

"I went up to London to see some one on the editorial staff of the
_Harpoon_," Martin explained. "There were two questions I wanted answers
for, if I could get them. You see, according to McKerrel--and you, Sir
Chichester, say that he is a capable man--Stella Croyle died at one in
the morning."

"Yes," Sir Chichester agreed.

"_About_ one," Harry Luttrell corrected, with the exactness of the
soldierly mind.

"'About' will do," Martin rejoined. "For newspapers go to press early
nowadays. The _Harpoon_ would have been made up, and most of the
editorial staff would have gone home an hour--yes, actually an
hour--before Mrs. Croyle died here at Rackham in Sussex. Yet the news is
in that very issue. How did that happen? How did the news reach the
office of the _Harpoon_ an hour before the event occurred?"

"Yes, that is what has been bothering me," added Sir Chichester.

"Well, that was one question," Martin resumed. "Here's the other. How,
when the news had reached the _Harpoon_ office, did it get printed in
the paper?"

Millie Splay found no difficulty in providing an explanation of that.

"It's sensational," she said disdainfully.

Martin shook his head.

"I don't think that's enough. The _Harpoon_, like lots of other
newspapers, has its social column, and in that column, no doubt, a
paragraph like this one about Stella would have a certain sensational
value. But supposing it wasn't true! A libel action follows, follows
inevitably. A great deal would be said about the unscrupulous
recklessness involved; the judge would come down like a cartload of
bricks and the paper would get badly stung. No editor of any reliable
paper would run such a risk. No sub-editor, left behind with power to
alter and insert, would have taken the responsibility. Before he printed
that item of news he would want corroboration of its truth. That's
certain. How did he get it? It was true news, and it was corroborated.
But, again, it was corroborated before the event happened. How?"

"I haven't an idea," cried Sir Chichester. "I thought I knew something
about getting things into the papers, but I see that I am a baby at it."

"It's much the more difficult question of the two," Hillyard agreed.
"But we will go back to the first one. How did the news reach the
_Harpoon_ office yesterday night? Perhaps you can guess?" and he looked
towards Harry Luttrell.

Luttrell, however, was at a loss.

"It's beyond me," he replied, and Martin Hillyard understood how that
one morning at the little hotel under the Hog's Back had given to him
and him alone the key by which the door upon these dark things might be
unlocked.

"The news arrived in the form of a letter marked urgent, which was
handed in by the chauffeur of a private motor-car just after midnight.
Of the time there is no doubt. I saw the editor myself. The issue would
already have gone to press, but late news was expected that night from
France, and the paper was waiting for it. Instead this letter came."

A look of bewilderment crept into the faces of the group about the
table.

"But who in the world could have written it?" cried Sir Chichester in
exasperation.

"It was written over your name."

"Mine?"

The bewilderment in Millie Splay's face deepened into anxiety. She
looked at her husband with a sudden sinking of her heart. Had his foible
developed into a madness? Such things had been. A little gasp broke from
her lips.

"But not in your handwriting," Hillyard hastened to add.

"Whose then?" asked Harry Luttrell suddenly.

"Stella's," answered Hillyard.

A shiver ran from one to the other of that small company, and discomfort
kept them silent. A vague dread stole in upon their minds. It was as
though some uncanny presence were in the room. They had eaten with
Stella Croyle in this room, played with her out there in the sunlit
garden, and only one of them had suspected the overwhelming despair
which had driven her so hard. They began to blame themselves. "Poor
woman! Poor woman!" Millie Splay whispered in a moan.

Sir Chichester broke the silence.

"But we left Stella here when we went to Harrel," he began, and Hillyard
interrupted him.

"There's no doubt that Stella sent the message," he said. "Your car,
Mrs. Brown's and Luttrell's, were all used to take us to Harrel. One car
remained in your garage--Stella's."

"But there wouldn't be time for that car to reach London." Sir
Chichester fought against Hillyard's statement. He did not want to
believe it. He did not want to think of it. It brought him within too
near a view of that horrid brink where overtried nature grows dizzy and
whirls down into blackness.

"Just time," Hillyard answered relentlessly, "if you will follow me.
Joan certainly returned here last night--that I know, as you know. But
she was back again in the ball-room at Harrel within a few minutes of
ten o'clock. She must have left Mrs. Croyle a quarter before ten--that,
at the latest."

"Yes," Millie Splay agreed.

"Well, I have myself crossed Putney Bridge after leaving here, within
ten minutes under the two hours. And that in the daytime. Stella had
time enough for her purpose. It was night and little traffic on the
road. She writes her letter, sends Jenny with it to the garage, and the
car reaches the _Harpoon_ office by twelve."

"But its return?" asked Sir Chichester.

"Simpler still. Your gates were left open last night, and we returned
from Harrel at four in the morning. Stella's chauffeur hands in his
letter, comes back by the way he went and is home here at Rackham an
hour and a half before we thought of saying good-bye to Mrs. Willoughby.
That is the way it happened. That is the way it must have happened,"
Hillyard concluded energetically. "For it's the only way it could have
happened."

Luttrell, though he had been a listener and nothing else throughout
Martin's statement, had cherished a hope that somehow it might be
discovered that Stella had died by an accident. That she should die by
her own hand, in this house, under the same roof as Joan, and because of
one year which had ended at Stockholm--oh, to him a generation
back!--was an idea of irrepressible horror. He could not shake off some
sense of guiltiness. He had argued with it all that day, discovering the
most excellent contentions, but at the end, not one of them had
succeeded in weakening in the least degree his inward conviction that he
had his share in Stella's death. Unless her death was an accident,
unless, using her drug, she fell asleep and so drifted unintentionally
out of life! He still caught at that hope.

"Are you sure that the handwriting was Stella's?" he asked.

"Quite. I saw the letter."

"Did the editor give it to you?"

"No, he had to keep it for his own protection."

"That's a pity," said Harry. A pity--or a relief, since, without that
evidence before his eyes, he could still insist upon his pretence.

"Not such a great pity," answered Martin, and taking a letter from his
pocket he threw it down upon the table, with the ghost of a smile upon
his face. "What do you think I have been doing during the last two
years?" he asked drily.

Harry pounced upon the letter and his first glance dispelled his
illusion--nay, proved to him that he had never had faith in it. For he
saw, without surprise, the broad strokes and the straight up-and-down
letters familiar to him of old. Stella had always written rather like a
man, a man without character. He had made a joke of it to her in the
time before the little jokes aimed by the one at the other had begun to
rasp.

"Yes, she wrote the letter and signed it with Sir Chichester's name."

Millie Splay reached out for the letter.

"Stella took a big risk," she said. "I don't understand it. She must
have foreseen that Chichester's hand was likely to be familiar in the
office."

"No, Millie," said Sir Chichester suddenly, and he spurred his memory.
"Of course! Of course! Stella helped me with the telephone one day this
week in the library there. I told her that I was new to the _Harpoon_."
He suddenly beat upon the table with his fist. "But why should she write
the letter at all? Why should she want her death here, under these
strange conditions, announced to the world? A little cruel I call
it--yes, Millie, a little cruel."

"Stella wasn't cruel," said Lady Splay.

"She wasn't," Hillyard agreed. "I know why she wrote that. She wrote it
to strengthen her hand and will at the last moment. The message was
sent, the announcement of her death would be published in the morning,
was already in print. Just that knowledge would serve as the final
compulsion to do what she wished to do. She wrote lest her courage and
nerve should at the last moment fail her, as to my knowledge they had
failed her before."

"Before!" cried Millie. "She had tried before! Oh, poor woman!"

"Yes," said Hillyard, and he told them all of the vague but very real
fear which had once driven him into Surrey in chase of her; of her
bedroom with the bed unslept in and the lights still burning in the
blaze of a summer morning; of herself sitting all night at her
writing-table, making dashes and figures upon the notepaper and unable
to steel herself to the last dreadful act.

Martin Hillyard gave no reason for her misery upon that occasion, nor
did any one think to inquire. He just told the story from his heart, and
therefore with a great simplicity of words. There was not one of those
who heard him, but was moved.

"Yet there were perhaps a couple of hours in her life more grim and
horrible than any in that long night," he went on, "the hours between
ten o'clock and midnight yesterday."

"Ah, but we don't know how they were spent," began Sir Chichester.

"We know something," returned Martin gravely. "I told you that that
letter was corroborated before the paragraph it contained was inserted
in the paper."

"Yes," said Lady Splay.

"Whilst they were waiting for the news from France, which did not come,
they rang you up from the _Harpoon_ office. Yes: they rang up Rackham
Park."

Harry Luttrell snatched up the letter once more from the table. Yes,
there across the left-hand corner was printed Sir Chichester's telephone
number and the district exchange.

"They were answered by a woman. Of that there's no doubt. And the woman
assured them that Stella Croyle was dead. This was at a quarter-past
twelve."

There was a movement of horror about the table, and then, with dry lips,
Millie Splay whispered:

"Stella!"

"Yes. It must have been," answered Hillyard. "Oh, she had thought out
her plan to its last detail. She knew the letter might not be enough.
So, whilst we were all dancing at Harrel, she sat alone from ten to
midnight in that library, waiting for the telephone to ring, hoping
perhaps--for all we know--at the bottom of her heart that it would not
ring. But it did, and she answered."

The picture rose vividly before them all. Harrel, with its lighted
ball-room and joyous dancers on the one side; the silent library on the
other, with Stella herself in all her finery, sitting with her haggard
eyes fixed upon the telephone, whilst the slow minutes passed.

"That's terrible," said Millie Splay in a low voice; and such a wave of
pity swept over the four people that for a long while no further word
was said. Joan upstairs in her room was forgotten. Any thought of
resentment in that Stella had used Sir Chichester's name was overlooked
by the revelation of the long travail of her soul.

"I remember that she once said to me, 'Women do get the worst of it when
they kick over the traces,'" Hillyard resumed. "And undoubtedly they do.
On the other hand you have McKerrel's hard-headed verdict, 'If these
poor neurotic bodies had any work to do they wouldn't have so much time
to worry about their troubles.' Who shall choose between them? And what
does it matter now? Stella's gone. She will strain her poor little
unhappy heart no more against the bars."




CHAPTER XXXI

JENNY AND MILLIE SPLAY


After a time their thoughts reverted to the living.

"There's Joan," said Millie Splay. "Jenny Prask hates her. She means to
drag her into some scandal."

"If she can," said Martin. He went out into the hall and returned with
the key of Stella Croyle's room. He held it up before them all.

"This key was found on the lawn outside the library window this morning
by Luttrell. Jenny has never referred to it since she ran downstairs
this morning crying out that the key was not in the lock. It was lying
on the hall table all through the time when Sir Chichester was
questioning her, and she said never a word about it. She was much too
clever. But she saw it. I was watching her when she did see it. There
was no concealing the swift look of satisfaction which flashed across
her face. I haven't a doubt that she herself dropped the key where it
was found."

"Nor I," Luttrell agreed with a despairing vehemence, "but we can't
prove it. Jenny Prask is going to know nothing of that key. 'No, no, no,
no!' she is going to say, 'Ask Miss Whitworth! Miss Whitworth came back
from Harrel. Miss Whitworth was the last person to see Mrs. Croyle
alive. Ask her!' It is Jenny Prask or Miss Whitworth. We are up against
that alternative all the time. And Jenny holds all the cards. For she
knows, damn her, what happened here last night."

"She did hold all the cards this morning," Hillyard corrected. "She
doesn't now. Look at this key! There was a heavy dew last night. It was
wet underfoot in the garden at Harrel."

"Yes," said Millie.

"How is it then that there's no rust upon the key?" and as he asked the
question he twirled the key so that the light flashed upon stem and
wards until they shone like silver. "No, this key was placed where you
found it, Luttrell, not last night, but this morning after the sun had
dried the grass."

"But we came home by daylight," Sir Chichester interposed. "They might
argue that Joan might have slipped downstairs before she went to bed,
with the key in her hand."

"But she wouldn't have chosen that spot in front of the library window.
She might have flung it from her window, she might conceivably have
slipped round the house and laid it under Mrs. Croyle's window. But to
place it in front of the library to which room she returned from
Harrel--no."

"Yes," said Sir Chichester doubtfully. "I see. Joan can make good that
point. Yes, she can explain that." And Millie Splay broke in with
impatience:

"Explain it! Of course. But what we want is to avoid that she should
have to explain anything, that she should be called as a witness at
all!"

There lay the point of trouble. To it, they came ceaselessly back,
revolving in the circle of their vain argument. Joan had something to
conceal, and Jenny Prask was determined that she should disclose it, and
Jenny Prask held the means by which to force her.

"But that's just what I am driving at," continued Martin. "We can't
afford to be gentle here. There's no lie Jenny Prask wouldn't tell to
force Joan into the witness box. We have got to deal relentlessly with
Jenny Prask. A woman's voice spoke from this house over the telephone to
London at a quarter-past twelve last night, and said that Stella was
dead. Whose voice? Not Joan's. Joan was having supper with Luttrell at
twelve o'clock. I saw her, others, too, saw her of course. Whose voice
then? Stella's, as we say--as we know. But if not Stella's, as Jenny
Prask says--why then there is only one other woman's voice which could
have given the news."

"Jenny's," cried Millie with a sudden upspring of hope.

"Yes, Jenny Prask's."

Millie Splay rose from her chair swiftly and rang the bell; and when
Harper answered it, she said:

"Will you ask Jenny to come here?"

"Now, my lady?"

"Now."

Harper went out of the room and Millie turned again to her friends.

"Will you leave this to me?" she asked.

Sir Chichester was inclined to demur. A few deft and pointed questions,
very clear, such as might naturally occur to Hillyard or Luttrell, or
Sir Chichester himself might come in usefully to put the polish, as it
were, on Millie's spade work. Harry Luttrell smiled grimly.

"We didn't exactly cover ourselves with glory this morning," he said. "I
think that we had better leave it to Lady Splay."

Sir Chichester reluctantly consented, and they all waited anxiously for
Jenny's appearance. That she would fight to the last no one doubted.
Would she fight even to her own danger?

Jenny came into the room, quietly respectful, and without a trace of
apprehension.

"You sent for me, my lady."

"Yes, Jenny."

Jenny closed the door and came forward to the table.

"Do you still persist in your story of this morning?" Lady Splay asked.

"Yes, my lady."

"You did not see your mistress at all after Miss Whitworth had talked
with her in the library?"

"No, my lady."

"Jenny, I advise you to be quite sure before you speak."

"I am not to be frightened, my lady," said Jenny Prask, with a spot of
bright colour showing suddenly in her cheeks.

"I am not trying to frighten you," Millie Splay returned. "But some
unexpected news has reached us which, if you persist, will place you in
an awkward position."

Jenny Prask smiled. She turned again to the door.

"Is that all, my lady?"

"You had better hear what the news is."

"As you please, my lady."

Jenny stopped and resumed her position.

"The announcement of Mrs. Croyle's death appeared in the _Harpoon_ this
morning. The news was left at the _Harpoon_ office by a chauffeur with a
private car at midnight--Mrs. Croyle's car."

"It never left the garage last night," said Jenny fiercely.

"You know that for certain?"

"I am engaged to the chauffeur," she replied with a smile; and Millie
Splay looked sharply up.

"Oh," she murmured slowly, after a pause. "Thank you, Jenny. Yes, thank
you."

The quiet satisfaction of Millie Splay's voice puzzled Jenny and
troubled her security. She watched Lady Splay warily. From that moment
her assurance faltered, and with the loss of her ease, she lost
something, too, of her respectful manner. A note of impertinence became
audible.

"Very happy, I'm sure," she said.

"The motor-car delivered the message at midnight," Lady Splay resumed,
"and--this is what I ask your attention to, Jenny--the editor, in order
to obtain corroboration of the message before he inserted it in his
paper, rang up Rackham Park."

Lady Splay paused for Jenny's comment, but none was uttered then. Jenny
was listening with a concentration of all her thoughts. Here was a new
fact of which she was ignorant, creeping into the affair. Whither did it
lead? Did it strike her weapon from her hand? Upset her fine plan of
avenging her dear mistress's most unhappy life? She would not believe
it.

"He rang up Rackham Park--mark the time, Jenny--at a few minutes after
twelve," said Lady Splay impressively, and Jenny's uneasiness was
markedly increased.

"Fancy that!" she returned flippantly. "But I don't see, my lady, what
that has to do with me."

"You will see, Jenny," Lady Splay continued with gentleness. "He got an
answer."

Jenny turned that announcement over in her mind.

"An answer, did he?"

"Yes, Jenny, and an answer in a woman's voice."

A startled cry broke from the lips of Jenny Prask. Her cheeks blanched
and horror stared suddenly from her eyes. She understood whose voice it
must have been which answered the question from London. Before her, too,
the pitiful vision of the lonely woman waiting for the shrill summons of
the telephone bell to close the door of life upon her, rose clear; and
such a flood of grief and compassion welled up in her as choked her
utterance.

"Oh!" she whispered, moaning.

"Whose voice was it, Jenny?"

At the question Jenny rallied. All the more dearly because of that
vision, should Joan Whitworth pay, the shining armour of her young
beauty be pierced, her pride be humbled, her indifference turned to
shame.

"I can't think, my lady--unless it was Miss Whitworth's."

"I asked you to mark the time, Jenny. A few minutes after midnight. Miss
Whitworth was at that moment in the supper-room at Harrel. She was seen
there. The woman's voice which answered was either Mrs. Croyle's or
yours."

Nothing could have been quieter or gentler than Millie Splay's
utterance. But it was like a searing iron to the shoulders of Jenny
Prask.

"Mine!" The word was launched in a cry of incredulous anger. "It wasn't
mine. Oh, as if I would do such a thing! The idea! Well, I never did!"

"I don't believe it was yours, Jenny," said Millie Splay.

"Granted, I'm sure," returned Jenny Prask, tossing her head.

"But how many people will agree with me?" Millie Splay went on.

"I don't care, my lady."

"Don't you? You will, Jenny," said Millie in a hard and biting tone
which contrasted violently with the smoothness of her earlier questions.
"You are trying, very maliciously, to do a great injury to a young girl
who had never a thought of hurting your mistress, and you have only
succeeded in placing yourself in real danger."

Jenny tried to laugh contemptuously.

"Me in danger! Goodness me, what next, I wonder?"

"Just listen how your story works out, Jenny," and Millie Splay set it
out succinctly step by step.

"Mrs. Croyle never took chloroform as a drug. Mrs. Croyle had no
troubles. Mrs. Croyle was quite gay this week. Yet she was found dead
with a glass of chloroform arranged between her pillows, so that the
fumes must kill her--and Jenny Prask was her maid. A motor-car took the
news of Mrs. Croyle's death to London before it had occurred and took
the news from Rackham Park. There was only one motor-car in the
garage--Mrs. Croyle's--and Mrs. Croyle's chauffeur was engaged to Jenny
Prask, Mrs. Croyle's maid. London then telephones to Rackham Park for
corroboration of the news, and a woman's voice confirms it--an hour
before it was true. There are only two women to choose from, Mrs. Croyle
and Jenny Prask, her maid. But since Mrs. Croyle never took drugs, and
had no troubles or thoughts of suicide and was quite gay, it follows
that Jenny Prask----"

At this point Jenny interrupted in a voice in which fear was now very
distinctly audible. "Why, you can't mean--Oh, my lady, you are telling
me that--oh!"

"Yes, it begins to look black, Jenny, but I am not at the end," Millie
Splay continued implacably. Jenny was not the only woman in that house
who could fight if her darling was attacked. "You proceed to direct
suspicion at a young girl with the statement that you never saw your
mistress after half past nine that night or helped her to undress; and
to complete your treachery, you take the key of Mrs. Croyle's door which
you found inside her room this morning, and threw it where it may avert
inquiry from you and point it against another."

Jenny Prask flinched. The conviction with which Lady Splay announced as
a fact the opinion of the small conclave about the table quite deceived
her.

"So you know about the key?" she said sullenly. And about the table ran
a little quiver of relief. With that question, Jenny Prask had delivered
herself into their hands.

"Yes."

Jenny stood with a mutinous face and silent lips. Lady Splay had
marshalled in their order the items of the case which would be made
against her, if she persisted in her lie. How would she receive them?
Persist, reckless of her own overthrow, so long as she overthrew Joan
Whitworth too? Or surrender angrily? The four people watched for her
answer with anxiety; and it was given in a way which they least
expected. For Jenny covered her face with her hands, her shoulders began
to heave and great tears burst out between her fingers and trickled down
the backs of her hands.

"It's unbearable," she sobbed. "I would have given my life for
her--that's the truth. Oh, I know that most maids serve their mistresses
for what they can get out of them. But she was so kind to me--wherever
she went she was thoughtful of my comfort. Oh, if I had guessed what she
meant to do! And I might have!"

The truth came out now. Stella Croyle had given the letter to Jenny, and
Jenny herself had taken it to the garage and sent the chauffeur off upon
his journey. She had no idea of what the letter contained. Stella was in
the habit of inhaling chloroform; she carried a bottle of it in her
dressing-case--a bottle which Jenny had taken secretly from the room and
smashed into atoms after Doctor McKerrel's departure. She had already
conceived her plan to involve Joan in so much suspicion that she must
needs openly confess that she had returned from Harrel to meet Mario
Escobar in the empty house.

"Mario Escobar!" Millie Splay exclaimed. "It was he." She turned pale.
Sir Charles Hardiman had spoken frankly to her of Escobar. A creature of
the shadows--it was rumored that he lived on the blackmailing of women.
Joan was not out of the wood then! Martin Hillyard was quick to appease
her fears.

"He will not trouble you," and when Jenny had gone from the room he
added, "Mario Escobar was arrested this morning. He will be interned
till the end of the war and deported afterwards."

Lady Splay rose, her face bright with relief.

"Thank you," she said warmly to Hillyard. "I am going up to Joan." At
the door she stopped to add, "Now that it's over, I don't mind telling
you that I admire Jenny Prask. Out-and-out loyalty like hers is not so
common that we can think lightly of it."

Martin Hillyard turned to Sir Chichester.

"And now, if you will allow me, I will open my box of cigarettes."

Harry Luttrell went back to his depot the next morning, without seeing
Joan again. Millicent Splay wrote to him during the next week. The
inquest had been confined within its proper limits. Jenny Prask had
spoken the truth in the witness box, and from beginning to end there had
been no mention of Joan or Mario Escobar. A verdict of temporary
insanity had been returned, and Stella now lay in the village
churchyard. Harry Luttrell drew a breath of relief and turned to his
work. For six weeks his days and nights were full; and then came
twenty-four hours' leave and a swift journey into Sussex. He arrived at
Rackham Park in the dusk of the evening. By a good chance he found Joan
with Millie Splay and Sir Chichester alone.

Sir Chichester welcomed him with cordiality.

"My dear fellow, I am delighted to see you. You will stay the night, of
course."

"No," Harry answered. "I must get back to London this evening."

He took a cup of tea, and Sir Chichester, obtuse to the warning glances
of his wife, plunged into an account of the events which had followed
his departure.

"I drew out a statement. Nothing could have been more concise, the
coroner said. What's the matter, Millie? Why don't you leave me alone?
Oh--ah--yes," and he hummed a little and spluttered a little, and then
with an air of the subtlest craft he remarked, "There are those plans
for the new pig-sties, Millie, which I am anxious to show you."

He was manoeuvred at last from the room. Harry Luttrell and Joan
Whitworth were left standing opposite to one another in the room.

"Joan," Harry Luttrell said, "in ten days I go back to France."

With a queer little stumble and her hands fluttering out she went
towards him blinded by a rush of tears.




CHAPTER XXXII

"BUT STILL A RUBY KINDLES IN THE VINE"


Between the North and South Downs in the east of Sussex lies a wide
tract of pleasant homely country which, during certain months of those
years, was subject to a strange phenomenon. Listen on a still day when
the clouds were low, or at night when the birds were all asleep, and you
heard a faint, soft thud, so very faint that it was rather a convulsion
of the air than an actual sound. Fancy might paint it as the tap of an
enormous muffled drum beaten at a giant's funeral leagues and leagues
away. It was not the roll of thunder. There was no crash, however
distant, along the sky. It was just the one soft impact with a
suggestion of earth-wide portentous force; and an interval followed; and
the blurred sound again. The dwellers in those parts, who had sons and
husbands at the war, made up no fancies to explain it. They listened
with a sinking of the heart; for what they heard was the roar of the
British guns at Ypres.

Into this country Martin Hillyard drove a small motor-car on a day of
October two years afterwards. Until this week he had not set foot in his
country of the soft grey skies since he had left Rackham Park. He had
hurried down to Rackham as soon as he had reported to his Chief, but not
with the high anticipation of old days. In what spirit would he find his
friends? How would Joan meet him? For sorrow had marked her cross upon
the door of that house as upon so many others in the land.

Martin had arrived before luncheon.

"Joan is hunting to-day," said Millie, "on the other side of the county.
She will catch a train back."

"I can fetch her," Hillyard returned. "She is well?"

"Yes. She was overworked and ordered a rest. She has been with us a
fortnight and is better. She was very grateful for your letters. She
sent you a telegram because she could not bear to write."

Martin had understood that. He had had little news of her during the two
years--a few lines about Harry in the crowded obituaries of the
newspapers after the attack in 1917 on the Messines Ridge, where he met
his death, and six months afterwards the announcement that a son was
born.

"Joan's distress was terrible," said Millie. "At first she refused to
believe that Harry was killed. He was reported as 'missing' for weeks;
and during those weeks Joan, with a confident face--whatever failings of
the heart beset her during the night vigils none ever knew--daily sought
for news of him at the Red Cross office at Devonshire House. There had
been the usual rumours. One officer in one prison camp had heard of
Harry Luttrell in another. A sergeant had seen him wounded, not
mortally. A bullet had struck him in the foot. Joan lived upon these
rumours. Finally proof came--proof irrefutable.

"Joan collapsed then," said Millie Splay. "We brought her down here and
put her to bed. She cried--oh, day and night!--she who never cried! We
were afraid for her--afraid for the child that was coming."

Millie Splay smiled wistfully. "She had just two weeks with Harry. They
were married before he left for France in 'sixteen, and then had another
week together in the January of 'seventeen at his house in the Clayford
country. That was all." Millie Splay was silent for a few minutes. Then
she resumed cheerfully:

"But she is better now. She will talk of him, indeed, likes at times to
talk of him; she is comforted by it, and the boy"--Millie's face became
radiant--"the boy is splendid. You shall see him."

Martin was shown the boy. He seemed to him much like any other boy of
his age, but such remarkable things in the way of avoirdupois poundage
and teething, serenity of temper and quickness of apprehension were
explained to him that he felt that he must be in the presence of a
prodigy.

"Chichester will want to see you. He is in the library. He is Chairman
of our Food Committee. You may have seen it in the papers," said Millie
with a smile. "He is back in the papers again, you know."

"Good. Then he won't object to me smoking a cigarette," said Martin.

He motored over in the afternoon to the house on the other side of
Sussex where he was to find Joan. He drove her away with him, and as
they came to the top of a little crest in the flat country, Martin
stopped the car and looked about him.

"I never cease to be surprised by the beauty of this country when I come
home to it."

"Yes, but I wish _that_ would stop."

_That_ was the dull and muffled boom of the great guns across the sea.
They sat and listened to it in silence.

"There it comes again!" said Joan in a quiet voice. "Oh, I do wish it
would stop! What has happened to me, has happened to enough of us."

As Millie had said, she was glad to talk of Harry Luttrell to his
friends; and she talked simply and naturally, with a little note of
wistfulness heard in all the words.

"We were going to have a small house in London and spend our time
between it and the old Manor at Clayford.... Harry had seen the
house.... He was always writing that I must watch for it to come into
the market.... It had a brass front door. There we should be. We could
go out when we wished, and when we wished we could be snug behind our
own brass door." Joan laughed simply and lovingly as she spoke. Hillyard
had never seen her more beautiful than she was at this moment. If grief
had taken from her just the high brilliancy of her beauty, it had added
to it a most appealing tenderness.

"After all," she said again, "Harry fulfilled himself. I love to think
of that. The ambition of his life--young as he was he saw it realised
and helped--more than all others, except perhaps one old Colonel--to
realise it. And he left me a son ... to carry on.... There will be no
stigma on the Clayfords when my boy gets his commission. Won't I tell
him why? Won't I just tell him!"

And the soft October evening closed in upon them as they drove.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Summons, by A.E.W. Mason

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUMMONS ***

***** This file should be named 16381.txt or 16381.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/3/8/16381/

Produced by Ted Garvin and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

